CITY OF DALLAS, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Volume I: Contains 10/25 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 33233, passed 9-17-2025
Volume II: Contains 10/25 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 33233, passed 9-17-2025
Volume III: Contains 10/25 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 33252, passed 9-24-2025
ENACTED AS A WHOLE FEBRUARY 6, 1961
EFFECTIVE MARCH 1, 1961
Ordained and Published by the City Council
of the City of Dallas
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
of
THE CITY OF DALLAS, TEXAS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Forms of Government and Charters of the City of Dallas (Historical)
Preamble
Ch. I.    Incorporation and Territory, §§ 1 - 3
Ch. II.    Powers of City, §§ 1 - 3
Ch. III.    City Council, §§ 1 - 20
Ch. IIIA.   City Secretary, §§ 1 - 3
Ch. IV.   Elections and Referendums, §§ 1 - 13
Ch. V.   Recall of City Council Members, §§ 1 - 2
Ch. VI.   The City Manager, §§ 1 - 2
Ch. VII.   Legal Department, §§ 1 - 3
Ch. VIII.   Municipal Courts, §§ 1 - 9
Ch. IX.   City Auditor, §§ 1 - 4
Ch. IXA.   Office of the Inspector General, §§ 1 - 3
Ch. X.   Administrative Departments, §§ 1 - 4
Ch. XI.   The Budget and Financial Procedure Relating Thereto, §§ 1 - 15
Ch. XII.   Police Department, §§ 1 - 8
Ch. XIII.   Fire-Rescue Department, §§ 1 - 9
Ch. XIV.   Franchises, §§ 1 - 11
Ch. XV.   Planning and Zoning, §§ 1 - 8
Ch. XVI.   Civil Service and Personnel, §§ 1 - 17
Ch. XVII.   Park and Recreation Department, §§ 1 - 10
Ch. XVIII.   Ordinances and Resolutions, §§ 1 - 16
Ch. XIX.   Assessment and Collection of Taxes, §§ 1 - 19
Ch. XX.   Public Improvements and Assessments, §§ 1 - 12
Ch. XXI.   Borrowing Money, §§ 1 - 12
Ch. XXII.   Public Contracts, §§ 1 - 12
Ch. XXIII.   Claims for Damages or Injury, §§ 1 - 6
Ch. XXIV.   Miscellaneous Provisions, §§ 1 - 23
Ch. XXV.   Citizen Enforcement, § 1
FORMS OF GOVERNMENT AND CHARTERS
OF
THE CITY OF DALLAS
(Historical)
(1)   Session Laws, Vol. 2, page 1399. The act establishing Dallas as county
seat.
(2)   Session Laws, Vol. 4, page 361.
   (A)   Incorporation of Dallas, February 2, 1856.
   (B)   Type of government: Mayor and six aldermen, treasurer, recorder and
constable, all elected for one year.
   (C)   Power to levy tax on all persons and property, but tax not to exceed
one-fourth of one percent ad valorem on such property.
(3)   Session Laws, Vol. 4, page 941.
   (A)   Incorporation of Dallas under the General Incorporation Act of January
27, 1858--adopted by the people June 30, 1858.
   (B)   Type of government: Mayor and marshal, and nine aldermen, all elected
for one year.
   (C)   Power to levy tax on persons and property not to exceed 50 cents on
the $100 in any one year.
(4)   Session Laws, Vol. 6, page 1294.
   (A)   Incorporation of Dallas, April 20, 1871. (Reincorporation)
   (B)   Type of government: Mayor and eight aldermen, marshal and assessor and
collector all elected. Aldermen term was two years; mayor, marshal and assessor
and collector term was one year.
   (C)   Power to levy tax on all property in the city not to exceed four-
tenths of one percent ad valorem - Section 29.
(5)   Session Laws, Vol. 8, page 485.
   (A)   Incorporation of Dallas under General Incorporation Laws March 15,
1875; adopted April 27, 1875. (Reincorporation)
   (B)   Type of government: Mayor and eight aldermen, treasurer, assessor and
collector, secretary, city attorney, marshal and city engineer; two year term,
but one aldermen and mayor elected annually.
   (C)   Power to levy tax not to exceed one percent provided, that by consent
of two-thirds of the qualified voters the council may levy an additional tax of
not exceeding one percent.
(6)   Session Laws, Vol. 8, page 1259.
   (A)   Incorporation of Dallas, August 9, 1876.
   (B)   Type of government: Mayor and two aldermen from each ward (probably
still four wards thus have eight aldermen), marshal, city recorder, city
secretary, treasurer, city attorney, assessor and collector and city engineer--
all elected for two years.
   (C)   Power to levy tax on all real and personal property in city not to
exceed 1-1/2 percent of the assessed value; provided city council could levy an
additional one percent on the assessed value if a majority under Section 3 of
Article 6 of the State Constitution shall have first voted in favor of such
additional levy.
(7)   Charter of 1889.
   (A)   Type of government: Mayor, city judge and two aldermen from each ward
to be elected biennially (12 wards), also elected tax collector, city assessor
and chief of police.
   (B)   Power to levy tax not to exceed 1-1/2 percent provided, council can
lay an additional one percent if authorized by two-thirds of the voters.
   (C)   Power to levy school tax aggregate not to exceed one-fourth of one
percent ad valorem.
   (D)   Schools under board of directors (mayor and one member from each
ward).
   (E)   SB 259 of March 13, 1889; HB 676 of March 18, 1893, and HB 339 of
March 13, 1889.
(8)   Charter of 1897.
   (A)   Type of government: Mayor and one alderman from each ward, city
assessor, chief of police, health officer; president and six members of the
board of education--all elected for one year.
   (B)   Power to levy tax not exceeding 1-1/2 percent provided an additional
one percent can be levied if authorized by two-thirds of voters.
   (C)   Power to levy school tax aggregate not to exceed one-fourth of one
percent ad valorem.
(9)   Charter of 1899.
   (A)   Type of government: Mayor, one alderman from each ward and one
alderman from each aldermanic district (10 wards and five aldermanic districts
maximum).
   (B)   Power to levy tax not exceeding 1-1/2 percent, provided council can
levy an additional one percent if authorized by two-thirds of the voters.
   (C)   Power to levy school tax aggregate not to exceed one-fourth of one
percent ad valorem.
(10)   Printed Charter of 1899 with amendments down to and including 1905.
(11)   Charter of 1907.
   (A)   Type of government: Commission form, mayor and four commissioners for
term of two years.
   (B)   Power to levy tax not exceeding 1-1/2 per centum of assessed value
provided, can levy an additional tax of one percent or any fraction thereof if
authorized by a majority of the voters.
   (C)   Power to levy school tax--one-fourth of one percent.
   (D)   President and six members of school board elected biennially.
(12)   Council-manager form of government; 1907 Charter with amendments up to
and including 1927 was amended in 1931 to set up council-manager form of
government. The Charter amendments of 1945, 1947, 1949, 1952, 1956, 1965, 1968,
1973, 1976, 1981, 1983, 1985, 1989 (portions precleared by the United States
Justice Department), 1993, 1997, 2001, 2005, 2014, and 2024 are also included
herein.
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the City of Dallas, under the constitution and laws of the
state of Texas, establish this preamble in order to secure the benefits of
local self-government and set forth the guiding principles for our city. We
affirm the values of our city as an equitable democracy, comprised of
representatives that act to make our city fair, equitable, just, and safe for
all those who reside within it.
(Amend. of 11-5-24)
CHAPTER I. INCORPORATION AND TERRITORY
SEC. 1.   CORPORATION NAME.
   All inhabitants of the City of Dallas, Dallas County, Texas, as the
boundaries and limits of said city are herein established or may hereafter be
established, shall be a body politic, incorporated under, and to be known by,
the name and style of the “City of Dallas,” with such powers, rights and duties
as herein provided.
SEC. 2.   BOUNDARIES.
   The bounds and limits of the City of Dallas shall be those as established
and described in ordinances duly passed by the city council of the City of
Dallas in accordance with state law. The city secretary shall at all times keep
a correct and complete description with recent annexations or disannexations.
(Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 3)
SEC. 3.   ADDITIONAL TERRITORY.
   The city may from time to time alter its boundaries by annexing or
disannexing any territory adjoining its present or future boundaries in any
size or shape desired in any manner provided by state law. (Amend. of 11-8-05,
Prop. No. 12)
CHAPTER II. POWERS OF CITY
SEC. 1.   POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The City of Dallas, as such body politic and corporate, shall have perpetual
succession and shall have the following powers:
      (1)   To use a corporate seal.
      (2)   To sue and be sued.
      (3)   To implead and be impleaded in all courts.
      (4)   To institute and prosecute suits without giving security therefor,
and to appeal from judgments of the courts without giving supersedeas or cost
bonds, other bonds or security.
      (5)   To contract and be contracted with.
      (6)   To acquire property within or without its boundaries or within the
boundaries of other municipalities for any public purpose, in fee simple or
lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation;
to sell, rent, lease, hold, manage, and control any property now owned by it or
that it hereafter may acquire; and to construct, own, lease, operate, and
regulate public utilities.
      (7)   To assess, levy, and collect taxes for general and special purposes
on all lawful subjects of taxation.
      (8)   To borrow money on the faith and credit of the city by the issue or
sale of bonds, warrants, or notes of the city.
      (9)   To appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes.
      (10)   To create, provide for, construct, regulate, and maintain public
works and public improvements of any nature.
      (11)   To levy and collect assessments for local improvements.
      (12)   To levy an occupation tax on any person, occupation, calling, or
business where permitted under the laws of this state.
      (13)   To license and regulate vehicles operated for hire and fix and
regulate the rates to be charged for the use of such vehicles.
      (14)   To license and regulate persons, corporations, and associations
engaged in any business, occupation, profession, or trade.
      (15)   To license and regulate all places of public amusement.
      (16)   To define nuisances and prohibit the maintenance of any nuisance
within the corporate limits of the city to within 5,000 feet of the corporate
lines, outside of the city limits, and abate such nuisances by summary
proceedings and provide for the punishment of persons who create or maintain
such nuisances.
      (17)   To regulate the use and speed of automobiles, motorcycles, and
other motor-driven vehicles and prescribe the proper lighting of such vehicles
when used at night.
      (18)   To provide for the inspection of buildings and all works of
construction and prescribe and enforce proper regulations in regard thereto.
      (19)   To regulate and locate or prohibit the erection of all poles in
the city and cause them to be removed or changed at any time.
      (20)   To provide for the inspection of weights and measures and fix
standards of weights and measures.
      (21)   To provide for the regulation of bakeries and prescribe the weight
and quality of bread manufactured or sold in the city.
      (22)   To provide for the inspection and regulation of dairies located
inside the city limits or at any other place from which milk or other products
are sold within the city, and for the inspection of all cows and facilities
from which milk is sold in the city, and prescribe fees to be charged in
connection with such inspection, and establish and maintain a standard of
quality of all dairy products sold in the city.
      (23)   To regulate, restrain, or prohibit the running at large of all
animals in the city, and to license animals.
      (24)   To adopt any ordinance or regulation having for its purpose the
prevention of fires or the removal of fire hazards.
      (25)   To regulate burial grounds, cemeteries, and crematories and
condemn and close them in the thickly settled portions of the city when public
interest and public health may demand and to regulate the burial of the dead.
      (26)   To provide for a system of vital statistics.
      (27)   To define, prohibit, abate, suppress, and prevent all things
detrimental to the health, morals, comfort, safety, convenience, and welfare of
the inhabitants of the city.
      (28)   To regulate the construction and height of, and materials used in,
all buildings and structures, and the maintenance and occupancy of buildings
and structures.
      (29)   To regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the
streets and all other public places.
      (30)   To create, establish, abolish, and organize offices and fix the
salaries, working conditions, and compensation of all officers and employees,
except those set out in the Charter.
      (31)   To make and enforce all police, health, sanitary, and other
regulations, and pass such ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and
promoting the peace, good government, and welfare of the city, for the
performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of its
inhabitants and to protect the peace, lives, health, and property of such
inhabitants, and to provide suitable penalties for the violation of any
ordinance enacted by the city.
      (32)   To open, extend, straighten, widen, or alter any street, alley,
avenue, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, or public way and to close or vacate and
abandon the same.
      (33)   To expend public funds for purposes of advertising and public
information.
      (34)   To have the exclusive right to erect, own, maintain, and operate a
waterworks and sanitary sewer system, or any part thereof, for the use of the
city and its inhabitants, and to regulate such system, but shall not have the
power or right to sell the waterworks system, except that excess property in
the waterworks system may be sold as other property; to prescribe rates for
water and sanitary sewer services furnished to the inhabitants, and to make
such rules and regulations as the council may deem expedient, including the
power to extend water and sanitary sewer lines and assess a portion or all of
the cost therefor and affix a lien against the property and the property owner;
to do anything whatsoever necessary to operate and maintain the waterworks
system, and to compel the owners of all property and the agents of such owners
to pay all charges for water and sanitary sewer services furnished upon such
property.
      (35)   To make provision for the care and sustenance of police officers,
firefighters, and other uniformed personnel of the police and fire-rescue
departments who have been disabled while in the service of the city, or who,
after long and continued service, become by reason of old age and infirmities
incapacitated to discharge their duties, or because of longevity of service
alone, and to make provision for the aid and relief of the widows, minor
children, and dependents of deceased police officers, firefighters, and other
uniformed personnel of the police and fire-rescue departments and may provide
for the creation of a fund or funds for such purposes, from the general revenue
of the city or from such other sources as may be prescribed by the council
under such rules and regulations as the council may adopt, and the city may
exercise all of the powers as may be conferred upon the city council by acts of
the legislature of the State of Texas.
      (36)   To make provision for the care and sustenance of all of the
officers and employees of the city who have been disabled while in the service
of the city, or who after long and continued service, become by reason of old
age and infirmities incapacitated to discharge their duties, or because of
longevity of service alone, to provide for the aid and relief of the widows,
minor children, and dependents of deceased officers and employees; to provide
for the creation of a fund or funds for such purposes, from the general revenue
of the city or from such other sources as may be prescribed by the council
under such rules and regulations as the council may adopt.
      (37)   By ordinance or resolution, to provide for and construct a general
storm sewer and drainage system in the city, which may be divided into public
and private sewers and drains and be built, maintained, and conducted in such
manner as the city council may provide. For the purpose of establishing a
general storm sewer and drainage system, the city council shall have full power
to change any river, creek, bayou, or other drain, or any part thereof, so as
to divert the drainage thereof in accordance with a general drainage plan or
any special plan providing therefor.
      (38)   To adopt rules and regulations for the civil service system.
      (39)   To fix and regulate the rates of gas, water, electricity and other
utilities, and to regulate and fix the fares, tolls and charges of local
telephones and exchanges; of public carriers and motor vehicles, where they are
transporting passengers, freight or baggage, and generally to fix and regulate
the rates, tolls or charges and the kind of service of all public utilities of
every kind, unless otherwise required by state law.
      (40)   To regulate the speed of engines, locomotives, electric railways,
or other power-driven equipment operating upon tracks, rails, or defined
routes, either at ground level, overhead or underground within the limits of
the city, and to regulate the operation of the same so as to prohibit the
blocking of intersections, streets, alleys, avenues or impeding the free flow
of vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
      (41)   To contract with public service carriers, common carriers, or
private carriers or with transportation authorities for the furnishing of
transportation facilities within the city limits of Dallas and connecting the
adjoining areas; including the joint use of publicly owned and privately owned
or joint publicly owned facilities to provide an interregional transportation
network, both within and without the city limits of Dallas.
      (42)   To require any and all railroad companies operating any track upon
or across any public street of the city, to reduce any such track below the
level of the streets intersected or occupied by any such track, or to elevate
any such track above the level of the streets intersected or occupied by any
such track, and to require the company or companies owning or operating any
such track to provide necessary and proper crossing for the public travel at
intersecting streets; all such work to be done in the manner required by the
city.
      (43)   To require any holder of a franchise from the city to allow the
use of its tracks, poles, underground conduits and wires by any other holder to
which the city shall grant a franchise upon payment of a reasonable rental
therefor to be fixed by the city council.
      (44)   To exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and
may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with the State of Texas, any county of this state or any
of the civil agencies thereof which have any of the municipal powers, or the
United States or any agency thereof.
      (45)   To acquire, construct, or own, within or without the city, either
wholly or in cooperation with any other city, county or political subdivision
of the state, an airport or airports, either by purchase, donation, bequest,
eminent domain or otherwise; to provide for the operation, maintenance, control
and financing thereof, the same as though wholly owned by the city within its
city limits.
      (46)   To acquire, by purchase, gift or devise, or by the exercise of the
right of eminent domain by and through condemnation proceedings, and own, in
fee simple or otherwise, either public or private property located inside or
outside of the corporate limits of the city or within any county in the state,
for the extension, improvement and enlargement of its waterworks system,
including riparian rights, water supply reservoirs, standpipes, watersheds,
dams, the laying, building, maintenance and construction of water mains,
rights-of-way in connection therewith, and the laying, erection, establishment
or maintenance of any necessary appurtenances or facilities which will furnish
to the inhabitants of the city an abundant supply of wholesome water; for
sewerage plants and systems; rights-of-way for water and sewer lines; parks,
playgrounds, fire-rescue stations, police stations, airports and landing
fields, burial grounds and cemeteries, incinerators or other garbage disposal
plants, electric light and power plants and rights-of-way for lines in
connection therewith, gas plants and rights-of-way for gas lines in connection
therewith; streets, boulevards and alleys or other public ways; city jails,
prison farms, city halls and other municipal buildings, municipal garages, and
parking facilities, or any rights-of-way needed in connection with any property
used for any purpose hereinabove named; for the straightening or improving of
the channel of any stream, branch or drain and for any other municipal purpose.
The procedure to be followed in any condemnation proceedings hereunder and
authorized herein shall be in accordance with the provisions of the state law
with reference to eminent domain. The provisions of Title 52 of the Revised
Civil Statutes of Texas (1925), as amended, or as may hereafter be amended,
shall apply to such proceedings, or such proceedings may be under any other
state law now in existence or that hereafter may be passed governing and
relating to the condemnation of land for public purposes by a city.
      (47)   To exercise all the powers conferred upon water improvement
districts or water control and preservation districts under the state law as
the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, providing for the exercise of
the rights of eminent domain by and through condemnation proceedings. It shall
also have all the powers authorized by Article 7880-126, Revised Civil Statutes
of the State of Texas, as the same presently exists or may hereafter be
amended, and all other powers conferred upon cities and towns in the State of
Texas acting individually or jointly, in the furnishing of an adequate supply
of wholesome water. It shall have authority to sell any surplus water not
needed by the City of Dallas.
      (48)   To erect and establish work houses, houses of correction, or
rehabilitation facilities within or without the city limits; to make all
necessary rules and regulations therefor; to employ personnel necessary to
manage and control the same; to assign persons confined to the city jail to any
such facility so established.
      (49)   To provide a code of ethics by ordinance which shall be binding on
all officers, employees, and elective and appointive officials as provided
herein, setting out the acts, conduct and financial interest which shall be
considered to be in conflict with the position they hold and providing the
procedure for enforcing the same. This may be either in addition to, or
incorporated into personnel rules and regulations as pertain to various
employees.
      (50)   To adopt rules and regulations regarding campaign contributions
and expenditures for city elections.
      (51)   To adopt a disaster emergency preparedness ordinance that provides
for the development and adoption of a comprehensive city emergency management
plan, to take effect in the event of the occurrence or imminent threat of
widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from
any natural or man-made cause. The comprehensive city emergency management plan
must ensure the continuity of governance. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6;
Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. Nos. 4, 6, and 10)
SEC. 2.   GENERAL POWERS ADOPTED.
   The enumeration of particular powers in the Charter shall not be held or
deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein,
implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the city shall have and
may exercise all other powers which under the Constitution and laws of the
State of Texas, it would be competent for the Charter specifically to
enumerate. The city shall have and exercise all the powers conferred upon
cities by what is known as the Home Rule Amendment to the Constitution of the
State of Texas and the Enabling Act relative thereto, passed by the Thirty-
third Legislature of the State of Texas, found in the published laws of said
legislature, Regular Session, pages 307 to 317, and effective July 7, 1913, and
all other laws passed by the legislature of the State of Texas, relating
thereto, or which may hereafter be passed by said legislature in relation to
such matters.
SEC. 3.   CHARTER REVIEW PROCESS.
   At intervals of not more than 10 years (the first interval to occur not more
than 10 years after adoption of this section), the Charter shall be reviewed by
a commission appointed by the council. The commission shall complete the review
and report to the council within one year after its appointment.
Notwithstanding this section, amendments to the Charter may at any time be
framed and proposed as provided by law. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 7)
CHAPTER III. CITY COUNCIL
SEC. 1.   COMPOSITION OF CITY COUNCIL.
   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all powers conferred on the
city shall be exercised by a city council to be composed of 15 members,
nominated and elected in the manner hereinafter provided unless otherwise
provided by law. One member of the city council, Place 15, shall be elected by
the qualified voters of the entire city and 14 members by the qualified voters
residing in a particular district, Places 1 through 14 respectively, as
provided in Chapter IV of this Charter. Members of council, Places 1 through
14, shall each be elected for a term of two years and member of council, Place
15, shall be elected for a term of four years. The city council members so
elected shall take office on the first Monday following the 30th calendar day
after the final canvass of the general election, and they shall serve until
their respective successors have been elected and qualified. (Amend. of 4-3-76,
Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 1;
Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 2.   MAYOR’S ELECTION AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The person elected as member of council, Place 15, shall be the
presiding officer of the city council and the mayor of the City of Dallas. The
mayor shall have a vote on all matters coming before the city council, other
than confirmation of appointments by the mayor, unless otherwise disqualified,
but no power to veto. The mayor shall be the official head of the city
government.
   (b)   In addition to the mayor’s other duties, the mayor shall ensure that
annual reports are made as to the state of the city, its financial condition,
its accomplishments, and its plan and needs for the future. (Amend. of 4-3-76,
Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1)
SEC. 3.   COUNCIL QUALIFICATIONS.
   Each member of the city council shall, in addition to the other
qualifications prescribed by law, be at the date of election a qualified voter
of the city, and shall not be in arrears in the payment of liabilities due the
city related to holding office. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 11-
5-24)
SEC. 3A.   LIMITATION OF TERMS.
   (a)   A person who has served as a member of the city council other than
Place 15 for four two-year terms shall not again be eligible to become a
candidate for, or to serve in, any place on the city council except Place 15.
   (b)   A person who has served two terms as a member of the city council,
Place 15, shall not again be eligible to become a candidate for, or to serve
in, Place 15 on the city council.
   (c)   A “term” as used in Subsection (a) shall include any period of service
during a city council term when that period is in excess of one year, including
a term from which the member resigned.
   (d)   For the purpose of limiting terms under Subsection (b), a term
includes a period of time less than four years when the period of service by a
mayor during a term is in excess of 731 days. (Amend. of 1-17-81, Prop. No. 2;
Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 4.   COMPENSATION OF THE MEMBERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (a)   Effective October 1, 2001, each member of the city council, other than
the mayor, shall receive a salary in the sum of $37,500 for each year (prorated
for partial years) that the member serves on the city council. The mayor shall
receive a salary in the sum of $60,000 for each year (prorated for partial
years) served as mayor on the city council. [Note: This version of subsection
(a) is effective until the swearing in of city council members in June 2015.]
   (a)   Effective upon the swearing in of city council members in June 2015,
each member of the city council, other than the mayor, shall receive a salary
in the sum of $60,000 for each year (prorated for partial years) that the
member serves on the city council. The mayor shall receive a salary in the sum
of $60,000 for each year (prorated for partial years) served as mayor on the
city council. [Note: This version of subsection (a) is effective upon the
swearing in of city council members in June 2015 and until the swearing in as
mayor of an individual who did not hold the office of mayor on November 4,
2014.]
   (b)   For purposes of this section, a “year” means a 12-consecutive-month
period.
   (c)   The salary provided for in Subsection (a) will be paid on a biweekly
basis.
   (d)   In addition to receiving the salary provided for in Subsection (a),
all necessary expenses incurred by members of the city council in the
performance of their duties will be paid by the city, when authorized by the
city council. The mayor and each member of the city council may also receive
benefits for elected officials as permitted by state and federal law and
adopted by city council through resolution or ordinance.
   (e)   If any city council member, including the mayor, misses more than 10
percent of the total number of regular meetings held by the city council during
any salary year, then the city council member’s salary provided for under
Subsection (a) for that year will be reduced proportionately by the percentage
of meetings missed. For purposes of this subsection, regular meetings include
both those held by the full city council and those held by the standing city
council committees on which a member serves. Meetings missed by a city council
member while he or she is on the official business of the city council and at
the direction of the city council will not be counted towards the percentage of
missed meetings for which salary reduction is required under this subsection,
but will be counted as though the member had attended the meetings that are
missed while so engaged in city business. (Amend. of 5-5-01, Prop. No. 1;
Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 8; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 5.   VACANCIES IN THE CITY COUNCIL; HOW FILLED.
   (a)   If a vacancy occurs on the city council, the vacancy must be filled at
a special election for that purpose unless a general election that would fill
the vacant place is scheduled to occur within 120 days after the vacancy
occurred. As soon as practicable after the occurrence of the vacancy, the city
council shall call a special election to be held at the next authorized
election date that is at least 60 days after the date of the occurrence of the
vacancy.
   (b)   A person selected to fill a vacancy on the city council shall serve
only until the next general city election for that place.
   (c)   If a candidate duly elected to the city council at the general
election fails to take the oath of office on or before 10 days after the
beginning of the term, then that place will be considered a vacancy and filled
as provided in this section for other vacancies. If a candidate elected to the
city council at a special election fails to take the oath of office on or
before 10 days after the official canvass of the election, then that place will
be considered a vacancy and filled as provided in this section for other
vacancies.
   (d)   In the event of the death or disability of all members of the city
council for any reason, such that the city council is unable to call an
election to fill vacancies on the city council, the city attorney is authorized
to institute an action on behalf of the city in the district court of Dallas
County, Texas to obtain an appropriate order declaring an emergency and calling
a special election to fill the city council vacancies. If state law provides
for the manner and method of calling such an election, then state law shall be
followed in lieu of the instituting of court action by the city attorney.
(Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 5-1-
93, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 4)
SEC. 6.   REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (a)   On the day the members of the city council take office, they shall
meet at the building designated as the official city hall, and thereafter all
regular meetings of the city council must be held in the city hall building in
such locations and at such times as may be prescribed by ordinance, resolution,
or lawfully-posted notice.
   (b)   For purposes of this Charter, a regular meeting of the city council
means a meeting of the full city council at which city council members vote or
are briefed on matters of interest to the city. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No.
5; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-
4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 7.   SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings shall be called by the city secretary upon the written
request of the mayor, the city manager or three members of the council. Any
such notice shall state the subject to be considered at the
special meeting and may provide for the taking up of any other matters
presented at such meeting.
SEC. 8.    OPEN MEETINGS; SPEAKERS.
   (a)   All official meetings of the city council and of all city council
committees must be open to the public as provided by state law. Those meetings
involving an attorney and client relationship, or other matters authorized by
law to be deliberated in closed session, need not be open to the public.
   (b)   The city council shall adopt rules of procedure that provide
reasonable opportunity for people to be heard by the city council. (Amend. of
5-1-93, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 9.   CITY COUNCIL QUORUM.
   A quorum shall consist of nine members, except when the number of city
council members, due to vacancies, is reduced to less than nine, in which event
a quorum shall consist of all of the remaining city council members; but a less
number than a quorum may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of
absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by
ordinance. (Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1)
SEC. 10.   COUNCIL VOTE.
   No member shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the
consideration of his or her own official conduct, where required by law, or
where his or her financial interests are involved, and in these instances, the
member shall not vote. The council shall determine its own rules of procedure,
and may punish its members for misconduct, and may compel the attendance of
absent members. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No.
9)
SEC. 11.   ELECTION AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR PRO TEM AND DEPUTY MAYOR PRO TEM.
   The city council shall elect one of its members as mayor pro tem, who shall
perform a specific duty of the mayor if the mayor is unable to discharge that
specific duty, and who shall, during that time, be vested with all the powers
belonging to the mayor to perform that specific duty. The council shall also
elect one of its members as deputy mayor pro tem to act if both the mayor and
the mayor pro tem are unable to discharge a specific duty and to exercise the
powers of the mayor to perform that specific duty. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop.
No. 13; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 12.   CITY COUNCIL MAY SUMMON WITNESSES, ETC.
   The city council shall have power to summon and compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of books and papers before it whenever it may be
necessary for the more effective discharge of its duties, and shall have the
power to punish for contempt before it with the same fines and penalties as the
county judge may punish for contempt before the county court. All process shall
be signed by the mayor and attested by the city secretary and shall be served
by the chief of police or any police officer of the said city.
   The mayor, city secretary or any member of the city council shall have
authority to administer oaths in any matter pertaining to municipal affairs.
SEC. 13.   POLICY-MAKING PROCEDURES AND OVERSIGHT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   In the performance of the powers of government, it is the duty of the
mayor and the city council to make suitable provision for the assurance of
adequate and appropriate prior review and consideration of official actions to
be taken by the city council, and to assure that a high performance level of
services to the residents is maintained, responsiveness to the people is
provided, and accountability in municipal government is assured. To this end,
the city council shall:
      (1)   adopt rules of procedure governing the conduct of city council
meetings and the introduction, consideration, and method of review of actions
to be considered by the city council, consistent with the city manager’s
authority to present directly to the entire city council the city manager’s
operational agenda;
      (2)   create a standing finance committee of the city council charged
with the responsibility for financial and audit oversight of the operations of
city government;
      (3)   establish such additional standing committees and their duties as
the city council determines is appropriate; and
      (4)   establish the process by which the committees shall conduct their
business and review matters for city council consideration, consistent with the
city manager’s authority to present directly to the entire city council the
city manager’s operational agenda.
   (b)   The mayor shall appoint the members and chairs of all city council
committees, and it shall be the duty of each member of the city council to
serve and to participate on each committee to which the member is appointed.
The mayor shall have the power to remove and reassign members to and from the
various city council committees. (Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 11-
5-24)
SEC. 14.   PROFESSIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANTS TO MAYOR AND COUNCIL.
   The city manager shall provide professional and administrative assistants to
aid the council in the performance of its official duties. Assistants to
individual council members shall be selected by the respective council members
from a pool of applicants provided by the city manager. An individual council
member may, at any time, require the city manager to reassign his or her
council assistant and provide a pool of applicants from which the council
member may select a new assistant. Personnel filling these positions shall not
be subject to civil service. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-8-
05, Prop. No. 2)
SEC. 15.   NO INTERFERENCE BY COUNCIL WITH APPOINTMENTS OR SUBORDINATES OF CITY
MANAGER.
   Neither the council nor any of its committees or members shall dictate or
attempt to dictate any person’s appointment to, or removal from, office or
employment by the city manager or any of the city manager’s subordinates, or in
any manner interfere in the appointment of officers and employees in the
departments of administrative service vested in the manager by this Charter.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with
that part of the administrative service for which the city manager is
responsible solely through such manager, and neither the council nor any city
council member shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager
in those departments, either publicly or privately. This section shall not
apply to those professional and administrative assistants provided for in
Section 14 of this chapter. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-8-05,
Prop. Nos. 2 and 13)
SEC. 16.   EXPULSION OF COUNCIL MEMBER.
   Willful violation of the foregoing provisions of this Charter by any member
of the council shall constitute official misconduct, and shall authorize the
council, by a vote of two-thirds of its entire membership, to expel such
offending member from the council, if found guilty after a public hearing, and
thereby create a vacancy in the place held by such member.
SEC. 17.   PROHIBITING HOLDING OR RUNNING FOR OTHER OFFICE.
   (a)   No person elected to the city council shall, during the term for which
he or she was elected, be appointed to any office or position of emolument in
the service of the city. If a member of any board or commission appointed by
the council or any appointive officer of the city, including municipal judges,
city appointees to the Dallas Area Rapid Transit Board, and city appointees to
the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport Board, becomes a candidate for
nomination or election to any public office, he or she shall immediately
forfeit his or her place or position with the city. This provision does not
prohibit a person from applying for a position as a municipal judge while a
candidate for nomination or election to any public office.
   (b)   A member of the city council shall forfeit his or her place on the
council if he or she becomes a candidate for nomination or election to any
public office other than a place on the city council or if he or she becomes a
candidate for election to any different place on the city council that requires
taking office prior to the end of his or her elective term. (Amend. of 6-12-73,
Prop. No. 8; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. Nos. 7
and 9)
SEC. 18.   INVESTIGATIONS.
   The council, the city manager or any person or committee authorized by
either or both of them shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any
department or office of the city; to make investigations as to city affairs,
and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the
production of books, papers and other evidence material to said inquiry. The
council shall provide by ordinance penalties for contempt in refusing to obey
any such subpoenas or failure to produce books, papers and other evidence, and
shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner provided by
ordinance.
SEC. 19.   INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
   The city council shall cause the annual financial statements and related
records and accounts of the city to be audited annually by a firm registered
with the Texas State Board of Public Accountancy as a firm practicing public
accountancy. The auditor shall be selected by the city council and shall be
responsible to the council. The report of such auditor and the financial
statements and related audit opinion for the fiscal year shall be printed and a
copy shall be furnished to each city council member and the city manager, and a
copy shall be kept available in the office of the city secretary for inspection
by any person upon request. The original report of the auditor or auditors
shall be kept among the permanent records of the city. (Amend. of 6-12-73,
Prop. No. 9; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. Nos. 11 and 13; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop.
No. 9; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 20.   CITY TREASURER AND SELECTION OF CITY DEPOSITORY.
   (a)   The person designated by the city manager as the chief financial
officer of the city shall serve as the city treasurer, who shall have the
custody of all the public moneys, funds, notes, bonds, and other securities
belonging to the city. The chief financial officer shall give such bond as the
council may require, conditioned on the faithful discharge of his or her
duties, and the premium of such bond shall be paid by the city. In addition to
such bond, the city shall, in accordance with state law, require designated
city depositories to hypothecate securities in such amount as it shall
prescribe.
   (b)   The city council shall, in accordance with state law, select and
designate a depository for the moneys and funds of the city. The city council
may at any time, in accordance with state law, select and designate more than
one depository. The chief financial officer shall be responsible for
administering the contract with the depository. The depository shall receive
and securely keep all moneys belonging to the city and make all payments from
the same upon orders signed by the city manager and countersigned by the chief
financial officer, after authorization of the city council. All monies received
by any person, department, or agency of the city for or in connection with the
affairs of the city shall be deposited promptly in a commercially reasonable
manner in city depositories. The chief financial officer shall ensure that a
full and correct statement of receipts and payments is provided to the city
manager and the city council, at such times as the city manager or city council
may require and in such form as the city manager may prescribe. The chief
financial officer shall perform such other acts and duties as the city manager
may prescribe. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 4-6-85, Prop. No. 1;
Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. Nos. 8 and 13; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
CHAPTER IIIA. CITY SECRETARY
(Added by Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 3)
SEC. 1.   APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL; COMPENSATION.
   The city council shall appoint a city secretary who shall serve for a period
of two years from the date of appointment or until a successor is appointed and
qualified, unless sooner discharged by the council. The city secretary shall be
a resident of the City of Dallas. If at the time of appointment, the city
secretary resides outside the City of Dallas, then he or she shall move into
the city within a time period required by the city council. The city secretary
shall be appointed by a majority vote of all of the members of the city council
and shall not be discharged during his or her term of office except upon a
majority vote of all of the members of the council. The city secretary shall
receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the council. (Amend. of 11-8-05,
Prop. Nos. 2 and 13)
SEC. 2.   ASSISTANTS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The city council shall provide the city secretary with such assistants and
employees as it may deem necessary, and they shall receive such compensation as
may be fixed by the council. Any such assistant or employee may be discharged
at any time by the city secretary. All powers and duties imposed on the city
secretary may be exercised and performed by any assistant or employee under the
city secretary’s direction. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. Nos. 2 and 13; Amend. of
11-5-24)
SEC. 3. DUTIES OF THE CITY SECRETARY.
   The city secretary shall:
      (1)   attend all meetings of the city council and keep accurate records
of all actions taken by the city council;
      (2)   oversee a records management program for the city that provides for
the identification, maintenance, retention, security, electronic storage,
microfilming, disposition, and preservation of city records and appoint a city
records management officer to administer the program;
      (3)   operate the city’s archives and records storage facility for the
storage of inactive city records until such time as those records may be
disposed of and identify, preserve, and serve as custodian of the city’s
historical records;
      (4)   inspect or direct the city records management officer to inspect
the city records and report to the city council and the city manager any
irregularities or failures of the city to create, identify, or maintain records
in accordance with requirements assigned by law;
      (5)   administer oaths;
      (6)   attest contracts, assessment certificates, and other legal
instruments when executed by the authorized officers of the city;
      (7)   serve as the election official for all city elections; and
      (8)   perform such other duties as may be required of the city secretary
by this Charter, the city council, or state law. (Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No.
9)
CHAPTER IV. ELECTIONS AND REFERENDUMS
SEC. 1.   HOLDING OF MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   All municipal elections shall be held under the provisions of this Charter
unless the laws of the State of Texas applicable to city elections require
otherwise. (Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 10)
SEC. 2.   QUALIFICATIONS OF VOTERS.
   (a)   All qualified electors of the state who reside within the city shall
have the right to vote in all city elections.
   (b)   In this Charter, the terms “qualified voter,” “registered voter,”
“qualified elector,” and “registered elector” are synonymous and may be used
interchangeably. (Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 10; Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No.
4; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 3.   GENERAL ELECTION.
   No primary election shall be held for the selection of nominees to the city
council unless specifically required by state law. General elections for the
purpose of electing members of the city council shall be held according to
state law. If state law does not restrict election dates, the city council
shall by resolution or ordinance establish an election date on a uniform
election date in odd-numbered years. The members elected shall compose the city
council of the City of Dallas and shall serve for the terms provided in Chapter
III of this Charter, or until their respective successors shall have been
elected, qualified, and taken office. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 4; Amend. of
8-12-89, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop.
No. 6; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 4.   ELECTION OF CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   All qualified voters of the city shall be entitled to vote for a candidate
in Place 15. The qualified voters of the respective districts shall be entitled
to vote for one candidate from Place 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
or 14, corresponding to the district of which the voter is a resident. (Amend.
of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop.
No. 1)
SEC. 5.   DISTRICTS AND REDISTRICTING.
   (a)   The city shall be divided into 14 districts, known as Districts 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14.
   (b)   Redistricting commission.
      (1)   Not later than 30 days after the city council is briefed on the
federal decennial census taken in the prior year, each member of the city
council shall appoint one member of the redistricting commission. The mayor
shall designate the chair of the redistricting commission, subject to
confirmation by a majority of the city council. In making such appointments,
the city council and the mayor shall, as nearly as may be practicable, provide
fair and balanced representation of all geographical areas of the city in the
redistricting process and provide a total membership that reflects the racial
and ethnic makeup of the city’s population. Members of the redistricting
commission shall be appointed to serve a term that will end upon completion of
the redistricting commission’s work.
      (2)   Persons appointed to the redistricting commission must meet the
qualifications for service on a city commission. A member of the redistricting
commission is not eligible to be a candidate for a place on the city council in
the next succeeding general election of the city, and may not be appointed or
elected to the city council or to any other official board or commission of the
city for a period of one year after service on the redistricting commission.
The following persons are not eligible to serve on the redistricting
commission:
         (A)   a current member of the city council or the spouse of a current
member of the city council or any family member within the third degree of
consanguinity or affinity;
         (B)   a person or the spouse of a person who has been appointed to or
elected to any elective federal, state, county, or city office during the three
years before the appointment date;
         (C)   the campaign manager, treasurer, or staff member of any
candidate for federal, state, county, or city elected office during the five
years before the appointment date;
         (D)   a registered lobbyist or spouse of a lobbyist registered with
the city, county, state, or federal government;
         (E)   a person or spouse of a person who works for the city or who
works with or for any current member of the city council;
         (F)   a person or spouse of a person who has a contractual
relationship with the city, has had a contractual relationship with the city
within three years before the date of appointment, has a contractual
relationship with any current member of the city council or the spouse of a
current city council member; or has had a contractual relationship with any
current member of the city council or the spouse of a current city council
member within three years before the date of appointment (this paragraph does
not apply to non- negotiated, form contracts for general city services or
benefits if the city services or benefits are made available to the person or
spouse on the same terms that they are made available to the general public);
or
         (G)   a person who, in accordance with this charter, city ordinances,
or written city policy, is ineligible for appointment to a city board or
commission.
      (3)   The redistricting commission shall draw the districts in compliance
with the following guidelines:
         (A)   The districts shall be substantially equal in population
according to the total population count as presented in the census data, except
where deviation is required to comply with federal law or is allowable by law.
         (B)   In addition to the requirements of federal law, there shall be
no discrimination on the basis of race, color, or membership in a language
minority group, and the voting strength of racial, ethnic, and language
minorities in the districts shall not be diluted to deprive minority voters of
an equal opportunity to elect a candidate of their choice.
         (C)   The districts shall be geographically compact, to the extent
possible, and composed of contiguous territory.
         (D)   The reconfiguration of districts shall be neutral as to
incumbents or potential candidates.
         (E)   Communities of interest shall be placed in a single district and
attempts should be made to avoid splitting neighborhoods, where possible
without violating the other requirements.
         (F)   The redistricting commission may adopt any other requirements of
federal or state law.
      (4)   The redistricting commission shall promptly convene in such
sessions as are necessary, including public hearings, to develop, prepare, and
recommend a districting plan that proposes the respective boundaries of the
various districts comprising the city council under this Charter.
      (5)   City council members may not have contact, directly or indirectly,
with a redistricting commission member, or with redistricting commission staff,
with respect to redistricting, except by testimony in an open meeting.
Redistricting commission members may not engage in any discussions, directly or
indirectly, regarding redistricting or the work of the redistricting commission
with city council members, except during an open meeting or by written
communication given to the entire redistricting commission. If a redistricting
commission member engages in a prohibited discussion or violates the Texas Open
Meetings Act, the redistricting commission may, by majority vote, remove the
commissioner from the redistricting commission.
      (6)   Upon completion of its work, the redistricting commission shall
file its recommended districting plan with the mayor. The mayor shall present
the recommended plan to the city council at its next meeting. The city council
shall adopt the plan as submitted or shall modify and adopt the plan, in either
case within 45 days of receipt by the mayor. Any modification or change to the
plan must be made in open session at a city council meeting, with a written
explanation of the need for the modification or change and a copy of the
proposed map with the modification or change made available to the public 72
hours before a vote, and the proposed plan must be approved by a vote of three-
fourths of the members of the city council. If final action is not taken by the
city council within 45 days after the plan was presented to the mayor, then the
recommended plan of the redistricting commission will become the final
districting plan for the city.
      (7)   The districting plan developed in accordance with this section must
be implemented at the next general election of the city council conducted at
least 90 days following the date the final districting plan becomes effective
for the city. (Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. Nos. 1 and 4; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop.
No. 1; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 6; Amend.
of 11-5-24)
SEC. 6.   CANDIDATE’S RESIDENCE.
   (a)   No person shall be eligible as a candidate for member of council,
Place 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, or 14, unless the person is at
the time a bona fide resident of District 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, or 14, respectively, has resided continuously in Texas for 12 months,
and has resided within the district in which the person is a candidate for a
period of at least six months prior to the date of the regular filing deadline
for a candidate’s application for a place on the ballot. Any person elected to
a place representing a district must continuously reside in the district during
that person's term of office. A candidate for member of council, Place 15, may
be a resident of any portion of the city, must have resided continuously in the
city for a period of at least six months and continuously in Texas for 12
months prior to the date of the regular filing deadline for a candidate’s
application for a place on the ballot, and must continuously reside within the
city during the person’s term of office.
   (b)   If the district in which a person will have resided for at least six
months prior to the date of an election will change because of the relocation
of a district boundary, the person is eligible to become a candidate:
      (1)   for the new district assigned to the person’s residence; or
      (2)   for the previous district of the person’s residence if the person
moves to a residence within the revised boundaries of that district prior to
becoming a candidate for election.
   (c)   No person may appear on the official ballot as a candidate for a place
on the city council unless that person files with the city secretary a signed,
sworn, and dated affidavit certifying compliance with the residency
requirements of this section, except that a sworn application for a place on
the ballot filed with the city secretary in accordance with the Texas Election
Code will satisfy the requirements of this paragraph. (Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop.
No. 1; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of
11-5-24)
SEC. 7.   NOMINATION BY PETITION.
   A person desiring to become a candidate for the city council shall file with
the city secretary, within the time required by the Texas Election Code, as
amended, an application for a place on the ballot and a petition signed by
qualified voters of the city eligible to vote for the candidate equal in number
to the minimum number of signatures required for a candidate petition by the
Texas Election Code, as amended. Each application and petition must comply in
form, content, and procedure with the Texas Election Code, as amended. (Amend.
of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 11; Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 8-12-89,
Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 8.   DESIGNATION ON OFFICIAL BALLOT.
   The places on the official ballot shall be designated as “Member of Council,
Place No.      ,” designating the place numbers for which the voters in each
district are eligible to vote, with Place 15 designated as mayor and being the
first in order and the others being in numerical order, and the candidate’s
name shall appear in the place for which the candidate’s petition and
application were filed. The city secretary shall make up the official ballot
from the names presented to the city secretary in the manner required by this
Charter. The order in which the names of the candidates for each place must
appear on the ballot will be determined by lot, in a drawing held under the
supervision of the city secretary. (Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 8-
12-89, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 9.   CANVASS OF ELECTION.
   The city council shall canvass and certify the results of any general or
special election in accordance with the Texas Election Code, as amended.
(Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 10.   CANDIDATES ELECTED.
   The candidate in the election receiving a majority of all of the votes cast
for the position of city council member for the place for which the candidate
ran, shall be declared elected. (Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 11.   RUNOFF ELECTIONS.
   If no candidate for a particular office receives a majority of the votes
cast for all candidates for that office in the first election, a runoff
election for that office is required. Candidates in the runoff election will be
listed on the ballot in the order of their standing in the first election. If
two candidates tie in the number of votes received in the first election, they
shall cast lots to determine the order in which their names will be listed on
the runoff ballot. The runoff election will be conducted in accordance with the
Texas Election Code, as amended. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 4; Amend. of 8-
12-89, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 12.   PETITION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   To be valid, a petition submitted for the purpose of complying with an
election process must comply with the Texas Election Code, as amended.
   (b)   Every person circulating a petition or page of a petition, other than
a petition to place a candidate’s name on the ballot, shall file with the city
secretary an affidavit containing the person’s name and address and a statement
that:
      (1)   the person circulated the petition;
      (2)   the purpose was explained to each signer;
      (3)   each signer freely provided all information required;
      (4)   all statements contained in the petition are true; and
      (5)   the person witnessed the affixing of each signature on the
petition.
(Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 13.   RESERVED.
(Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 6; Repealed by Amend. of 11-5-24)
CHAPTER V. RECALL OF CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS
SEC. 1.   PETITION FOR RECALL OF CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   Any member of the city council may be recalled and removed from office by
the electors qualified to vote for a successor of the incumbent as provided in
this chapter. The procedure to remove members of the city council is as
follows:
      (1)   A petition demanding the recall of the city council member must be
filed with the city secretary. The petition must:
         (A)   be signed by qualified voters entitled to vote for a successor
to the member sought to be removed, equal in number to at least 15 percent of
the number of voters who, on the date of the last preceding general municipal
election, were entitled to vote for the place occupied by the member sought to
be removed;
         (B)   contain a general statement of the grounds for which the removal
is sought; and
         (C)   comply in form, content, and procedure with the provisions of
Section 12, Chapter IV of this Charter.
      (2)   On the day that the petition is first circulated, notice must be
given in writing to the city secretary by five registered voters of the city
council district from which the member is sought to be removed, and the total
signatures required must be secured and the petition filed within 60 days after
the city secretary receives the notice.
      (3)   Within 30 days after the petition is filed, the city secretary
shall examine the petition and, from the list of qualified voters, ascertain
whether or not the petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified
voters. If necessary, the city council shall allow the city secretary extra
help, and, in the case of a petition to recall the mayor or multiple petitions
to recall city council members, additional days to complete the examination.
The city secretary shall attach to the petition a certificate showing the
result of the examination. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 12; Amend. of 4-2-83,
Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 2.   RECALL ELECTION.
   If the city secretary finds the recall petition in order, the city secretary
shall submit the petition to the city council. The city council shall then, as
soon as practicable, call a recall election on the next available election date
that is not less than 60 days after the certification of the recall petition,
unless the next available election date is the general election in which case
the election will be held on that date. The name of the city council member
sought to be removed will automatically be placed on the ballot unless, before
the filing deadline, the member resigns or declares an intention to not be a
candidate on the ballot. All other candidates shall comply with the
requirements for candidacy in a general election of the city. The election will
be conducted in the same manner as set forth in this Charter for an election to
fill a vacancy on the city council. The election will be only for the unexpired
term of the questioned city council member. Failure of the person elected to
take the oath of office within 10 days after the official canvass of the
election will create a vacancy in the office. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 4;
Amend of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 6)
CHAPTER VI. THE CITY MANAGER
SEC. 1.   APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL; COMPENSATION.
   The council shall appoint a city manager, who shall be the chief
administrative and executive officer of the city. The city manager shall be
chosen by the council solely on the basis of executive and administrative
training, experience, and ability, and without regard to political
consideration. The city manager shall be a resident of the City of Dallas. If
at the time of appointment, the city manager resides outside the City of
Dallas, then he or she shall move into the city within a time period required
by the city council. No member of the council shall, during the time for which
elected, be chosen as city manager. The city manager shall not be appointed for
a definite fixed time, but shall be removable at the will and pleasure of the
city council upon a two-thirds vote of the members of the council unless
otherwise provided by contract. The action of the council in removing the city
manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all
authority and fix all responsibility for such removal in the council. The city
manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council. (Amend.
of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 4; Amend. of 11-8-05,
Prop. Nos. 2, 5, and 13)
SEC. 2.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.
   The powers and duties of the city manager shall be as follows:
      (1)   To be responsible to the council for the proper administration of
all the city affairs placed in the city manager’s hands, and shall to that end
appoint and employ all directors of departments and other employees not
otherwise provided for in this Charter or by ordinance. Appointments made by
the city manager shall be on the basis of executive and administrative
experience and ability and of training fitness and efficiency of such
appointees in the work that they are to administer. All such directors of
departments shall be immediately responsible to the city manager and may be
removed by the city manager at any time.
      (2)   To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided by the Charter of the City of Dallas,
to appoint and remove all heads of departments and all subordinate officers and
employees of the city. All appointments must be upon merit and fitness alone,
and, in the classified civil service, all appointments are subject to the civil
service provisions of this Charter.
      (4)   To exercise control over all departments and subdivisions of
departments created by the Charter, or that may hereafter be created by the
council, except as hereinafter provided.
      (5)   To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city
or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and
performed and, upon knowledge of any violation of such terms and conditions, to
call the matter to the attention of the city attorney, whose duty it shall be
to take such steps as may be necessary to enforce such terms and conditions.
      (6)   To attend all meetings of the council, with the right to take part
in the discussion, but having no vote. The city manager shall be entitled to
notice of all special meetings.
      (7)   To recommend to the council for adoption such measures as the city
manager may deem necessary or expedient.
      (8)   To keep the council at all times fully advised as to the financial
condition and needs of the city.
      (9)   To act as budget commissioner and prepare and submit to the council
an annual budget after receiving estimates made by the directors or heads of
the various departments of the city, and submit recommended capital programs.
      (10)   To see to it that the city lives within its budget.
      (11)   To execute deeds, deeds of trust, easements, releases, contracts,
and all other legal instruments on behalf of the city when authorized by
ordinance or resolution of the city council, and approved as to form by the
city attorney.
      (12)   Appoint assistants and employees to fill the positions established
by ordinance of the city council.
      (13)   When requested by the city council, to cause to be prepared an
actuarial determination and appraisal of any or all city pension systems.
      (14)   In the absence or inability of the city manager, the city
manager’s duties, including the execution of legal instruments, shall be
performed by the assistant city managers in the order of precedence as may be
designated by city ordinance, and the city manager may designate any of the
assistant city managers to perform any of the powers and duties imposed on the
city manager by this Charter.
      (15)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter,
or by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 4;
Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. Nos. 5 and 13)
CHAPTER VII. LEGAL DEPARTMENT
SEC. 1.   CREATION OF LEGAL DEPARTMENT; APPOINTMENT OF CITY ATTORNEY.
   There is hereby created a department to be known as the legal department.
The director or head of this department shall be a competent practicing
attorney of recognized ability and shall be known as the city attorney. The
city attorney shall be a resident of the City of Dallas. If at the time of
appointment, the city attorney resides outside the City of Dallas, then he or
she shall move into the city within a time period required by the city council.
The city attorney shall be appointed by a majority vote of all the members of
the city council and shall serve for a period of two years from the date of
appointment and thereafter until a successor is appointed, unless sooner
discharged by the council, and the city attorney shall not be discharged during
his or her term of office except upon a majority vote of all members of the
city council. The city attorney shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed by the council at the time of appointment and such compensation may not
be diminished during the term for which he or she is appointed. (Amend. of 11-
8-05, Prop. Nos. 2, 5, and 13)
SEC. 2.   ASSISTANTS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The city attorney shall have such assistants as shall be provided for by
ordinance, and they shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city
council. Any assistant city attorney may be discharged at any time by the city
attorney. The city attorney and all assistant city attorneys shall devote their
entire time to the service of the city. All powers and duties imposed on the
city attorney may be exercised and performed by any assistant city attorney
under the direction of the city attorney. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 7;
Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 10)
SEC. 3.   DUTIES OF THE CITY ATTORNEY.
   The city attorney shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Representing the city in all litigation and controversies.
      (2)   Administering oaths and affidavits.
      (3)   Prosecuting, in person or by assistants, all cases brought before
the municipal court.
      (4)   Approving as to form in writing all proposed ordinances before they
are adopted, or filing with the city council, in writing, any objection to an
ordinance.
      (5)   Drafting all proposed ordinances granting franchises.
      (6)   Inspecting and passing upon all papers, documents, contracts, and
other instruments in which the city may be interested.
      (7)   Being the legal adviser to the city manager, the council, or any
committee thereof, all official boards and commissions and all city officers
and employees with respect to any legal question involving an official duty or
any legal matter pertaining to the affairs of the City of Dallas.
      (8)   Whenever it is brought to the city attorney’s knowledge that any
person, firm, or corporation exercising and enjoying any franchise or privilege
from the City of Dallas has been guilty of a breach of any condition of such
grant, or has failed to comply in any material matter with the terms and
stipulations of such grant, reporting the matter to the city council, together
with all facts bearing upon the matter that may be brought to the city
attorney’s attention. If the council determines that the complaints are well
founded, it shall be the council’s duty to take such action as may be
necessary, and, if the offending party fails or refuses to conform to such
order as the council may make with respect to the matter, it shall be the duty
of the council to direct the city attorney to institute suit against the
offending party in the court having jurisdiction over the matter to obtain a
judgment of forfeiture of the franchise or privilege.
      (9)   Advising the city council, the city manager, and all the
departments of the city concerning new or proposed state or federal legislation
and representing the city before all legislative bodies in matters affecting
the city.
      (10)   Upon the city attorney’s own initiative or upon the direction of
the city council, appearing in any and all litigation affecting the city and
representing the city in such manner as he or she deems to be to the best
interest of the city, and instituting such legal proceedings as may be
necessary or desirable on behalf of the city.
      (11)   Hiring or discharging such clerical personnel or other personnel
as may be authorized for the city attorney’s department by the city council.
      (12)   When deemed for the best interest of the city, advising or
representing officers and employees of the city in litigation in matters
arising out of the official conduct of their office or duties or in the course
of their employment.
      (13)   Performing such other duties as the council may direct or request.
(Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. Nos. 3 and 13)
CHAPTER VIII. MUNICIPAL COURTS
SEC. 1.   CREATION.
   The city council may, by ordinance, create and provide for municipal courts
to be known as municipal courts of the City of Dallas, as it may deem
necessary, and may appoint one or more municipal judges to serve each court.
(Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 15)
SEC. 2.   JURISDICTION, POWER AND FINES.
   The municipal court shall have jurisdiction:
      (1)   over all criminal cases arising under the ordinances of the city
within the city limits and outside the limits to the extent authorized by state
law;
      (2)   concurrent with the appropriate state court of all criminal cases
arising under the criminal laws of the state, where the offense is committed
within the city limits of Dallas and the penalty does not exceed that which is
established for municipal courts by state law;
      (3)   over the forfeiture and collection of bonds given in proceedings
therein, and to order the forfeiture of cash acceptance bonds upon failure of
the defendant to appear, and to accept same in lieu of a fine;
      (4)   over cases involving a license or permit granted by the city for
any calling, occupation, business or vocation. In addition to the punishment to
be imposed therefor, the court may suspend or revoke the license or permit so
granted;
      (5)   enforce all process of the courts in accordance with state law and
city ordinances, punish witnesses for failing to obey subpoenas, and compel
their attendance by process of attachment;
      (6)   punish for contempt, admit to bail, and forfeit bonds under such
circumstances and as provided by county courts, or county courts exercising
criminal jurisdiction only;
      (7)   over all other matters and cases provided for by state law or city
ordinance. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 16)
SEC. 3.   PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE.
   Except as otherwise provided by state law, practices and procedures in the
municipal courts and appeals therefrom shall be as established by ordinances of
the city council. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 3)
SEC. 4.   MUNICIPAL JUDGES; APPOINTMENT.
   Each of the municipal courts of the City of Dallas shall be presided over by
a judge or judges, each of whom shall be designated as municipal judge. Each
judge shall be a practicing attorney of good standing. Biennially in May of
each even-numbered year, the municipal judges shall be appointed by the
council, which appointment shall designate the administrative judge. Each
municipal judge shall hold office for two years from the date of appointment or
until a successor is appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed by the
council. In the event of any vacancy in the office of municipal judge by death,
resignation, or otherwise, the city council shall appoint a qualified attorney
to fill the unexpired term as municipal judge. The administrative judge
designated by the city council shall be the administrative head of the
judiciary of the city. As such, the administrative judge shall promulgate work
rules concerning the administration of the court dockets, the times and places
for holding court, equalizing of the case assignments, the vacation schedules,
and other administrative details concerned with the judicial performance of the
municipal courts, which rules shall be submitted to the city manager and city
attorney for comment prior to adoption by the city council. Once adopted, the
administrative judge shall be responsible to see that the rules are adhered to
by all courts. The administrative judge shall make such reports as may be
required by the city council. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 17; Amend. of 4-6-
85, Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13)
SEC. 4A.   REMOVAL OF MUNICIPAL JUDGES.
   (a)   A full-time or associate municipal judge may be removed from office by
a majority vote of all members of the city council if the council determines,
after a hearing before the council, that the municipal judge:
      (1)   does not meet any residency requirements for municipal judges
established by city council ordinance; or
      (2)   does not meet any other qualifications or requirements for
municipal judges established by city ordinance, state or federal law, or other
applicable law.
   (b)   A full-time or associate municipal judge shall immediately forfeit his
or her place with the city if he or she becomes a candidate for nomination or
election to any public office (see Section 17 of Chapter III of this Charter).
(Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 3; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 7)
SEC. 5.   MUNICIPAL JUDGES; AUTHORITY.
   The municipal judges shall have power and authority to administer official
oaths and affirmations and to give certificates thereof, and shall have full
power and authority to place persons upon probation, to issue subpoenas, writs
of capias, search warrants, executions and all other process known to the law
which justice courts are by law authorized to issue in similar cases. (Amend.
of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 18)
SEC. 6. ASSOCIATE MUNICIPAL JUDGES.
   In May of each fourth year, associate municipal judges shall be appointed by
city council. Associate municipal judges will receive their assignment from the
administrative judge or the administrative judge’s designee. Each associate
municipal judge shall be a practicing attorney of good standing. Each associate
municipal judge must be a resident of the City of Dallas within four months of
appointment. Each associate municipal judge shall hold office for a term that
is equal to the length of terms for members of the city council, Places 1
through 14, from the date of appointment or until a successor is appointed and
qualified, unless sooner removed by the council. In the event of any vacancy in
the office of associate municipal judge by death, resignation, or otherwise,
the city council may appoint a qualified attorney to fill the unexpired term as
an associate municipal judge. The associate municipal judge is considered a
part-time judge and is called upon as needed. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 19;
Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 7.   COMPENSATION.
   Each of the municipal judges shall receive such compensation as may be
determined by the council. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 3)
SEC. 8.   CLERK OF COURT.
   There shall be a clerk or clerks of the municipal court and such deputies as
may be provided for by ordinance. The clerks shall be appointed by the city
manager and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the council. The
deputies shall be those as selected under the civil service system. The clerks
shall have the power to perform all things and acts usual and necessary to be
performed by clerks of court in issuing process of said courts and conducting
the business thereof, and such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance
of the city council. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 3)
SEC. 9.   GENERAL LAWS; ACT CUMULATIVE OF.
   This chapter is cumulative of any laws that may now or hereafter be passed
by the legislature regulating or increasing the jurisdiction of municipal
courts in cities of the grade and size of the City of Dallas. (Amend. of 11-8-
05, Prop. No. 3)
CHAPTER IX. CITY AUDITOR
SEC. 1.   SELECTION OF CITY AUDITOR.
   There is hereby created the office of city auditor, which official shall
hold office for a period of two years and until a successor shall be chosen and
shall qualify. The city auditor must be a person knowledgeable in public
administration, public financial and fiscal theory, municipal accounting, and
auditing, and must be licensed as a Certified Public Accountant. The city
auditor shall be a resident of the City of Dallas. If at the time of
appointment, the city auditor resides outside the City of Dallas, then he or
she shall move into the city within a time period required by the city council.
The city auditor shall be appointed by the city council after being nominated
in accordance with a nomination procedure established by ordinance. (Amend. of
4-3-76, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop.
No. 2)
SEC. 2.   ASSISTANTS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The council shall provide the city auditor with such assistants and
employees as it may deem necessary, and those assistants and employees shall
receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council. Any such assistant or
employee may be discharged at any time by the city auditor. All powers and
duties imposed on the city auditor may be exercised and performed by any
assistant and employee under the city auditor’s direction. (Amend. of 11-8-05,
Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 3.   DUTIES OF THE CITY AUDITOR.
   The city auditor shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
      (1)   Conducting financial audits, compliance audits, economy and
efficiency audits, special audits, and investigations.
      (2)   Conducting, at the direction of the city council or the city
council finance committee, an audit or investigation of any entity receiving
funds from the city.
      (3)   Ensuring the quality and accuracy of information received for
business decision-making and for improvement of the processes and controls used
to effectively manage city resources.
      (4)   Monitoring and evaluating the city’s accounting and property
records, funds, general accounting system, and records of city officers
authorized to receive money or other property belonging to the city.
      (5)   Examining the books, accounts, reports, vouchers, and records of
city officers, of funds of the city, and of funds for which the city is
responsible as trustee.
      (6)   Appraising and verifying the accounting accuracy of financial
records, statements, and reports, and determining that generally accepted
accounting procedures and principles are followed.
      (7)   Evaluating the adequacy of the city’s accounting system and
controls.
      (8)   Reporting to the city council, the city council finance committee,
and the city manager any irregularities or failures to maintain adequate and
accurate records.
      (9)   Making such studies and reports as the city council shall request
or approve as to the efficiency, economy, and effectiveness of the programs,
projects, or departments, and reporting such data to the city council, the city
council finance committee, and the city manager.
      (10)   Acting, on behalf of the city, as liaison to external auditing
agencies that are reviewing or auditing city operations or city programs that
may be federally or state funded. (Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 8-
12-89, Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 2)
SEC. 4.   SPECIAL AUDIT.
   Upon the death, resignation, removal, or expiration of the term of any
officer of the city, other than the city auditor, the city auditor shall cause
an audit and investigation of the accounts of such officer to be made and shall
report to the city manager and the council. Either the council or the city
manager may at any time provide for an investigation or audit of the accounts
of any officer or department of the city government. In case of the death,
resignation, or removal of the city auditor, the city manager shall cause an
audit to be made of the city auditor’s accounts. If, as a result of any such
audit, an officer is found to be indebted to the city, the city auditor, or
other person making such audit, shall immediately give notice of such
indebtedness to the council, the city manager, and the city attorney, and the
city attorney shall, as directed by the city council, proceed to collect such
indebtedness. (Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13)
CHAPTER IXA. OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
(Added by Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 7; Repealed by Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop.
No. 6; Added by Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 1.   CREATION OF OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL; APPOINTMENT OF INSPECTOR
GENERAL.
   (a)   There is hereby created an office to be known as the office of the
inspector general. The head of this department shall be a competent practicing
attorney of recognized ability, a certified inspector general, and shall be
known as the inspector general. The inspector general shall serve as an
independent investigative authority regarding misconduct involving fraud,
corruption, ethics, waste, and abuse. The Code of Ethics and other ordinances
should include the provisions necessary to ensure independence of the office of
the inspector general.
   (b)   The inspector general shall be a resident of the City of Dallas. If at
the time of appointment, the inspector general resides outside the City of
Dallas, then he or she shall move into the city within a time period required
by the city council. The inspector general shall be appointed by a majority
vote of all the members of the city council and shall serve for a period of two
years from the date of appointment and thereafter until a successor is
appointed, unless sooner discharged by the council, and the inspector general
shall not be discharged during the inspector general’s term of office except
upon a 2/3 vote of all members of the city council. The inspector general shall
receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the council. (Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 2.   ASSISTANTS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL.
   The inspector general shall have such assistants and employees as shall be
provided by ordinance, and they shall receive such compensation as may be fixed
by the city council. Any assistant or employee may be discharged at any time by
the inspector general. The inspector general and any assistant inspector
general shall devote their entire time to the service of the city. All powers
and duties imposed on the inspector general may be exercised and performed by
any assistant under the direction of the inspector general. (Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 3.   DUTIES OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL.
   The inspector general shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Supervising and controlling the structure of the office of the
inspector general.
      (2)   Initiating investigations and receiving and investigating
complaints and tips regarding misconduct involving ethics, fraud, waste, abuse,
and corruption of city officials, city employees, and persons doing business
with the city.
      (3)   Examining the books, accounts, reports, vouchers, financial
records, records of the city, documents, and tangible things relevant to the
subject matter of an investigation regardless of their form.
      (4)   Submitting reports summarizing the findings of investigations and
reviews completed by the inspector general.
      (5)   Acting, on behalf of the city, as liaison to law enforcement
agencies regarding fraud and corruption investigations initiated by the office
of the inspector general.
      (6)   Presenting ethics complaints regarding alleged or suspected
violations of the city’s code of ethics before a commission created to make
findings concerning the ethical nature of actions and conduct and recommending
appropriate sanction.
      (7)   Doing all things necessary to carry out the functions set forth in
this chapter. (Amend. of 11-5-24)
CHAPTER X. ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
SEC. 1. ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENTS.
   The city council shall have the power by ordinance to establish other
departments and offices, than those created by charter, and to create divisions
or sections within any department, whether established by charter or ordinance.
The council may discontinue any department or office established by ordinance
and may prescribe, combine, distribute or abolish the functions and duties of
departments and offices not inconsistent with this Charter or state law. All
such ordinances creating a department or making any changes in the same shall
be adopted only after receiving the recommendation of the city manager and by a
three-fourths vote of the council.
SEC. 2.   DIRECTION.
   Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, all departments of the city
shall be under the supervision and direction of the city manager, including any
department hereafter established by ordinance. The directors of such
departments shall be appointed by the city manager, and they shall serve until
removed by the city manager, or until a successor has been appointed and
qualified. The city manager shall coordinate the work of the various
departments in the execution of their duties of office. Subject to the
direction and supervision of the city manager, the director of a department
shall manage the department. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13)
SEC. 3.   PURCHASE AND SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   Purchases must be made by the city purchasing agent, or the purchasing
agent’s designees, who shall make all purchases for the city in the manner
provided by ordinance and shall, under such regulations as may be provided by
ordinance or by resolution, sell all personal property of the city not needed
for public use, or that may have been condemned as useless by a department
director. (Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 4)
SEC. 4.   PURCHASING AND FURNISHING OF SUPPLIES.
   Before making any purchase or sale, the city purchasing agent shall give
opportunity for competition, under such rules and regulations as the city
council may establish, subject to the competitive bidding sections of this
Charter. Supplies required by departments may be furnished under the control of
the purchasing agent or the purchasing agent’s designees. (Amend. of 5-1-93,
Prop. No. 4)
CHAPTER XI. THE BUDGET AND FINANCIAL PROCEDURE RELATING THERETO
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   ANNUAL BUDGET ESTIMATE.
   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October of each
year and shall end with the 30th day of September next following. By the 15th
day of August of each year the city manager shall submit to the council a
budget estimate of the revenue of the city and the expense of conducting the
affairs thereof for the ensuing fiscal year. This estimate shall be compiled
from information obtained from the several departments, divisions and offices
of the city on uniform forms furnished by the city manager. It shall be in
accordance with uniform accounting procedures with comparisons to the last two
fiscal years and an estimate of the probable income for the period covered with
the significant underlying assumptions. (Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 8; Amend.
of 11-5-24)
SEC. 2.   BUDGET ESTIMATES TO BE FURNISHED TO CITY MANAGER BY DEPARTMENTS NOT
UNDER CITY MANAGER’S IMMEDIATE DIRECTION.
   Every department of the city government not under the direct control of the
city manager, except the city auditor and the inspector general, shall furnish
to the city manager, for use in the preparation of recommendations to the
council regarding the annual budget, a detailed budget estimate of the needs
and requirements of such department for the coming year. The city auditor and
the inspector general shall furnish a detailed budget estimate of the needs and
requirements of the city auditor’s office and the inspector general’s office,
respectively, for the coming year directly to the city council, to be approved
by the city council, and then consolidated with the city manager’s annual
budget estimate. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No.
5; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 3.   ANNUAL APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE.
   (a)   Upon receipt of the city manager’s estimate, the council shall call a
public hearing upon the submitted budget to be held before a committee of the
council, or before the entire council sitting as a committee of the whole.
Following the public hearings, the council shall pass on first reading the
appropriation ordinance. Upon passage of the appropriation ordinance by the
council, it shall become immediately effective, and the funds appropriated
therein become available on October 1, the beginning of the next fiscal year.
   (b)   Following the final passage of the appropriation ordinance, the city
council shall, by ordinance, levy the taxes for the current year. (Amend. of 4-
3-76, Prop. No. 8; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 11; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 4.   TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   Upon the written recommendation of the city manager, the city council may at
any time transfer an unencumbered balance of an appropriation made for the use
of one department, division, or purpose to any other department, division, or
purpose. (Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 5.   APPROPRIATION OF EXCESS REVENUE.
   If at any time the total accruing revenue of the city shall be in excess of
the total estimated income thereof, as set forth in the annual budget estimate
in compliance with Section 1 of Chapter XI of this Charter, the council may
from time to time appropriate such excess to such uses as will not conflict
with any uses for which such revenues specifically accrued. (Amend. of 11-4-14,
Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 6.   EXPENDITURES ONLY PURSUANT TO APPROPRIATIONS.
   No money shall be drawn from the city treasury, nor shall any obligation for
the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of appropriation made
by the council and, whenever an appropriation is so made, the chief financial
officer shall forthwith give notice to the city manager. At the close of each
fiscal year, the unencumbered balance of each appropriation shall revert to the
fund from which it was appropriated and shall be subject to future
appropriations, but appropriations may be made in furtherance of improvements
or other objects of work of the city that will not be completed within the
current year. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 8; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 7.   ACCOUNTS OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   Accounts shall be kept for each item of appropriation made by the council
and every warrant on the city treasury shall state specifically against which
of such items the warrant is drawn. Each account shall show in detail the
appropriations made to the account by the council, the amount drawn on the
account, the unpaid obligations charged against the account, and the
unencumbered balance to the credit of the account. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop.
No. 8)
SEC. 8.   PAYMENT OF OBLIGATIONS.
   The chief financial officer shall examine payrolls, bills, and other claims
and demands against the city and shall issue no warrant for payment unless the
chief financial officer finds that the claim is in proper form, and duly
approved; that it is justly and legally due and payable; that an appropriation
has been made therefor which has not been exhausted or that the payment has
been otherwise legally authorized; and that there is money in the city treasury
to make payment. The chief financial officer may investigate any claim and for
that purpose may summon any officer, agent or person to be examined by the
chief financial officer upon oath or affirmation relative thereto, which oath
or affirmation the chief financial officer may administer. If the chief
financial officer knowingly or negligently issues a warrant on the treasury
authorizing payment of any item for which no appropriation has been made, or
for the payment of which there is not a sufficient balance in the proper
appropriation, or which is otherwise contrary to law or ordinance, the chief
financial officer and the chief financial officer’s sureties shall be
individually liable to the city for the amount thereof. (Amend. of 4-3-76,
Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 7;
Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 9.   MONEY CERTIFIED IN TREASURY.
   No contract, agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of
money shall be entered into, nor shall any ordinance, resolution, or order for
the expenditure of money be passed by the council or be authorized by any
officer of the city, except in the cases hereinafter specified, unless the city
manager first certifies to the council, or to the proper officer, as the case
may be, that the money required for such contract, agreement, obligation or
expenditure is in the treasury to the credit of the fund from which it is to be
drawn and not appropriated for any other purpose, which certificate shall be
filed and immediately recorded. The sum so certified shall not thereafter be
considered unappropriated until the city is discharged from the contract,
agreement or obligation.
SEC. 10.   MONEY DEEMED IN TREASURY.
   All moneys actually in the treasury to the credit of the fund from which
they are to be drawn, and all moneys applicable to the payment of the
obligation or appropriation involved that are anticipated to come in the
treasury before the maturity of such contract, agreement or obligation, from
taxes or assessments, or from sales of service product, or by-products, or from
any city undertaking, fees, charges, accounts and bills receivable, or other
credits in process of collection, and all moneys applicable to the payment of
such obligation or appropriation, which are to be paid into the city treasury
prior to the maturity thereof, arising from the sale or lease of lands or other
property, and moneys to be derived from lawfully authorized bonds sold and in
the process of delivery, and moneys to be derived from the sale of lawfully
authorized commercial paper notes, shall, for the purpose of such certificate,
be deemed in the treasury to the credit of the appropriate fund and subject to
such certification. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 8)
SEC. 11.   OBLIGATIONS; WHEN VOID.
   All contracts, agreements, or other obligations entered into, and all
ordinances passed and resolutions and orders adopted, that are contrary to the
preceding sections of this chapter shall be void, and no person shall have any
claim or demand against the city thereunder, nor shall the council or any
officer of the city waive or qualify the limits fixed by any ordinance,
resolution, or order, or fasten upon the city any liability in excess of such
limits, or relieve any party from an exact compliance with a contract under
such ordinance, resolution, or order; provided, that this section shall not
apply in case of public disaster calling for extraordinary emergency
expenditure or to the exceptions contained in Section 12 of this chapter.
(Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 12.   LIMITATIONS ON EXPENDITURES NOT TO APPLY TO PURCHASES BY PARK BOARD
IN CERTAIN EXTRAORDINARY CASES WHEN APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The limitations and restrictions contained in Sections 10 and 11 above shall
not be applicable to the park board where an advantageous opportunity is
presented to said board to purchase an additional park for any year upon a cash
payment out of the appropriation set apart to the park department for that year
and the contract or agreement to pay the balance of the purchase price for the
said park is not to exceed 10 annual installments; provided that such
contemplated purchase of park property shall first be reported to the city
council and approved by the council. When so approved the said purchase may be
consummated and thereafter provision shall be made in the annual budget for the
payment of the annual installment with interest thereon, to be charged against
the annual appropriation for such department.
SEC. 13.   RESERVED.
   (Combined into Chapter III, Section 20 by Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 14.   USE OF WATER UTILITIES DEPARTMENT RECEIPTS AND REVENUES.
   (a) All receipts and revenues from the water utilities department constitute
a separate and sacred fund, which may never be diverted or drawn upon for any
purposes other than those set forth in this section. The city council may
appropriate or pledge all receipts and revenues from the water utilities
department:
      (1)   for acquiring, constructing, repairing, extending, improving,
operating, maintaining, and bettering the city’s combined water and wastewater
utility systems and related plants, properties, mains, facilities, and water
supplies;
      (2)   for paying, discharging, or retiring the indebtedness and
obligations of the city that have been or may be incurred for Dallas water
utilities department purposes;
      (3)   for payment for services rendered to the department by other city
departments; and
      (4)   for payment of an amount equal to ad valorem taxes and other
charges that would be due the city if the water utilities department were not a
city-owned public utility.
   (b)   All water service or municipal and industrial waste water collection
and treatment service rendered by the water utilities department must be paid
for by rate schedules as approved by the city council and such state authority
as may be required. (Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43; Amend. of
5-1-93, Prop. No. 7)
SEC. 15.   PRIORITY OF EXCESS REVENUE.
   (a)   If at any time the total actual, accruing or estimated annual revenue
of the city exceeds the total actual annual revenue of the prior fiscal year,
city council shall appropriate no less than 50 percent of such excess amount,
in compliance with Section 1 of Chapter XI of the Charter, to fund the Dallas
Police and Fire Pension System - Combined Plan, in the amount directed by the
State Pension Review Board and/or city council, whichever is higher. Any monies
remaining shall be appropriated to the public safety objectives described below
in Subsection (b).
   (b)   Public safety objectives.
      (1)   The starting combined salary and non-pension benefits, excluding
sign-on bonuses, of the police officers of the Dallas Police Department are
within the top five of all city police departments (as compared to the starting
combined salary and non-pension benefits) in Dallas, Collin, Tarrant, Denton,
and Rockwall Counties with a population over 50,000, on a per officer basis;
and
      (2)   The total number of full- time sworn police officers of the police
department of the City of Dallas is increased to at least 4,000 and the ratio
established of 4,000 officers to Dallas city residents as of the date of the
passage of this charter amendment is maintained or increased going forward.
         (A)   Any monies appropriated to this public safety objective but not
spent within the fiscal year shall be transferred to a sinking fund to fund
this Public Safety Objective in the subsequent fiscal year.
   (c)   Any monies remaining after all public safety objectives defined in
this section have been met may be reappropriated by city council.
   (d)   The city, on an annual basis, shall hire a third-party firm to conduct
a survey to calculate the starting combined salary and non- pension benefits,
excluding sign-on bonuses, of the full-time police officers of all cities in
Dallas, Collin, Tarrant, Denton, and Rockwall Counties with a population over
50,000, on a per officer basis, and report the findings to city council. The
third-party firm will be required to certify in writing to the city that it
used its best efforts to include responses from each city in Dallas, Collin,
Tarrant, Denton, and Rockwall Counties in the annual survey, and the failure or
unwillingness of any city to participate in the survey shall have no impact on
either:
      (1)   the city’s and the third-party firm’s obligations to complete and
deliver the survey required by this Section on an annual basis; or
      (2)   the city’s obligations under this chapter.
   (e)   As used in this section, “revenue” shall mean all revenue collected by
the city that’s use is not restricted to a limited purpose under state or
federal law, including, but not limited to ad valorem property tax, sales tax,
beverage taxes, asset forfeiture funds, bingo fees, cemetery taxes, impact
fees, interlocal agreements, internet payment and access fees, investments,
court fees, open records fees, municipal development corporation sales taxes,
municipal development district taxes, pro rata fees, public improvement
district assessments, right-of- way fees, special improvement district fund
taxes, street assessments, time warrants, user fees, venue taxes, donations,
coin-operated machine taxes, drainage fees, hotel taxes, parking fees,
franchise fees, enterprise funds, charges for services, admission fees, fines
and forfeitures, operating transfers from municipally controlled entities,
municipal enterprises, municipally owned utilities, municipally controlled
districts, licenses and permits, and interest, but shall not include any debt
proceeds taken on by the city, or any grants, appropriations or other revenue
received from other governmental or non-profit entities (that weren’t directly
or indirectly initially provided to such other governmental or non-profit
entities by the city).
   (f)   If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this section is for
any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or
unenforceability of that section, paragraph, clause, or provision shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this section, and to this end, the
provisions of this section are declared to be severable. This section shall
supersede the Dallas City Code to the extent there are any conflicts. (Amend.
of 11-5-24)
CHAPTER XII. POLICE DEPARTMENT
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   CREATION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT; PERSONNEL.
   There is hereby created a police department of the City of Dallas at the
head of which shall be the chief of police. The police department shall be
composed of the chief, whose office is hereby created and established, and
other unclassified positions of assistants, limited to the three grades or
ranks immediately below the grade or rank of chief, and classified employees as
the council may provide by ordinance upon recommendation of the city manager.
The chief of police shall designate the order of succession of the assistant
chiefs, who shall perform the duties of the chief in the event of the chief’s
disability, absence from the city, or inability to perform duties from any
other cause. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 26; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 8;
Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 2.   DUTIES.
   The chief of police shall:
      (1)   have immediate direction and control of the police department,
subject to the supervision of the city manager, and also subject to such rules,
regulations, and orders as the city manager may prescribe, not inconsistent
with the ordinances of the city, and shall promulgate all orders, rules, and
regulations for government of the police force;
      (2)   devote the chief’s entire time to the discharge of official duties,
and shall not be absent from the city except in the performance of official
duties, unless granted a written leave of absence by the city manager;
      (3)   keep the office of the chief of police open at all hours, day and
night, and either the chief or a subordinate shall be in constant attendance of
such office;
      (4)   prescribe the uniforms and badges for the members of the police
force and direct the manner in which the members of the police force shall be
armed;
      (5)   perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 3. APPOINTMENT AND OATH.
   The members of the police department, other than the chief of police and
assistants provided by ordinance, shall be selected from the list of eligibles
prepared by the civil service commission. In case of emergency, the mayor, the
city manager, or the chief of police may appoint additional patrol officers and
other officers for temporary service, who need not be in the classified
service. Each member of the police department, both rank and file, shall be
issued a warrant of appointment signed by the city manager in which the date of
appointment shall be stated, and such shall be the member’s commission. Each
member of the police department shall, before entering upon any duties,
subscribe to an oath that the member will faithfully, without fear or favor,
perform the duties of the office, and such oath shall be filed and preserved
with the records of the police department, and in addition, the several
officers of the force shall, if so required by the council, give bond in such
penal sum and with such security as the council may prescribe by ordinance. The
cost of such bond is to be borne by the city. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 26;
Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 4.   DISCIPLINE OF POLICE; HEARING.
   The chief of police shall have the right to discipline any of the officers
or employees who may be under the chief’s jurisdiction and control for
violations of city ordinances or federal or state law, or for failure to obey
orders given by the proper authority, or the orders, rules, and regulations
promulgated by the chief of police. The chief of police may delegate this
authority to discipline as he or she deems fit. If any officer or employee is
discharged, the chief of police shall forthwith in writing certify the fact,
together with the cause for the action, to the city manager. A disciplined
officer or employee shall have 10 days from receipt of notice of a suspension,
demotion, or discharge within which to demand a hearing before the city
manager, as provided in this Charter, but such demand must be made in writing.
If demanded, the city manager shall proceed to inquire into the cause of the
discipline and render judgment thereon, which judgment, if the charge is
sustained, may be suspension, reduction in rank, discharge, or such other
discipline as may seem just and equitable to the city manager under all the
facts and circumstances of the particular case. Such judgment is final unless a
discharged or demoted officer or employee desires to exercise the right of a
public hearing before a trial board or an administrative law judge as provided
by this Charter. (Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 7;
Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 8; Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-8-
05, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 5.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 6.   AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   (a)   The officers and privates constituting the police department of the
City of Dallas are vested with all the power and authority given to them as
peace officers under the laws of the state, the federal law, and the ordinances
and regulations of the city, and it shall be the duty of each such officer and
private:
      (1)   to use every endeavor to prevent the commission within the city of
offenses against the laws of the state, the federal government, and the
ordinances and regulations of the city;
      (2)   to observe and enforce all such laws, ordinances, and regulations;
      (3)   to detect and arrest offenders against all such laws, ordinances,
and regulations; and
      (4)   to preserve the public peace, health, and safety.
   (b)   All police officers shall execute any criminal warrant, warrant of
arrest, writ, subpoena, or other process that may be placed in their hands by
the duly constituted authorities of the city. No police officer shall receive
any fee or other compensation for any service rendered in the performance of
the officer’s duty other than the salary paid by the city, nor shall the police
officer receive a fee as a witness in any case arising under the criminal laws
of this state or under the ordinances or regulations of the city and prosecuted
in the municipal court of the city or in any criminal court in Dallas County.
(Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 3)
SEC. 7.   SPECIAL POLICE.
   No person, except as otherwise provided by general law or the Charter, or
the ordinances passed in pursuance thereof, shall act as special police or
special detectives, except upon written authority from the city manager. Such
authority, when conferred, shall be exercised only under the direction and
control of the chief of police and for the time specified in the appointment.
(Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 8.   FALSELY WEARING POLICE UNIFORM OR BADGE.
   Any person, other than a member of the police force of the City of Dallas,
who wears the uniform or badge as prescribed by the chief of police for the
City of Dallas Police Department, or a uniform or badge so closely similar as
to be mistaken for the uniform or badge of the City of Dallas Police
Department, shall be subject to such fine as may be prescribed by the city
council by ordinance. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6)
CHAPTER XIII. FIRE-RESCUE DEPARTMENT
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43; Retitled by Amend. of 11-8-05,
Prop. No. 10)
SEC. 1.   CREATION OF FIRE-RESCUE DEPARTMENT; PERSONNEL.
   There is hereby created a fire-rescue department of the City of Dallas, at
the head of which shall be the chief of the fire-rescue department. The fire-
rescue department shall be composed of the chief of the fire-rescue department,
whose office is hereby created and established, and other unclassified
positions of assistants, limited to the two grades or ranks immediately below
the grade or rank of chief, and classified employees as the council may provide
by ordinance upon the recommendation of the city manager. The chief of the
fire-rescue department shall designate the order of succession of the assistant
chiefs, who shall perform the duties of the chief in the event of the chief’s
disability, absence from the city, or inability to perform duties from any
other cause. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 27; Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6;
Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 10)
SEC. 2.   DUTIES.
   The chief of the fire-rescue department shall:
      (1)   have exclusive control of the stationing and transfer of all
firefighters and other officers and employees constituting the fire-rescue
department, under such rules and regulations as may be established by the city
manager, to whom the chief shall be immediately responsible, or according to
the ordinances of the city;
      (2)   take all necessary measures to protect the city and the property of
its residents from destruction by fire or conflagration;
      (3)   devote the chief’s entire time to the discharge of official duties,
and shall not be absent from the city except in the performance of official
duties, unless granted a written leave by the city manager;
      (4)   classify the fire-rescue service of the city in conformity with the
ordinances of the city council concerning the number of persons to be employed
therein and make rules for the regulation and discipline of such service and
the employees;
      (5)   prescribe the uniform and badges for the members of the fire-rescue
department;
      (6)   provide fire-rescue equipment, personnel, and services for
emergency use; and
      (7)   perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-
8-05, Prop. No. 10; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 3.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 4.   APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the fire-rescue department, other than the chief of the fire-
rescue department and the chief’s assistants provided for by council ordinance,
shall be certified from the list of eligibles prepared by a civil service
commission, in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed
by the civil service commission; provided, however, that in case of civil
disturbance, the city manager or the chief of the fire-rescue department may
appoint additional firefighters and officers for temporary service, who need
not be in the classified service. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 27; Amend. of
5-3-97, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 10)
SEC. 5.   ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION FOR CONTINUOUS SERVICE.
   All firefighters and other uniformed personnel of the fire-rescue department
shall receive additional compensation for continuous service as is provided by
the laws of the State of Texas and, in the absence of such provisions, as is
provided for by ordinances of the city. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6; Amend.
of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 10)
SEC. 6.   DESTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS.
   When any building in the city is on fire, it shall be lawful for the chief
of the fire-rescue department or any assistant chief of the fire-rescue
department, with the concurrence of the city manager, to direct such building,
or any buildings that they may deem hazardous and likely to communicate fire to
other buildings, to be torn down, blown up, or destroyed, and no action shall
be maintained against any person or against the city therefor. Any person
interested in any building so destroyed or injured may, within six months, and
not thereafter, apply in writing to the council to assess and pay the damages
claimed to have been sustained. If the council and the claimant cannot agree
upon the terms of adjustment, then the application of the claimant shall be
referred for decision to three disinterested arbitrators, who shall be
qualified voters and owners of real estate within the city. One arbitrator
shall be appointed by the claimant, and one by the council, and the third by
both arbitrators previously selected, and the decision of the majority shall
constitute the award in the case. The arbitrators shall be sworn to faithfully
execute their duties according to the best of their ability. They shall have
power to subpoena and administer oaths to witnesses; to give all parties a fair
and impartial hearing; and to give reasonable notice beforehand of the time and
place of the hearing. They shall take into account the probability as to
whether the building would have been destroyed by fire if it had not been
pulled down and destroyed and the loss of insurance upon the property, if any,
caused by the pulling down, blowing up, and destroying of the building, and may
report that no damages should equitably be allowed to the claimant. Whenever
such report appraising the damages is made and finally confirmed by the
council, compliance therewith by the council shall be deemed full satisfaction
of the damages. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No.
10)
SEC. 7.   FIREFIGHTERS TO EXERCISE POLICE POWERS IN ATTENDING AND RETURNING
FROM FIRES AND RESCUE SITUATIONS.
   Each member of the fire-rescue department acting under orders of a
commanding officer is authorized to exercise powers of police officers while
going to, attending, or returning from any fire, alarm of fire, or rescue
situation and shall be issued a warrant of appointment signed by the city
manager, in which the date of appointment shall be stated, and such warrant
shall be the firefighter’s commission. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6; Amend.
of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 10)
SEC. 8.   FALSELY WEARING UNIFORM OR BADGE.
   Any person, other than a member of the fire-rescue department of the City of
Dallas, who wears the uniform or badge as prescribed by the chief of the fire-
rescue department of the City of Dallas, or a uniform or badge so closely
similar as to be mistaken for the uniform or badge of the fire-rescue
department of the City of Dallas, shall be subject to such fine as may be
prescribed by the city council by ordinance. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6;
Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 10)
SEC. 9.   DISCIPLINE OF FIREFIGHTERS AND OTHER FIRE-RESCUE DEPARTMENT
PERSONNEL; HEARING.
   The chief of the fire-rescue department shall have the right to discipline
any officers or employees who may be under the chief’s control and management
for violations of city ordinances or federal or state law, or for failure to
obey orders given by the proper authority, or the orders, rules, and
regulations promulgated by the chief for the department. The chief of the fire-
rescue department may delegate this authority to discipline as he or she deems
fit. If any officer or employee is discharged, the chief of the fire-rescue
department shall forthwith in writing certify the fact, together with the cause
for the action, to the city manager. A disciplined officer or employee shall
have 10 days from receipt of notice of a suspension, demotion, or discharge
within which to demand a hearing before the city manager, as provided in this
Charter, but such demand must be made in writing. If demanded, the city manager
shall proceed to inquire into the cause of the discipline and render judgment
thereon, which judgment, if the charge is sustained, may be suspension,
reduction in rank, discharge, or such other discipline as may seem just and
equitable to the city manager under all the facts and circumstances of the
particular case. Such judgment is final unless a discharged or demoted officer
or employee desires to exercise the right of a public hearing before a trial
board or an administrative law judge as provided by this Charter. (Amend. of 4-
3-76, Prop. No. 8; Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No.
8; Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. Nos. 5 and 10;
Amend. of 11-5-24)
CHAPTER XIV. FRANCHISES
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   FRANCHISE BY ORDINANCE.
   The city council shall have the power, subject to the provisions of this
chapter, by ordinance to confer upon any person, firm, corporation, or other
business entity operating as a general public service provider the franchise or
right to use the public streets, alleys, highways, thoroughfares, easements, or
other public property of the city for the purpose of furnishing to the public
any general public service or benefit, including, but not limited to, heat,
light, power, telephone service, solid waste pickup, solid waste hauling, solid
waste recycling, solid waste disposal, and transportation, for compensation or
hire; provided that no franchise shall be granted by the city council to any
person, firm, corporation, or other business entity to own, control, or operate
a water or wastewater utility system within the city limits. Any franchise
granted may be voided upon the failure of the grantee to exercise the same in
compliance with the terms of the franchise. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 2.   FRANCHISE ORDINANCE PROCEDURE.
   The granting of franchises by the city council shall be governed by the
following regulations:
      (1)   No exclusive franchise or privilege shall ever be granted.
      (2)   No determinate or fixed term franchise shall ever be granted for a
longer term than 40 years.
      (3)   Within 10 years of the date of expiration of any fixed term
franchise, the city council may grant a new franchise to commence upon the
expiration of the franchise in question, or grant a new franchise if the
existing franchise is released.
      (4)   Actual operation under a franchise must commence within six months
after the granting of the franchise. As a part of the actual operation, the
city council may grant a reasonable time beyond the six month period for
research, development and construction upon terms and conditions as set forth
in the franchise.
      (5)   No franchise, nor the assets held by the franchise holder, may be
sold, assigned, transferred, or conveyed to any other person, firm,
corporation, or other business entity without the consent of the city first had
and obtained by ordinance or resolution, unless otherwise provided in the
franchise. If the purchaser is the holder of a like franchise, the franchise
purchased shall be canceled and merged into the franchise held by the purchaser
upon terms and conditions as may be set out by the city council when permission
for merger is granted.
      (6)   The purchaser of any franchise must assume and promptly discharge
all of the payments due and owing the city by the holder of the franchise being
purchased.
      (7)   An indeterminate franchise (that is, with no fixed or determinate
duration) may be granted, provided that the ordinance granting the franchise
gives to the city, in express terms, the right to purchase the property of the
franchise holder or to cause a purchaser to buy such property, fixing the
times, the rights, and the conditions under which they may be exercised. In the
event of purchase by the city, the franchise itself shall not be deemed to have
any market value.
      (8)   All holders of franchises for public services from the city, their
successors or assigns, as compensation for the right or privilege enjoyed shall
pay to the city a sum not less than four percent per annum of gross receipts of
the business pursued by the franchise holder rendered in the city. Such sum
shall be exclusive of, and in addition to, all special assessments and taxes of
whatever nature, including ad valorem taxes upon the value of the franchise and
other property of the franchise holder. The sum due under this subsection shall
be due and payable on or before February 15 of each year for the preceding
calendar year.
      (9)   All rights held under any such ordinance, shall at all times be
subject to the power of the city council to require the holder thereof to make
any necessary changes in or reasonable extensions of facilities and service in
or to any portion of the city, which in the judgment of the city council may be
necessary and proper (subject to the terms and conditions of any franchise).
The city reserves the right to prevent the making of unnecessary or
unprofitable extensions. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 3.   CONTESTING OF RATES.
   No person, firm, corporation, or other business entity enjoying any
franchise to operate a public utility within the City of Dallas shall ever make
any charge or fix any rate for public service to its patrons or the inhabitants
of the City of Dallas without first being authorized by the city council by an
ordinance or order approving the same, and no public utility shall contest any
rate or charge or order fixed by the city council under the authority otherwise
conferred in the charter of the city, in any suit or cause of action in any
court until after such utility has filed a motion for a rehearing with the city
council specifically setting out the grounds of complaint against any such
order or ordinance fixing any rate or charge and until the city council shall
have passed upon the motion for rehearing, provided that if the council has not
acted within 60 days, the motion shall be deemed overruled. This section does
not apply to a person, firm, corporation, or other business entity engaged in
the business of solid waste pickup, solid waste hauling, solid waste recycling,
or solid waste disposal. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 4.   INVESTIGATIVE POWERS.
   In order to ascertain the true amount of gross receipts, capital invested,
property value, depreciation and expenses, or any other fact connected with or
relating to the business done by such franchise holder, the city council shall
have full power:
      (1)   to examine, or cause to be examined, at any and all reasonable
times, the books, papers and records of the franchise holder;
      (2)   to take testimony and compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, papers and records and to examine witnesses under oath,
under such rules and regulations as the city council may adopt;
      (3)   to examine the physical properties and facilities of the franchise
holder at all reasonable times;
      (4)   to declare the franchise or privilege enjoyed by the holder in
default, annulled and terminated in the event the holder should unjustifiably
refuse to permit the inspection of books, papers, records or properties, or if
any officer, agent or employee of such franchise holder unjustifiably refuses
to give testimony when requested by the city council.
SEC. 5.   SERVICE WITHOUT DISCRIMINATION.
   Every public service franchise holder shall furnish and provide equal and
uniform service alike to all persons, firms, corporations, and other business
entities in the City of Dallas. It shall be unlawful and a sufficient ground
for forfeiture of any franchise for any such holder, after notice, to grant
free service or furnish better service, or to furnish service for a lower price
or rate, conditions or quantity of service considered, to any person, firm,
corporation, or other business entity, than to other persons, firms,
corporations, or other business entities under like circumstances, or to
otherwise discriminate in the manner of rates or service, except as may be
provided by state law. Any such public service franchise holder may, from time
to time, with the consent and approval of the city council, adopt the schedules
governing rates, conditions or quantities of service considered, and allow the
applicants to choose between alternative schedules. No such schedule shall be
operative, nor shall service be furnished in accordance therewith, until filed
with and approved by the city council. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 6.   FORFEITURE OF FRANCHISE.
   Upon proof being received by the city council that the provisions of a
franchise previously granted are being violated, it shall at once cause an
investigation to be made of the alleged violation. If the city council is of
the opinion that the provisions of the franchise are being violated, it shall
instruct the city attorney to take the necessary steps to secure compliance
with the terms of the franchise. Should the franchise holder fail to comply,
after notice, then the city attorney may take the steps authorized by law
including forfeiture of the same.
SEC. 7.   RATE HEARINGS.
   The city council shall provide for a fair hearing to any person, firm,
corporation, or other business entity enjoying a public service franchise in
the City of Dallas, prior to the change in the rates, rules, or regulations
applicable to such franchise. In fixing or changing the charges, rates, fares,
or compensation, or determining the reasonableness thereof, no stocks or bonds
authorized or issued by any corporation, nor any indebtedness created by any
person, firm, corporation, or other business entity, enjoying a franchise,
shall be considered unless upon proof that the stocks, bonds, or indebtedness
have been actually issued for money paid and used in the reasonable development
of the property of the franchise holder, for labor done or property actually
received in accordance with the laws and constitution of the state applicable
thereto. No hearing shall be required for a reduction in rates unless requested
in writing by an interested person, firm, corporation, or business entity.
(Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 8.   ACQUISITION BY EMINENT DOMAIN.
   The city shall have the power through eminent domain proceedings to acquire
any public utility operating with or without a franchise and furnishing a
public service to the residents of Dallas. The procedure to be used in the
acquisition of such property shall be that as set forth in Chapter 21 of the
Texas Property Code, as amended, and other applicable state law. In valuing the
property, the measure of damages shall be the fair market value of the physical
properties together with its franchise, if any, taken together as one system.
This power shall be in addition to and cumulative of any other powers of
acquisition granted to or reserved by the city in a franchise ordinance.
(Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. Nos. 9 and 13; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 9.   NO PUBLIC UTILITY PURCHASE WITHOUT VOTER APPROVAL.
   Prior to the purchase of any existing franchised public utility system,
either according to the terms of the franchise or by eminent domain, the city
council must submit the question of the purchase to the qualified voters of the
City of Dallas, and the same must be approved by a majority of those voting in
the election.
SEC. 10.   PRIVATE LICENSES.
   The city council shall have the power by ordinance to grant to any owner of
property abutting upon the streets or other property of the city, the use
thereof or to go over or under the same in any manner which may be necessary or
proper to the enjoyment of said abutting property by the owner; provided,
however, that such use be not inconsistent with, and does not unreasonably
impair the public use to which said street or other public property may be
dedicated, or the use being made of the same by a public service franchise
holder from the city. The city council shall fix the terms and conditions of
any such grant and the time for which it shall exist. Whether expressed or not,
the right is expressly reserved to the city, acting through the city council,
to terminate such license when deemed inconsistent with the public use of the
property of the city and when the same may become a nuisance.
SEC. 11.   REVOCABLE LICENSE.
   The city council shall have the power to grant minor or temporary privileges
in the streets, public ways and public places of the city by ordinance or
resolution. Such permit shall be unconditionally revocable at the will of the
city council and shall not be deemed to be a franchise as used in this Charter.
CHAPTER XV. PLANNING AND ZONING
(Renamed and Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING.
      (1)   CONTENT. The council may adopt, and may from time to time modify, a
comprehensive plan setting forth in graphic and textual form, policies to
govern the future physical development of the city. Such plan may cover the
entire city and all of its functions and services or may consist of a
combination of plans governing specific functions and services or specific
geographic areas which together cover the entire city and all of its functions
and services.
      (2)   ADOPTION. Upon receipt from the city manager of a proposed
comprehensive plan or proposed modification of the existing plan, the city
council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed comprehensive plan or
modification thereof and shall thereafter adopt it by ordinance, or reject the
same.
      (3)   EFFECT. The comprehensive plan shall serve as a guide to all future
council action concerning land use and development regulations, urban
conservation and rehabilitation programs and expenditures for capital
improvements. (Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43; Amend. of 11-4-
14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 2.   URBAN CONSERVATION AND REHABILITATION AND REDEVELOPMENT.
   The council may by ordinance provide for urban redevelopment, rehabilitation
and conservation programs for:
      (1)   the alleviation or prevention of slums, obsolescence, blight or
other conditions of urban deterioration; and
      (2)   the achievement of the most appropriate use of land. (Renumbered by
Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 3.   ZONING COMMISSION.
   The city council shall appoint 15 residents of the City of Dallas who shall
constitute the zoning commission of the City of Dallas and shall be the city
plan commission as the same is referred to by state statute for the approval of
plats and subdivisions. Except for the qualified voter requirement, the members
shall possess the same qualifications and be subject to the same
disqualifications as provided by the Charter for members of the city council,
or general laws of the State of Texas. The mayor shall designate one member as
chair, subject to confirmation by the city council. (Renumbered by Amend. of 6-
12-73, Prop. No. 43; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 4.   DUTIES OF ZONING COMMISSION.
   The zoning commission shall:
      (1)   Adopt, subject to approval of the city council, such rules and
regulations as they deed best to govern their actions, proceedings and
deliberations, including the time and place of meeting.
      (2)   Upon application made, advertise and hold public hearings on zoning
or changes in zoning, and make recommendations thereon to the city council.
      (3)   Act as an advisory body to the city council in relation to any
changes in the boundaries of the various original districts and any changes in
the zoning ordinances and regulations to be enforced therein. Such
recommendation shall be made after a public hearing held thereon.
      (4)   Administer provisions of state law regarding the platting and
recording of subdivisions and additions, and in connection therewith, to
require the owners and developers of land who desire to subdivide, plat or
replat land for urban development, to provide for building setback lines, to
dedicate streets, alleys, parks, easements or other public places of adequate
width and size; to coordinate street layouts and street planning with the city
and with other municipalities, and to coordinate the same with the county,
state and federally designated highways, as they may deem best in the interest
of the general public. In connection with the planning and the platting of
property, the zoning commission shall have the power to consider the character
of development or land use contemplated by the proposed platting and the zoning
of the property, and require off-street parking, streets and alleys of adequate
width to be provided for that purpose.
      (5)   Make recommendations to the city manager and the city council on
matters affecting the physical development of the city.
      (6)   Advise and make recommendations on the comprehensive plan and the
implementation thereof as may be requested by the city manager and the city
council.
      (7)   Exercise all other responsibilities as may be provided by law.
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 9;
Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 5.   DEDICATION OF STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC PROPERTIES.
   The action of the zoning commission in requiring the dedication of streets,
alleys and public places shall not amount to an acceptance of said dedication,
nor estop the city council to deny the same. Acceptance of all dedications
shall be by action of the city council, or when the city council shall have
made actual appropriation of the same by entry, use or improvement. (Renumbered
by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 6.   CITY URBAN DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
   In addition to the zoning commission, the city council may by ordinance
provide for an urban development commission. The ordinance creating the same
shall state how the body shall be constituted, the qualifications of the
members and the duties of the same. (Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No.
43)
SEC. 7.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 8.   THOROUGHFARE PLAN.
   The city council shall by ordinance adopt a thoroughfare plan. A
thoroughfare plan now in existence or hereafter adopted by the city council
shall not be changed except by an ordinance duly adopted after a public hearing
as herein provided.
   Prior to any change in a thoroughfare plan, the city council shall hold a
public hearing. Written notice of all public hearings before the city council
on proposed changes in the thoroughfare plan shall be sent to owners of real
property lying within 200 feet of the area of the proposed change, such notice
to be given, not less than 10 days before the date set for hearing, to all such
owners who have rendered their said property for city taxes as the ownership
appears on the last approved city tax roll. Such notice may be served by
depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States
mail. (Amend. of 1-17-81, Prop. No. 3)
CHAPTER XVI. CIVIL SERVICE AND PERSONNEL
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   ORGANIZATION OF CIVIL SERVICE.
   There is hereby created and established a civil service board to be composed
of seven members who shall be residents of the City of Dallas and a number of
adjunct members equal to the number of members on the city council who shall
have qualifications established by the city council. Biennially in September of
each odd-numbered year, the city council shall appoint the members and adjunct
members to serve for two years and until their successors have been appointed
and qualified, and the mayor shall designate one member as chair subject to
confirmation by a majority of the city council. The adjunct members shall not
have voting privileges on matters to be determined by the civil service board
but shall perform such duties as prescribed for them by this Charter. The
members and adjunct members of the civil service board shall not hold any other
position under the city, county, or state government. The city council may
remove any member or adjunct member of the board. Any vacancies on the board
must be filled by the city council for the unexpired term. (Amend. of 4-2-83,
Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 4-6-85, Prop. No. 4; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1;
Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 8; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-5-
24)
SEC. 2.   OFFICERS OF CIVIL SERVICE BOARD; DIRECTOR OF CIVIL SERVICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Immediately after appointment, the board shall organize by electing
one of the members vice chair. The board shall also appoint a secretary, who
shall not be a member or adjunct member of the board. The secretary shall serve
as director of the civil service department of the city and employ such
assistants and employees to positions as the city council may establish.
   (b)   The secretary of the board shall serve for a period of two years from
the date of appointment or until a successor is appointed and qualified, unless
sooner discharged by the board. The secretary shall be appointed by a majority
of all of the members of the board and may not be discharged during the term of
office except by a two-thirds vote of all of the board members. The secretary
shall receive such compensation as is fixed by the board. (Amend. of 4-2-83,
Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 8)
SEC. 3.   CIVIL SERVICE DIVIDED INTO CLASSIFIED AND UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   (a)   The civil service of the city is divided into the “unclassified” and
“classified” service.
   (b)   The unclassified service shall include:
      (1)   the directors of departments, assistant directors of departments,
and other managerial personnel as designated by city council;
      (2)   the municipal court clerk and the secretary of the civil service
board; and
      (3)   the labor class, which shall include all ordinary unskilled labor.
   (c)   The classified service shall include all positions not exempted or
otherwise designated according to the Charter. There shall be in the classified
service two classes to be known as the “competitive class” and the
“noncompetitive class,” as follows:
      (1)   The competitive class shall include all positions and employment
for which it is practical to determine the merit and fitness of the applicant
by competitive examination.
      (2)   The noncompetitive class shall consist of all positions designated
to respond to special needs identified by directors of departments and approved
by the board or positions requiring peculiar and exceptional qualifications or
management accountability as may be determined by the rules of the board.
(Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-5-
24)
SEC. 4.   CIVIL SERVICE BOARD TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS, SUBJECT TO THE
APPROVAL OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (a)   The civil service board, subject to the approval of the city council,
shall:
      (1)   adopt, amend, and enforce a code of rules and regulations providing
for appointment and employment in all positions in the classified service,
which shall have the force and effect of law;
      (2)   adopt rules regulating reduction of force of employees and in what
order they shall be dismissed and reinstated; and
      (3)   make investigation concerning the enforcement and effect of this
section of the Charter and of the rules adopted under the powers granted in
this section.
   (b)   The rules as adopted shall provide for the following:
      (1)   Notice of no less than seven days of any public meeting of the
board.
      (2)   A lapse of 15 days between a recommended change in the rules by the
board and action by the city council.
      (3)   Notice to all department heads and through them to their employees
regarding any recommended changes.
      (4)   No changes in the rules shall become effective without complying
with the notice provisions as stated in this section.
   (c)   If the civil service rules or any rule adopted by the civil service
board, the civil service trial board, or an administrative law judge, and
approved by the city council, conflicts with a provision of this Charter or the
personnel rules adopted by ordinance of the city council, then this Charter and
the personnel rules will prevail.
   (d)   The civil service board shall make an annual report to the city
council at the end of each fiscal year, giving a complete statement of the
board’s activities and containing such recommendations with regard to improving
the efficiency of the civil service as it may deem advisable. (Amend. of 6-12-
73, Prop. No. 29; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 5.   LISTS OF ELIGIBLES TO BE PROVIDED AND MAINTAINED BY BOARD.
   The board shall provide for examination in accordance with its code of rules
and regulations, and maintain lists of eligibles to each class of the service
of those meeting the requirements of said regulations. Positions in the
classified service shall be filled from such eligible lists upon requisition of
the city manager.
SEC. 6.   BOARD TO PROVIDE FOR PROMOTIONS AND REASSIGNMENT IN THE CLASSIFIED
SERVICE.
   (a)   The board shall provide for promotion to all positions in the
classified service on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by
examination or other appropriate evidences of competition and by records of
merit, efficiency, character, conduct, and seniority.
   (b)   The board may, but is not required to, provide for reassignment in the
case of:
      (1)   reduction in force;
      (2)   removal or reduction for cause under standard civil service hearing
and appeal procedures; or
      (3)   departmental reorganization. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 30;
Amend. of 4-6-85, Prop. No. 3; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 8; Amend. of 11-5-
24)
SEC. 7.   HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT TO RECOMMEND RULES GOVERNING CONDUCT.
   It shall be the duty of the human resources department to recommend
personnel rules to be adopted by city council that govern evaluation of conduct
and performance and require remedies for nonperformance for positions in the
civil service. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 8.   INVESTIGATIONS; POWER TO REQUIRE ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES, ETC.
   In any investigations conducted by the board, it shall have the power to
subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production thereby of
books and papers pertinent to the investigation and to administer oaths to such
witnesses.
SEC. 9.   DEPARTMENTS EXEMPTED FROM CIVIL SERVICE.
   The legal department, the city manager’s office, the city auditor’s office,
the city secretary’s office, the library department, the park and recreation
department, the radio department, municipal court judges, and the city council
office staff are exempted from the provisions applicable to the civil service.
(Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 8; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. Nos. 3 and 5)
SEC. 10.   PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   (a)   Appointments or promotions of city officers and employees in the
classified and unclassified service shall not be deemed complete until a period
of six months shall have elapsed. A probationer may be discharged, suspended or
reduced within said period by the city manager, or the head of the department
in which said probationer is employed without right of appeal. A probationary
period served as a civilian employee will not satisfy the probationary period
for a position in the sworn service with the police department or the fire-
rescue department.
   (b)   Probationary periods may be extended under civil service rules or
personnel rules to allow six months on-the-job work performance or completion
of any written prerequisites to employment. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 7;
Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 11.   EMPLOYEE ACTIONS AFTER PROBATION PERIOD.
   (a)   Any classified or unclassified officer or employee may be removed,
laid off, or reduced in grade by the city manager, or the head of the
department in which the officer or employee is employed, after the six months’
probationary period has expired. The officer taking the action shall, upon
request, furnish the discharged or reduced officer or employee with a written
statement of the reasons for the action. The discharged or reduced officer or
employee shall have the right to demand a public hearing upon the charges,
within a reasonable time after notice of the action, before the trial board as
provided by this Charter. This right of appeal does not apply to department
directors, assistant department directors, and other managerial personnel
designated by the city council, or to employees in departments exempted from
the provisions applicable to the civil service.
   (b)   An officer or employee who has been disciplined by the head of any
department under the city manager shall have 10 days from receipt of notice of
such action within which to demand, in writing, a hearing before the city
manager. At the hearing, the city manager shall inquire into the cause of the
disciplinary action and render a decision either affirming the action of the
department head, setting aside the action of the department head, or directing
the department head to enter a new order that the city manager determines is
just and equitable. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the
city manager is not limited in determining the extent of any discipline
ordered. The decision of the city manager is final unless the disciplined
officer or employee exercises any right to a public hearing before the trial
board as provided by this Charter. This right of appeal does not apply to
department directors, assistant department directors, and other managerial
personnel designated by the city council, or to employees in departments
exempted from the provisions applicable to the civil service. (Amend. of 4-2-
83, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 8; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 5;
Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 12.   TRIAL BOARD.
   (a)   There is hereby created for the purpose of hearing and determining
charges made against any officer or employee of the city, classified or
unclassified, who has been discharged or reduced in grade, a board to be known
as the trial board, which shall be composed of one member of the civil service
board as designated by the chair and two adjunct members of the civil service
board as designated by the chair. The civil service board shall designate a
secretary to the trial board.
   (b)   The trial board has final jurisdiction to hear and decide all appeals
made to it by any discharged or reduced officer or employee. The judgment or
decision of a majority of the trial board is final, unless the decision is
appealed by either party within one year to the district court of the State of
Texas, in which hearing the matter must be decided based upon the review of the
record of the trial board hearing. An appeal by the city of a trial board
decision to district court must be approved by the city manager and city
attorney. An appeal by either party to district court does not suspend the
execution of the trial board order being appealed. The prevailing party in an
appeal to district court is entitled to reasonable attorney’s fees incurred
from the date the trial board order is issued.
   (c)   Any aggrieved officer or employee who desires to appeal to the trial
board must do so in writing within 10 working days from the date of
notification of dismissal or reduction. The aggrieved officer or employee has
the right to be represented by counsel, to have an open hearing, and to compel
the attendance of witnesses to testify for the aggrieved officer or employee.
The appeal to the trial board does not suspend the execution of the order being
appealed. The trial board, by majority vote, or the administrative law judge
may either sustain, reverse, modify, or amend the disciplinary action as is
determined just and equitable, provided that the disciplinary action must be
sustained if a reasonable person could have taken the same disciplinary action
against the employee. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 31; Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop.
No. 7; Amend. of 4-6-85, Prop. No. 4; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 8; Amend. of
11-8-05, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 12.1.   ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE.
   Instead of appealing to a trial board as provided in Section 12 of this
chapter, an officer or employee of the city, classified or unclassified, who
has been discharged or reduced in grade may appeal to an administrative law
judge in accordance with procedures established by ordinance. (Amend. of 8-12-
89, Prop. No. 10; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 13.   MERIT PRINCIPLE.
   All appointments and promotions of city officers and employees, including
classified and unclassified positions and positions exempt from the civil
service, shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness.
SEC. 14.   ADOPTION OF PERSONNEL SYSTEM.
   The city council shall provide a system of personnel rules and regulations
for all employees which shall include:
      (1)   a description of employment positions;
      (2)   methods of determining merit and fitness;
      (3)   hours of work, attendance regulations, provisions for sick leave
and provisions for vacation leave;
      (4)   a plan of equitable pay scales;
      (5)   policies regarding in-service training programs;
      (6)   grievance procedures; and
      (7)   other conditions of employment.
SEC. 15.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 16.   NO DISCRIMINATION; PROHIBITING CERTAIN POLITICAL ACTIVITY ON THE
PART OF EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   No person shall be appointed, reduced, removed, or in any way favored
or discriminated against because of race, color, age, religion, marital status,
sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, genetic characteristics,
national origin, disability, military or veteran status, sex, political
opinions or affiliations. No officer or employee of the city shall directly or
indirectly, in any way be required to contribute to any political campaign,
political party, organization which supports candidates for public office, or
for any partisan political purpose whatsoever.
   (b)   To avoid undue influence of city employees on the outcome of city
council elections and to avoid undue influence of city council members or
candidates for city council on city employees, the following restrictions are
imposed:
      (1)   No employee of the city or association of such employees may
publicly endorse or actively support candidates for the city council or any
political organization or association organized to support candidates for the
city council.
      (2)   No employee of the city may circulate petitions for city council
candidates, although an employee may sign such a petition.
      (3)   No employee of the city may contribute, directly or indirectly or
through an organization or association to such a campaign nor solicit or
receive contributions for a city council candidate.
      (4)   No employee of the city may wear city council campaign buttons nor
distribute campaign literature at work or in a city uniform or in the offices
or buildings of the City of Dallas.
   (c)   In elections other than for city council of the City of Dallas, an
employee of the city may not:
      (1)   use the prestige of the employee’s position with the city for any
partisan candidate;
      (2)   manage a partisan political campaign;
      (3)   solicit or receive contributions for such a campaign; or
      (4)   actively support a candidate except on the employee’s own time
while not in a city uniform nor in an office or building of the City of Dallas.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any conflict with Subsections (b) and (c) of this
section, a sworn employee of the fire-rescue department or the police
department may engage in political activities to the extent permitted by law.
(Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 32; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 11; Amend. of
11-8-05, Prop. No. 10; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 17.   FALSIFICATION OR PAYMENT FOR OFFICE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark,
rating, or report in regard to any test, certification, or appointment under
the personnel system or civil service provisions of this Charter or the rules
and regulations made under those provisions, or in any manner commit or attempt
to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of such provisions,
rules, and regulations. No person who seeks appointment or promotion with
respect to any city position shall directly or indirectly give, render, or pay
any money, service, or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection
with a test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, or proposed
promotion. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13)
CHAPTER XVII. PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT.
   There is hereby created a park and recreation department of the City of
Dallas which shall be administered by the park and recreation director under
the supervision of the park and recreation board as hereinafter set out.
SEC. 2.   ORGANIZATION OF BOARD AND TERMS OF OFFICE OF MEMBERS.
   (a)   The city council shall appoint a number of residents of the City of
Dallas equal to the number of members on the city council who shall constitute
the park and recreation board of the city. The members shall possess the same
qualifications and be subject to the same disqualifications as provided by the
Charter for members of the city council, or by general laws of the State of
Texas, except that a member is not required to be a qualified voter of the
city, and shall serve without compensation.
   (b)    All members of the board shall be appointed by the city council, in
accordance with Chapter XXIV, Section 13 of this Charter, as are other boards
and shall serve for like terms, as provided by this Charter. The mayor shall
appoint the president of the board from among the members appointed by the city
council, subject to confirmation by a majority of the city council. (Amend. of
8-12-89, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 3.   BOARD VACANCIES; HOW FILLED.
   Any vacancy in the membership of said board shall be filled by the city
council for the unexpired term of the member whose place has by removal or
otherwise become vacant.
SEC. 4.   JURISDICTION OF THE PARK AND RECREATION BOARD; SCOPE OF ACTIVITY.
   (a)   The park and recreation board shall have jurisdiction over the
control, management and maintenance of the public parks of the city, with power
to acquire, in the name of the city, land for park purposes, except as herein
otherwise provided. The city council must approve:
      (1)   any purchase of land;
      (2)   any contract requiring council approval under rules established by
ordinance; and
      (3)   any lease or agreement with a term exceeding one year.
   (b)   Any purchase of supplies or contracts, including emergency purchases,
shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the city
council.
   (c)   The park and recreation board shall have the following general powers,
duties and authority which shall be exercised and performed as herein provided
and in accordance with the Charter and general ordinances of the city, as
follows:
      (1)   to the extent required by rules and regulations adopted by the city
council, to control and manage all property owned, or that may hereafter be
acquired by the city for park purposes; all public properties, on which there
is a joint use agreement with other public or private entities for recreational
purposes; all public properties used jointly with other departments of the city
for recreational purposes; and all other grounds and properties that may be
assigned to them by the city council for control, maintenance or management;
      (2)   to manage, maintain and repair all buildings and equipment in the
park system;
      (3)   to establish all rules and regulations for the protection of rights
and property under the control of the said board for use, care, maintenance and
management of all parks and the activities conducted therein;
      (4)   to conduct playgrounds and recreational facilities on the grounds
and in the buildings in charge of the board; to supervise and equip playgrounds
and play fields and manage and direct the same; and provide such other means
and methods of recreation as it may deem advisable;
      (5)   to have authority to make such charges for such facilities of
amusement, entertainment, refreshment or transportation of the public upon the
park properties, and to grant or lease concession rights within the parks on
such terms and conditions as it shall deem proper;
      (6)   to plant, set out, place, protect and care for flowers, vines,
shrubs and trees to adorn and improve the public squares, grounds, boulevards,
streets, avenues, parkways or other spaces within the city;
      (7)   to provide for an animal zoo and to exercise supervision and
control thereof;
      (8)   to enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations governing parks
and boulevards and such recreation centers, grounds and areas as have been or
may hereafter be established, and to provide for the policing of same;
      (9)   to take and hold by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or otherwise,
such real and personal property as may be useful or needful in connection with
park purposes and to administer the same according to the provisions of the
instrument of conveyance;
      (10)   in acquiring lands for the use of the park system, to exercise the
rights of condemnation available to the city and in the name of the city;
      (11)   with the approval of the city council, when required by law, to
sell and convey or lease lands whenever required in the interest of the city;
      (12)   to make all contracts necessary to carry out the objects and
purposes of the park system as herein provided, the same to be approved by the
city council as herein set out;
      (13)   when deemed advisable, to provide for park and recreation
facilities on all public lands adjacent and recreational activities conducted
on, the municipal water reservoirs of the city, and to provide for the
maintenance, control and policing of same where not otherwise provided for,
whether located within or without the city limits of the city;
      (14)   to enter into agreements with other park and recreation
departments of other municipalities, school districts, the county or other
governmental bodies, for joint administration and control and supervision of
facilities jointly administered;
      (15)   to the extent required by rules and regulations adopted by the
city council, to contract for the use of Fair Park, acquired and now owned by
the city, heretofore known as State Fair Grounds, or any portion of or addition
thereto, for public affairs, public recreation, sports events, or other public
events when conducted thereon, and also to provide for public entertainments of
all kinds that may be lawfully conducted upon the premises, and to charge
admission fees therefor. All contracts and agreements heretofore made with the
city in relation to said grounds shall be binding upon and shall be observed
by, said park and recreation board to provide for the direction and control by
the board of the improvement and maintenance of said grounds and appurtenances
subject to existing and future contract rights;
      (16)   to provide for, or to conduct public affairs, public recreation,
sports events or other public events on any of the lands under the control and
management of the park and recreation board;
      (17)   to maintain and manage any and all abandoned cemeteries as park
properties when requested to do so by resolution of the city council, and after
funds are appropriated by the council; and
      (18)   to contract with civic, historical, educational, improvement or
other nonprofit organizations whose main objective is the aesthetic, cultural,
educational or scenic improvement of the community. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop.
No. 1; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 12)
SEC. 5.   APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES; RULES AND REGULATIONS OF GOVERNMENT OF
SAME.
   The park and recreation department shall be composed of a director and the
positions of assistants and such other employees as the council may provide
upon the recommendation of the park and recreation board. The compensation to
be paid to the employees of this department and the personnel rules and
regulations to be followed shall be those established by the city council in
conformity with standard schedules of compensation and personnel policies for
all city employees.
SEC. 6.   POLICE AUTHORITY.
   The park and recreation board may select such security personnel as it may
deem necessary to protect the parks and property administered by the park and
recreation board, either within or without the city limits. Such security
personnel shall be commissioned as police officers, after clearance as to
qualifications, by proper municipal authorities at the request of the board.
Such persons shall be under the control of the park and recreation board and
their compensation shall be fixed by the board. They shall be subject to
removal or dismissal at the pleasure, and without cause, by the board. None of
these provisions, however, shall be deemed to limit in any manner the authority
of the police department of the city, or other peace officers, but shall be
cumulative thereof. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 7.   CONFLICTS BETWEEN PARK AND RECREATION BOARD AND OTHER BOARDS TO BE
DETERMINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL.
   In the event of any conflict of jurisdiction arising between the park
department and any other department of the city, or in regard to any
administrative detail thereof, the same shall be referred to the city council
and its decision thereon shall be final.
SEC. 8.   REPORTS.
   The park and recreation board shall render to the city council such reports
as may be required by the city council.
SEC. 9.   DISBURSEMENTS OF FUNDS.
   All ad valorem tax funds and other funds appropriated by the city council
for park purposes, and all sums received from other sources for park purposes,
shall be held in the city treasury subject to the order and disbursement of the
park and recreation board, and shall be paid out upon warrants issued by the
park and recreation board signed by either the president of the board or the
individual designated by the board and countersigned by the city controller.
(Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 8)
SEC. 10.   TITLES AND SIGNATURES.
   All property purchased, acquired or given to the city, shall be taken in the
name of the city, and if given, deeded or devised to the park and recreation
department of the city, or to the park and recreation board of the city, shall
be deemed to be the property of the city to be used for park purposes. All
deeds, leases, conveyances and contracts on behalf of the park and recreation
board of the city shall be signed by the president of the park and recreation
board and attested by its secretary, in addition to the signatures necessary on
behalf of the city as herein otherwise provided.
CHAPTER XVIII. ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   COUNCIL ACTION.
   The city council shall evidence its official actions by written ordinances,
resolutions or oral motion. The use of one method or the other shall not affect
the validity of the action, except in those instances where one or the other is
required by state law or this Charter.
SEC. 2.   STYLE OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   The style of all ordinances shall be: “BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF DALLAS”, and the style of all resolutions shall be: “BE IT RESOLVED
BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DALLAS.” In each case words of like import
may be used, but such caption may be omitted when said ordinances are published
in book form, or are revised and digested under the order of the council.
SEC. 3.   PASSAGE.
   All ordinances and resolutions of the city council, unless otherwise
provided by state law, this charter, or the ordinance itself, shall be final on
the passage or adoption by the required majority pursuant to one motion duly
made, seconded and passed. Where the state law or this charter provides for a
different procedure before the action of the council may become final, then in
that event, the council shall follow the procedure required.
SEC. 4.   VOTING.
   The vote upon the passage of any ordinance, resolution or motion shall be
taken by voice vote unless otherwise requested by a member of the city council,
in which case a roll call vote shall be taken. The results of all voting shall
be entered upon the minutes of the proceedings of the council. Every ordinance,
resolution, or motion shall require on final passage the affirmative vote of a
majority of the members present unless more is required by state law, this
Charter, or ordinance. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 33; Amend. of 8-12-89,
Prop. No. 13)
SEC. 5.   EFFECTIVE DATE.
   All ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council shall become
effective immediately from and after final publication, except in the following
instances:
      (1)   where the state law or other provisions of this Charter provide
otherwise, in which case the effective date shall be the earliest time therein
prescribed;
      (2)   where the ordinance or resolution prescribes a different effective
date;
      (3)   where an ordinance or resolution is adopted under the initiative
and referendum provisions of this Charter, in which case the effective date
thereof shall be immediately after the canvass of the election.
SEC. 6.   OFFICIAL RECORDS.
   The city secretary shall keep an accurate record of all actions taken by the
city council and shall preserve each ordinance, resolution, and motion of the
city council as permanent records of the city. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 3)
SEC. 7.   RESERVED.
   (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 11; Repealed by Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 8.   CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The city council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be
printed, in code form, and shall have the same arranged and digested as often
as the council may deem advisable; however, failure to print the ordinances as
herein provided shall not affect the validity of the same.
SEC. 9.   HOW PLEAD.
   In all judicial proceedings, it shall be sufficient to plead any ordinance
by caption, or by the number of sections thereof wanted, and it shall not be
necessary to plead the entire ordinance or section. All ordinances of the city
when printed and published and bearing on the title page thereof “Ordained and
Published by the City Council of the City of Dallas,” or words of like import,
shall be prima facie evidence of their authenticity and shall be admitted and
received in all the courts and places without further proof.
SEC. 10.   APPROVAL OF MAYOR NOT NECESSARY.
   The approval or signature of the mayor shall not be necessary to make an
ordinance or resolution valid.
SEC. 11.   INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM OF ORDINANCES.
   Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the city council in the form in
which the petitioner desires the ordinance to be passed, by a petition filed
with the city secretary in the following manner:
      (1)   A committee of at least five residents of the City of Dallas must
make application to the city secretary and file an intention to circulate a
petition, giving the date and the proposed ordinance to be circulated. Unless
the final petition, with the required number of signatures is returned within
120 days from this date, it will not be received for any purpose.
      (2)   The petition must contain the names of a number of qualified voters
in the city equal to five percent of the qualified voters of the City of Dallas
as appears from the latest available county voter registration list.
      (3)   The petition must comply in form, content, and procedure with the
provisions of Section 12, Chapter IV of this Charter. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop.
No. 2; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 12.   CITY SECRETARY TO EXAMINE PETITION.
   Within 30 days after the date the petition is filed, the city secretary
shall examine and ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the
requisite number of qualified voters and shall attach to the petition a
certificate showing the result of the examination. If the petition is found to
be sufficient, the city secretary shall submit the petition to the city council
without delay. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 6)
SEC. 13.   CITY COUNCIL EITHER TO PASS ORDINANCE OR CALL ELECTION.
   If the petition, properly signed, is presented to the city council, the
council shall either:
      (1)   pass the ordinance without alteration within 20 days after the
attachment of the city secretary’s certificate of sufficiency to the
accompanying petition (subject to referendary vote under provisions of this
Charter); or
      (2)   after the attachment of the city secretary’s certificate of
sufficiency to the petition accompanying the ordinance, promptly call a special
election, at which the ordinance, without alteration, shall be submitted to a
vote of the people. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13)
SEC. 14.   BALLOTS; ONE OR MORE ORDINANCES MAY BE VOTED; PROVISION FOR REPEAL.
   The ballots used when voting upon said ordinance shall be in a manner so as
to apprise the voters of the nature of the proposed ordinance and contain two
propositions so that they may vote either “for” or “against” the propositions
indicating their preference on the ordinance. If a majority of the qualified
electors voting on said proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such
ordinance shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the city, and
any ordinance proposed by petition, or which shall be adopted by a vote of the
people, cannot be repealed or amended except by a vote of the people.
   Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election, in
accordance with the provisions of this section of the Charter, but more than
one special election shall not be held in any period of six months.
   The city council may submit a proposition for the repeal of any such
ordinance or for amendments thereto, to be voted upon at any succeeding general
city election, and should such proposition so submitted receive a majority of
the votes cast thereon at such election, such ordinance shall be repealed or
amended accordingly.
SEC. 15.   RESERVED.
   (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 11; Repealed by Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 16.   ADOPTION OF CODES.
   The city council may adopt technical codes, manuals or other recognized
standards by reference, so long as the same, with any amendments, are on file
with the city secretary. When so adopted they shall be considered the same as
though fully set out in the ordinance adopting the same.
CHAPTER XIX. ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAXES
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   PROPERTY SUBJECT TO TAXATION.
   All property, real, personal or mixed, lying and being within the corporate
limits of the city on the first day of January, shall be subject to taxation,
excepting such property as may be exempt from taxation under the Constitution,
and the laws of the State of Texas. Pursuant to the Texas Tax Code, the chief
appraiser of the appraisal districts of the counties in which the City of
Dallas is located on or before the 25th day of July of each year shall make and
return to the city council a full and complete list and assessment of all
property, both real and personal, held, owned or situated in the city on the
first day of January of each year and not exempt from municipal taxation.
(Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 4)
SEC. 2.   LEVY AND COLLECTION.
   The city council shall have full power to provide by ordinance for the
prompt collection of taxes assessed, levied and imposed under the Charter, and
is hereby authorized to enforce the collection of same against all property
subject to taxation and the owners thereof as provided by law. Unless otherwise
provided by ordinance and the Charter, all property in the city liable to
taxation shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of the general
laws of the state insofar as applicable.
SEC. 3.   SUPPLEMENTAL ASSESSMENT.
   If it is discovered that any real or personal property has been omitted from
the tax appraisal rolls for the City of Dallas, the property will be added to
the rolls and taxes, with any penalties and interest, will be assessed and
collected on the property in accordance with the Texas Property Tax Code, as
amended. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 12)
SEC. 4.   TAXATION OF FRANCHISES.
   All rights, privileges, and franchises heretofore or hereafter granted to
and held by any person, firm, corporation, or other business entity in the
streets, alleys, highways, or public grounds or places in the city shall be
subject to taxation by the city separately from and in addition to the other
assets of such person, firm, corporation, or other business entity, and the
city council may require the rendition and assessment thereof accordingly.
(Renumbered by Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 5.   IRREGULARITY SHALL NOT INVALIDATE.
   No irregularity in the time or manner of making or returning the city
assessment rolls or the approval of such rolls shall invalidate any assessment.
(Renumbered by Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 6.   RENDITION.
   All property, real and personal, shall be rendered for taxation by the owner
of the property or the owner’s agent, as provided by the laws of the state.
(Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13)
SEC. 7.   TAX LIEN; LIABILITY FOR TAXES.
   A lien is hereby created on all property, personal and real, in favor of the
City of Dallas, for all taxes, ad valorem, occupation or otherwise. Said lien
shall exist from the earlier of 30 days after the tax is due or January l of
each year until the taxes are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other
claims, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ
of any kind, can ever defeat such lien, but the tax assessor and collector may
pursue such property, and whenever found may seize and sell enough thereof to
satisfy such taxes.
   In the event that personal property of the taxpayer is delivered into the
actual or constructive possession of a receiver, trustee, or other person
because of insolvency, bankruptcy, receivership or otherwise, before the taxes
are actually levied, then and in that event the amount of the taxes due shall
be the same as was previously levied for the same property and shall be secured
by a lien in that amount.
   All persons or corporations owning or holding personal property or real
estate in the city from the date the lien exists shall be liable for all
municipal taxes levied thereon.
   The personal property of all persons owing any taxes to the city is hereby
made liable for all of said taxes, whether the same be due upon personal or
real property, or upon both. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 8.   SEIZURE TO PREVENT REMOVAL.
   If anyone against whom a personal tax is assessed, which is due and unpaid,
whether the tax is delinquent or not, has moved out of the city or is about to
move out of the city, or has removed or is about to remove his or her personal
property out of the city, it shall be the duty of the tax assessor and
collector to proceed at once and collect such taxes by seizure and sale of any
personal property of such person to be found in the city, or anywhere in the
State of Texas. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No.
13)
SEC. 9.   PLACE OF PAYMENT; DEMAND UNNECESSARY.
   All taxes shall be payable at the office of the tax assessor and collector,
Dallas, Dallas County, Texas. No demand for such taxes shall be necessary but
it is made the duty of the taxpayer to make payment of such taxes in cash
within the time specified. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 10.   TAX TITLE TO PERSONALTY.
   A sale of personal property for delinquent taxes shall convey with it an
absolute title, and the owner shall have no right to redeem the same.
(Renumbered by Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 11.   CITY MAY PURCHASE.
   The city shall have the right to become a purchaser of property at tax
sales, and the city manager or the person designated by the city manager, may
attend such sales and bid on behalf of the city. (Renumbered by Amend. of 4-2-
83, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13)
SEC. 12.   REDEMPTION BY OWNER; VESTING TITLE.
   The owner of real estate sold for the payment of taxes, or the owner’s heirs
or assigns or legal representatives, may redeem the property as provided by
state law. If the real property is not redeemed within the time provided, then
the title shall become absolute in the purchaser. (Renumbered by Amend. of 4-2-
83, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 12)
SEC. 13.   AMENDMENT OF PROPERTY DESCRIPTION.
   In any suit by the city for the collection of any delinquent tax where it
shall appear that the description of any property in the city assessment rolls
shall be insufficient to identify such property, the city shall have the right
to set up in its pleading a good description of the property intended to be
assessed, and to prove the same, and to have its judgment foreclosing its tax
lien upon the same, and personal judgment against the owner, for such taxes,
the same as if the property where fully described upon the assessment rolls.
(Renumbered by Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 14.   PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF TAX LEVY AND ASSESSMENT.
   The provisions herein for the collection of taxes shall not be construed to
prevent the city from filing suit in any court of competent jurisdiction for
the collection of any taxes due on real estate, as well as personal property,
and for the enforcement of levies for such taxes; and the assessment rolls
shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated in said rolls and that all
taxes assessed on such rolls have been regularly levied and assessed in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter and the state law; and no
irregularity in the manner of levying or assessing taxes shall invalidate the
same unless it appears from affirmative proof that such irregularity operated
injuriously to the taxpayer attempting to avoid the payment of such tax.
(Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 15.   CONSTITUTIONAL LIMIT ADOPTED.
   The city council shall have the power to levy, for general purposes, an
annual ad valorem tax on all real, personal and mixed property within the
territorial limits of the city, not exempt from taxation by the Constitution
and laws of the State of Texas, based upon its true full value in money as
provided by law, to the extent of the constitutional limit permitted by the
State of Texas. (Renumbered by Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 16.   STATE LAW ON ASSESSMENT APPLICABLE.
   Unless otherwise provided by this charter amendment and by ordinances passed
thereunder, all property in such city liable to taxation shall be assessed and
collected in accordance with the provisions of general laws of the state,
insofar as applicable. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 17.   ASSESSMENT OF PROPERTY; SEPARATE ASSESSMENT OF JOINT, COMMON, AND
CONFLICTING INTERESTS IN REAL ESTATE.
   The tax assessor and collector shall not be required to make separate
assessments of individual, joint, common, or conflicting interest in any real
estate, but the owner of such interest may furnish to the tax assessor and
collector at any time before May 1 of each year, and not thereafter, a written
description of any parcel of land in which the owner has an interest less than
the whole, showing the amount of interest the owner has in the parcel, and the
tax assessor and collector may assess such interest as a separate parcel and
the remaining interest as a different parcel and proceed to fix the value of
each. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13)
SEC. 18.   COLLECTION OF TAXES ON UNDIVIDED INTEREST.
   The tax assessor and collector may receive the taxes on parts of any lots or
parcels of real property or on an undivided interest therein, but no such taxes
shall be received until the person tendering the same shall have furnished the
tax assessor and collector a particular description of the particular part or
interest on which payment is tendered, and the tax assessor and collector shall
enter such specification in the name of the person paying and at the proper
place in the assessment books, so that the part or interest on which payment
has been made and the part or interest on which taxes remain unpaid may clearly
appear. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 5)
SEC. 19.   GENERAL STATE LAWS ADOPTED.
   In addition to the powers herein conferred with reference to the assessment
and collection of taxes, the City of Dallas shall have and may exercise all
powers and authority now conferred or that may hereinafter be conferred upon
cities by the general laws of the State of Texas. (Renumbered by Amend. of 4-2-
83, Prop. No. 5)
CHAPTER XX. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND ASSESSMENTS
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   All of the powers conferred by the State of Texas authorizing cities to
improve streets and alleys and make assessments for those improvements, as set
forth in Chapters 311 and 313 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, are
hereby adopted as the methods and procedures to be used for street and sidewalk
improvements and assessments in the City of Dallas. In addition to the methods
and procedures set out in those statutes, the city council shall have the
option, as an alternative, to use any of the methods and procedures as set
forth in this chapter. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 2.   IMPROVEMENT ORDERED BY ORDINANCE.
   The city council shall have power by ordinance to order the making of the
public improvements mentioned in this chapter, or any of them, and the passage
of such ordinance shall be conclusive of the public necessity and benefits of
making the improvements. Notice of the ordinance and a public hearing must be
provided as required by state law. The ordinance must, in general terms, set
forth the nature and extent of the improvements to be made, the section or
sections of any highway or highways to be improved, and whether or not
assessments are to be made for such improvements. The city secretary shall,
immediately upon the passage of the ordinance, furnish a copy to the county
clerk, as provided in Chapter 313 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended,
to be filed as therein provided. In addition, the city secretary shall furnish
a copy of the ordinance to the tax assessor and collector, who shall indicate
upon any tax statement thereafter issued covering property abutting upon that
part of the highway or highways to be improved that the proceeding is pending.
Any failure by the city secretary to furnish a copy of the ordinance to the tax
assessor and collector, or any failure by the tax assessor and collector to
indicate the pendency of such a proceeding upon a tax statement, shall not
affect the validity of the proceeding under this chapter, nor of any assessment
thereafter levied pursuant to this chapter. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 9;
Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 3.   PROPERTY MAY BE OMITTED.
   When the city council shall have reason to believe that the owner or owners
of any property may successfully claim the same as exempted from the
enforcement of a lien, said city council may order that the improvement shall
not be made in front of, or abutting on, said property unless the owner or
owners shall first make satisfactory provision for, or satisfactorily secure,
the payment of the amount of the costs which would be assessed against said
property except for such exemption. In any case where the cost, or any part
thereof, is to be paid by such property owners or assessed against their
property and the contractor to whom their work is let is required to look
primarily or wholly to such property or owners thereof for payment of the
proportion of the cost of such improvement assessed against them, and the city
is relieved from the payment of such proportion of the cost, such contractor
shall not be obliged to make such improvement in front of any property which is
exempt from the enforcement of a lien for such improvement, but may omit the
construction thereof.
SEC. 4.   MAY IMPROVE ONE SIDE OF HIGHWAY.
   Subject to the provisions hereof the city council may order improvements to
be made on only one side of a highway or highways, or section or portion
thereof, and may assess the cost or a portion thereof against the property and
owners of property abutting on said side of said highway or highways or section
or portion thereof.
SEC. 5.   ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATES.
   The city council may provide that for that part of the cost which may be
assessed against abutting property and its owners, the contractor to whom the
work may be let shall look only to such property owners and their property, and
that the city shall be relieved of liability for such portion of the cost. The
city council may also authorize assignable certificates payable to the city or
the purchaser thereof, against abutting property or property owners, or against
persons, firms or corporations occupying highways with their tracks, to be
issued to the contractor, and shall prescribe the form and terms of such
certificates. The recital of such certificates that the proceedings with
reference to making such improvements have been regularly had in compliance
with the terms hereof, and that all prerequisites to the fixing of the lien and
the claim of personal liability evidenced by such certificate have been
performed, shall be prima facie evidence of the fact so recited and no other
proof thereof shall be required, but in all courts the said proceedings and
prerequisites shall, without further proof, be presumed to have been made or
performed. Such certificates shall be executed by the mayor and attested by the
city secretary with the corporate seal affixed thereto.
SEC. 6.   CITY EXEMPT FROM LIABILITY.
   The city shall never be liable to any contractor or other person, firm or
corporation doing work in connection with any street paving, or the opening and
widening of streets, or the building of any drains or storm sewers, or the
laying of sanitary sewers or any other character of public improvement, whereby
a part or the whole of the cost thereof is to be paid for by special
assessment, on account of the failure of any officer of the government or the
members of the council to pass suitable ordinances or resolutions to take
necessary steps to fix liens, or to make said assessments, or to issue
certificates therefor, or to provide for reassessment on account of the
invalidity of any lien attempted to be fixed, or any failure or omission with
respect thereto.
SEC. 7.   PAYMENT TO CITY UNDER ASSESSMENT.
   As an alternate method of paving and improving streets, alleys, and
sidewalks, the city shall have the power and authority to adopt plans and
specifications for such improvements in accordance with the procedure
prescribed in Chapter 313 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended. The
city shall also have the power to pay to the contractors, the successful
bidder, that part of the cost that may be assessed against the owners and their
property abutting on such improvements in cash, and the city may reimburse
itself for the amount by levying an assessment against the abutting owners and
their property, after a hearing and notice, as provided in Chapter 313 of the
Texas Transportation Code, as amended, up to the amount of the enhancement in
value represented by the benefits and permitted by that statute, and issue
assignable certificates in favor of the city for the assessment. The
certificates shall be enforceable in the same manner as provided by Chapter 313
of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended. The city shall likewise have the
power to do the improvement by its own forces if, in the opinion of the city
council, the work can be done more expeditiously or economically. (Amend. of 5-
3-97, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 8.   STATE LAW ON ASSESSMENTS FOR CONDEMNATION ADOPTED.
   The provisions of Chapter 314 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended,
relative to condemnation for highways and the levying of special assessments to
defray the cost thereof, are hereby adopted as an alternative method for the
assessment and payment of such costs. (Amend. of 5-3-97, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 9.   CHURCH AND SCHOOL PROPERTY NOT EXEMPT FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   No property of any kind, church, school or others, in the city shall be
exempt from any of the special taxes and assessments authorized by this Charter
for local improvements.
SEC. 10.   ASSESSMENTS FOR STORM SEWERS; ASSIGNABLE CERTIFICATES.
   (a)   Wherever any creek, waterway, bayou, or other public drain or any part
thereof is diverted or changed in its course, in accordance with the drainage
system adopted, and wherever property is reclaimed, improved, or otherwise
specially benefitted by reason of such diversion or alteration, or whenever, by
reason of the laying of any storm sewer or the establishment of any drainage
system, property is specially benefitted, it shall be liable to be assessed
therefor to the extent the property is specially benefitted, and all of the
provisions relative to the opening and widening of streets or other laws and
the assessment of property therefor and the making of a personal charge against
the owners of such property specially benefitted, and the issuance of
assignable certificates therefor, shall govern as far as practicable the
procedure relating to the character of improvements contemplated in this
section, particularly where condemnation of land is necessary to accomplish the
building and construction of the drainage system. Such assignable certificates
may be spread over a period of 15 years, according to such terms as may be
authorized by the city council.
   (b)   The city council, in carrying out this power, may pass all suitable
ordinances or resolutions in order to carry out and effectuate the purposes of
this section and adopt such assessment plans as it may deem advisable, it being
one of the purposes of this section that the city council may create drainage
districts and seek to reclaim property that is now affected by rivers, creeks,
bayous, waterways, and other public drains, or any part thereof, and the
property that may be located in the vicinity of or in the territory that is
specially benefitted by reason of such alteration or change of any such river,
creek, bayou, waterway, or other public drain or any part of any river, creek,
bayou, waterway, or other public drain, may be specially assessed for the
special benefits received by it by reason of the changing, abolition,
modification, or discontinuance of such river, creek, bayou, waterway, or other
public drain or any part thereof.
   (c)   Provision may be made for the regulation and control of private
drains, as well as for the levying of special assessments therefor, as herein
provided for. In addition the city may exercise all of the rights granted by
Chapter 372, Subchapter B of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
(Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13)
SEC. 11.   STATE LAW ADOPTED AS TO WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS.
   All of the powers conferred by applicable state laws, authorizing cities to
improve their waterworks and sanitary sewer systems and to make assessments
therefor, are hereby adopted in all respects insofar as they may apply to the
City of Dallas. Insofar as it is allowable under the state law, the city
council shall have the option as an alternative to use any other methods of
obtaining the same services and improvements as may be provided by state law.
(Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 12.   SUBTERRANEAN IMPROVEMENTS.
   The power is further conferred upon the city to construct underground or
subterranean public improvements, vehicular or pedestrian tubes, tunnels, or
subway streets or other public subsurface facilities, and to provide that the
cost of making any such improvements shall be paid for by the property owners
owning property in the territory specially benefitted in enhanced value by
reason of making such improvements. A personal charge shall be made against
such owners and a lien shall be fixed by special assessment against any such
property. The city may issue assignable or negotiable certificates, as it deems
advisable, covering such cost, and may provide for the payment of such cost in
deferred payments and fix the rate of interest not to exceed eight percent. It
may provide for the appointment of special commissioners for the making or
levying of said special assessments, or may provide that the same may be done
by the city council. The rules and regulations shall be the same as those
applicable in the assessing for the improving of a street, as nearly as
practicable.
CHAPTER XXI. BORROWING MONEY
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   AUTHORITY TO BORROW.
   The city shall have the right and power, except as prohibited by law, to
borrow money by whatever method the city council may deem to be in the public
interest.
SEC. 2.   GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS (TAX SUPPORTED BONDS).
   The city shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the city and
to issue general obligation bonds for making public improvements or for other
public purposes not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of
Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the city
previously issued. All such bonds shall be issued in accordance with state law.
For bonds requiring voter approval, the city shall indicate on the ballot
proposition the amount of bond issuance authorization, estimated amount of
repayment including principal and interest based on current market conditions,
and the purpose of the bonds. (Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 1)
SEC. 3.   LIMITATIONS ON BONDED INDEBTEDNESS PAYABLE FROM TAXES.
   (a)   The maximum bonded indebtedness of the city outstanding at any one
time, and payable from taxation, shall not exceed 10 percent of the total
assessed valuation of property shown by the last assessment roll of the city.
   (b)   The city may not issue general obligation bonds or property-tax-
supported certificates of obligation, other than refunding bonds, with a
maturity in excess of 10 years unless the bonds have first been authorized by a
majority vote of the participating voters at an election held for that purpose.
(Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 7)
SEC. 4.   REVENUE BONDS.
   The city shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of
constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public
utilities, recreational facilities, off-street parking facilities or any other
self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the Constitution and laws
of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation
created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable solely from the
properties, or interest therein, pledged, or the income therefrom, or both, and
shall never be a debt of the city. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity
with the laws of the State of Texas.
SEC. 5.   REFUNDING OUTSTANDING BONDS.
   The city shall have the right to refund any outstanding bonds by the
issuance of new bonds in lieu thereof, at the same, higher or a lower rate of
interest, and may apply thereto the sinking fund belonging to any series of
bonds so refunded, and may pay and retire any bond by using the sinking fund
thereof. The city shall have the same right to refund any bonds assumed as a
result of annexations.
SEC. 6.   BONDS PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED.
   All unissued bonds previously authorized by any election or by any
provisions in a former city charter may be issued and are hereby validated.
SEC. 7.   BONDS INCONTESTABLE.
   All bonds of the city having been approved by the attorney general and
registered by the comptroller of the public accounts shall be incontestable,
except for forgery, fraud or exceeding the limit fixed by the Charter.
SEC. 8.   EXECUTION OF BONDS.
   All bonds must be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city manager
or the city manager’s designee and must have the seal of the city impressed on
each bond; provided, that the bond ordinance or ordinances may provide for the
bonds and any attached interest coupon to be signed by facsimile signatures and
for the seal of the city on the bonds to be a facsimile as provided by the laws
of the State of Texas. Such bonds shall mature serially or otherwise not to
exceed 40 years from their date. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 5-1-
93, Prop. No. 7)
SEC. 9.   SINKING FUND FOR GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS.
   It shall be the duty of the city council each year to levy a tax sufficient
to pay the interest and provide the necessary sinking fund required by law on
all general obligation bonds outstanding, and if a deficiency appears at any
time in such fund the council shall, for the next succeeding year, levy an
additional tax sufficient to discharge such deficiency.
SEC. 10.   BOND REGISTER.
   The city council shall keep or cause to be kept for and on behalf of the
city a complete bond registry and set of books, showing all bonds issued, the
date and amount thereof, the rate of interest, maturity, type, etc., of all
bonds or other indebtedness incurred under the provisions of the Charter, and
all other transactions of the city council having reference to the refunding of
the indebtedness of the city. When bonds or their coupons are paid, their
payment or cancellation shall be noted in said registry, and the books so
required shall be safely kept among the records of the city manager. (Amend. of
6-12-73, Prop. No. 35)
SEC. 11.   MISAPPLICATION OF BOND FUNDS.
   Any officer of the city who shall willfully or knowingly divert or use any
funds arising from the issuance of any bonds or any sinking fund for any other
purpose except that for which the fund is created or are herein otherwise
authorized, shall be deemed guilty of a misapplication of public funds and
subject to prosecution as provided under the laws of the State of Texas for the
diversion and conversion of funds belonging to any of the municipalities of the
state.
SEC. 12. BIDDING; SALE.
   When the sale of bonds is in response to a request for bids, the bids may be
opened and the bonds sold on the same day, whether at a regular or special
meeting of the city council.
CHAPTER XXII. PUBLIC CONTRACTS
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   SIGNATURES AND APPROPRIATIONS.
   No contract, other than purchase orders for supplies and equipment and
change orders authorized in accordance with Section 6, Chapter XXII of this
Charter, shall be deemed executed on behalf of the city nor shall it be binding
upon the city unless it has first been signed by the city manager and approved
as to form by the city attorney. The expense thereof shall be charged to the
proper appropriation. Whenever the contract charged to any appropriation equals
the amount of said appropriation, no further contracts shall be signed. The
publication of an ordinance or resolution to make it effective as an ordinance
or resolution in accordance with Section 7 of Chapter XVIII of this Charter
does not execute the ordinance or resolution as a contract unless the ordinance
or resolution expressly so provides. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 36; Amend.
of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop.
No. 14; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 2.   CONTRACT LETTING.
   (a)   All city contracts calling for or requiring the expenditure or payment
of an amount required by state law to be competitively bid creating or imposing
an obligation or liability of any nature or character upon the city, must first
be submitted for competitive bids in accordance with this chapter. Such bids
shall be based upon plans and specifications prepared for that purpose. Such
contract shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder.
   (b)   The city council shall by ordinance establish rules by which a
contract may be let without city council approval; however, a contract that is
required to be bid and which is let to other than the lowest bidder shall be
first approved by the city council. The amount below which city council
approval is not required for a contract may not be changed more often than once
every 24 months.
   (c)   The city shall have the right to reject any and all bids. The city in
the first instance may elect to perform the work involved by its own forces or
by day labor, or if such contract is let for bids and all are rejected, the
city may either readvertise for competitive bidding or may thereafter perform
such work with its own forces or by day labor. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 1;
Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 3.   RESERVED.
   (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 1; Repealed by Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 4.   EMERGENCY SPENDING, ETC.
   The provisions regarding competitive bidding shall not apply in the
following instances:
      (1)   In case of a public calamity where it becomes necessary to act at
once to relieve the necessity of the residents or to preserve the property of
the city.
      (2)   Where it is necessary to preserve or protect the public health of
the residents of the city.
      (3)   In the case of unforeseen damage to public property, machinery, or
equipment.
      (4)   Work done by employees of the city and paid for as such work
progresses.
      (5)   The purchase of land, buildings, existing utility systems, or
rights-of-way for authorized needs and purposes.
      (6)   Expenditures for or relating to improvements to the city’s water
system, sewer system, streets or drainage (any one or all) where the cost of at
least one-third of which is to be paid by special assessments levied against
the properties to be benefitted thereby.
      (7)   Where the entire contractual obligation is to be paid from bond
funds or current funds, or where an advertisement for bids has previously been
published (in the manner authorized by law) but the current funds or bond funds
are not adequate to permit the awarding of a contract, and the city council
authorizes the issuance of certificates of obligation to provide the
deficiency.
      (8)   The sale of any public security as such term is defined in Chapter
1204 of the Texas Government Code, as amended. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No.
38; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 5.   PERSONAL SERVICES.
   Competitive bidding need not be applied to contracts for personal or
professional services.
SEC. 6.   CHANGE ORDERS.
   In the event that it becomes necessary to make changes in the plans or
specifications after performance of the contract has been commenced, or it
becomes necessary to decrease or increase the quantity of work to be performed,
or materials, equipment or supplies to be furnished, the city council is
authorized to approve change orders effecting such changes, but the total
contract price shall not be increased thereby unless due provision has been
made to provide for the payment of such added cost by appropriating available
funds for that purpose. This authority may be delegated to the city manager or
the city manager’s designee when authorized by state law. (Amend. of 6-12-73,
Prop. No. 39; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 14)
SEC. 7.   PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS.
   Any prime contractor entering into a public contract with the city for the
construction, alteration, or repair of any public building or structure, or for
the prosecution or completion of any public work, shall be required, before
commencing such work, to execute a performance bond in a good and sufficient
amount, as required by law, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
work in accordance with the plans, specifications, and contract documents. The
bond must be solely for the protection of the city. The contractor shall also
be required, before commencing such work, to execute a payment bond in a good
and sufficient amount, as required by law, solely for the protection of all
claimants supplying labor and material in the prosecution of the work provided
for in the contract, for the use of each claimant. The bonds must be made by a
bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Texas, and legal
venue for enforcement of the bonds lies exclusively in Dallas County, Texas. A
resident of Dallas County must be appointed as agent for delivery of notice and
service of process by the surety. (Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 40; Amend. of
5-1-93, Prop. No. 4)
SEC. 8.   OTHER BONDS AND SECURITY.
   (a)   In addition to the two bonds mentioned in Section 7 of this chapter,
the city may require that the contractor show proof of coverage by public
liability and property damage insurance in an amount to be set by the city and
by the applicable workmen’s compensation insurance as set forth in the
Workmen’s Compensation Law of the State of Texas. The contractor may be
required to post any other bond or proof of insurance that the plans and
specifications may require.
   (b)   Where the contract by the city is for the purchase of materials,
supplies, machinery, equipment, or other paraphernalia not involved in the
construction of public works, or the contract is for the lease, rental,
franchise, or other use of personal or real property of the city, the city may
require such bonds and other forms of security as it deems advisable. (Amend.
of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 4)
SEC. 9.   BID BOND.
   Each bid submitted pursuant to a request for bids must be accompanied by a
cashier’s check, certified check, or unconditional letter of credit or a bid
bond in the amount set by the city in the request for bids. The bid bond, if
required, must be made by a bonding company authorized to do business in the
State of Texas and must designate a resident agent in Dallas County. If the
successful bidder fails or refuses to sign the contract for the performance of
the work upon which the bid was made, the city council may require the
forfeiture of the total amount of the bid bond as liquidated damages. (Amend.
of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 4)
SEC. 10.   RESIDENTS GIVEN PREFERENCE IN LETTING OF CONTRACTS.
   Qualifications, prices and quality of material being equal, residents and
business firms of Dallas shall be given preference in the awarding of all
contracts over which the city has jurisdiction, direct or indirect. This
section shall not be construed so as to conflict with any provision of the
Charter requiring competitive bidding. (Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 11.   FINANCIAL INTEREST OF EMPLOYEE OR OFFICER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No city official or employee shall have any financial interest, direct
or indirect, in any contract with the city, or be financially interested,
directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, materials,
supplies or services, except on behalf of the city as a city official or
employee. Any violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office,
and any city official or employee guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit the city
official’s or employee’s office or position with the city. Any violation of
this section, with knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation
contracting with the city shall render the contract involved voidable by the
city manager or the city council.
   (b)   The alleged violations of this section shall be matters to be
determined either by the trial board in the case of employees who have the
right to appeal to the trial board, and by the city council in the case of
other employees.
   (c)   The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the participation
by city employees in federally-funded housing programs, to the extent permitted
by applicable federal or state law.
   (d)   This section does not apply to an ownership interest in a mutual or
common investment fund that holds securities or other assets unless the person
owns more than 10 percent of the value of the fund.
   (e)   This section does not apply to non-negotiated, form contracts for
general city services or benefits if the city services or benefits are made
available to the city official or employee on the same terms that they are made
available to the general public.
   (f)   This section does not apply to a nominee or member of a city board or
commission, including a city appointee to the Dallas Area Rapid Transit Board.
A nominee or member of a city board or commission, including a city appointee
to the Dallas Area Rapid Transit Board, must comply with any applicable
conflict of interest or ethics provisions in the state law and the Dallas City
Code. (Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 15; Amend.
of 11-4-14, Prop. Nos. 2 and 9)
SEC. 12.   LIENS AND RETAINAGES.
   No lien of any kind can ever exist against the public buildings, public
halls, public works, or any public property of the city except as herein
otherwise provided. All subcontractors, materialmen, mechanics, and laborers on
any public works or contracts of the city on which no payment bond is required
or made, are required to notify the chief financial officer of all claims that
they may have on account of such work against the city. When such notice has
been given, the city may retain an amount from any funds due the contractor or
contractors, sufficient to satisfy all such claims. Such notice may be given at
any time after such indebtedness becomes due and before final settlement with
the contractor or contractors, and no contractor or subcontractor shall issue
any time checks on account of any contract with the city. No claims against the
city shall constitute a valid claim over and above the amount of the retainage
made by the city. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No.
8)
CHAPTER XXIII. CLAIMS FOR DAMAGE OR INJURY
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   NOTICE REQUIRED -- PERSONAL INJURY.
   The City of Dallas may never be liable for any personal injury, whether
resulting in death or not, unless the person injured, or someone on the
person’s behalf, or if the injury results in death, the person or persons who
may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death injury, files
a notice in writing with the city, at a location to be designated by ordinance,
within six months after the injury was received. The notice must specifically
state:
      (1)   when, where, and how the exact injury occurred;
      (2)   the full extent of the injury; and
      (3)   the amount of damages claimed or asserted.
(Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 41; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 2.   NOTICE REQUIRED -- INJURY TO PERSONAL OR REAL PROPERTY.
   The City of Dallas may never be liable for any claims for damages or injury
to real or personal property caused by the negligent act or omission of its
officers, servants, or employees, unless the person whose property has been
injured or damaged, or someone on that person’s behalf, files a claim in
writing with the city, at a location to be designated by ordinance, within six
months after the damage or injury occurred. The notice must specifically state:
      (1)   when, where, and how the exact injury or damage occurred;
      (2)   the full extent of the injury or damage; and
      (3)   the amount of damages claimed or asserted.
(Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 41; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 3.   CLAIMS FOR INDEMNITY OR CONTRIBUTION.
   The city may not be liable for claims for contribution or indemnity, unless
the person asserting the claim gives notice, in writing, to the city, at a
location to be designated by ordinance, within six months after the occurrence
that is the basis for the claim. The notice must specifically state:
      (1)   that the claim is for contribution or indemnity;
      (2)   a description of the parties involved;
      (3)   when, where, and how the exact injury, death, or property damage
occurred;
      (4)   the full extent of the injury, death, or property damage; and
      (5)   the amount of contribution or indemnity claimed or asserted.
(Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 11; Amend. of 5-1-93, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 4.   PAYMENT OF MERITORIOUS CLAIMS.
   (a)    Subject to Sections 1, 2, and 3 of this chapter, in order to
accomplish justice and fairness, the city council shall have the power and
authority to pay claims that it deems to be meritorious for damages to real or
personal property and for personal injury whether resulting in death or not,
suffered by any member of the public through no fault of his or her own, but
that results from direct, positive, affirmative action or physically doing of
something that should not have been done by officers, agents, or employees of
the city while engaged in the performance of a governmental function; provided,
however, that no claim may be settled, compromised, and paid if such claim
would be barred by applicable statutes of limitations.
   (b)   No payment shall be made unless the claimant accepts the amount
allowed as in full compromise and settlement of all amounts claimed or to be
claimed against the city, its officers or employees, arising from the same
facts. In the event that no settlement is made, nothing herein contained or
done hereunder shall prejudice the city in any defense that it may have in any
suit or action. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as creating a cause
of action or the giving of any right to institute or maintain any suit or
action that would not otherwise exist or be cognizable under the law as a legal
claim; provided, however, this section may never be used to pay any claim
arising under Section 5 of this chapter concerning claims arising out of
floods, war, insurrection, riot, civil disorder, or commotion. (Amend. of 11-8-
05, Prop. No. 13)
SEC. 5.   INJURY OR DAMAGE DUE TO WAR, RIOT, ETC.
   The City of Dallas shall never be liable to any person or persons for any
personal injury or property damage of any nature resulting from or occasioned
or arising out of floods, war, insurrection, riot, civil disorder or commotion.
The provisions of this section shall never be waived and any attempt at payment
shall be void and subject to injunction by any court of proper jurisdiction.
SEC. 6.   WAIVER OF NOTICE.
   Neither the mayor, any city council member, the city manager, the city
secretary, the city attorney, nor any other officer or employee of the city,
shall have authority to waive any of the provisions of this chapter, but the
same may be waived only by resolution of the city council made and passed
before the expiration of the six month period provided for in this chapter,
which resolution shall be evidenced by the minutes of the city council. Such
waiver shall never be made in regard to claims arising out of Section 5 of this
chapter. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13)
CHAPTER XXIV. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
(Renumbered by Amend. of 6-12-73, Prop. No. 43)
SEC. 1.   NO OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE TO ACCEPT GIFT, ETC., FROM PUBLIC UTILITY.
   No officer or employee of the city shall ever accept, directly or
indirectly, any gift, favor, privilege or employment from any public utility
corporation enjoying a grant of any franchise, privilege or easement from the
city during the term of office of such officer, or during such employment of
such employee, except as may be authorized by law or ordinance. Any officer or
employee of the city who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by any fine that may be prescribed
by ordinance for this offense, and shall forthwith be removed from office.
SEC. 2.   CITY EXEMPT FROM BONDS.
   It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the
city or any of its appointive boards or commissions is a party, for any bond,
undertaking or security to be executed in behalf of the city, but all such
actions, suits, appeals or proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as
if such bond, undertaking or security had been given, and the city shall be
liable as if such obligation had been duly given and executed.
SEC. 3.   EXECUTION, GARNISHMENT, ASSIGNMENT, ETC.
   The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable
to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill, nor shall
the funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, be liable to
garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds it may have on hand due
any person, nor shall the city or any of its officers or agents be required to
answer any writ of garnishment on any account whatsoever. Any attempted
assignment of wages shall be absolutely void so far as the city is concerned
unless authorized by state law and approved by resolution of the city council.
This section shall also apply to the property, funds and personnel of
appointive boards and commissions of the city council.
SEC. 4.   CONDEMNATION OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.
   Whenever in the opinion of the city council, any building, fence, shed,
awning or structure of any kind or part thereof is liable to fall down and
injure persons or property, the city council may order the owner or agent of
the same or occupant of the premises, to take down and remove the same within
such time as it may direct and may punish by fine all persons failing so to do.
The city council shall have the additional power to remove the same at the
expense of the city on account of the owner of the property and assess the
expenses thereof, including condemnation proceedings, as a special tax against
the land, and the same may be collected as other special taxes provided for in
this Charter, or by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   The city council shall have full power to condemn all dangerous buildings or
obstructions of any kind and may provide regulations therefor by ordinance. All
of the provisions of this section may be carried out in such manner as the city
council by ordinance may provide.
SEC. 5.   POWER TO REMIT PENALTIES.
   The city council shall have the right to remit, in whole or in part, any
fine or penalty belonging to the city, which may be imposed under any ordinance
or resolution passed pursuant to this Charter.
SEC. 6.   FIRE LIMITS.
   The city council may establish fire limits and prescribe the kind and
character of materials to be used in buildings constructed within such limits.
SEC. 7.   BUILDING PERMITS.
   The city shall have power to prohibit the erection, construction or repair
of any building or structure of any kind within the city without a permit first
having been issued by the city for the construction, erection or repair of such
building or structure, and may authorize a fee to be charged for such permit,
and in pursuance of said authority, may authorize the inspection by the city of
all buildings or structures during the progress of their construction and may
require that all buildings shall be constructed or repaired in conformity with
the building regulations which exist in the city or which shall hereafter be
passed.
SEC. 8.   ACQUISITION OF LAND FOR PARK PURPOSES.
   The city may acquire and appropriate land inside or outside of the city for
the purpose of establishing, laying out or enlarging any parks, parkways or
pleasure grounds, and to provide that the cost of such land and improvements
shall be paid for wholly or in part, to the extent not exceeding the special
benefits received by the property owners owning property in the vicinity
thereof and benefitted thereby, and for such purpose all of the powers
conferred by the Act of the Fortieth Legislature, known as House Bill No. 401,
Chapter 283, page 433, of the General Laws, passed by the Fortieth Legislature
of the State of Texas, as amended or as may hereafter be amended, are hereby
adopted and made a part of this charter, and the same may be used by the city
council in the manner and for the purposes of the condemnation of said land and
the appointment of commissioners therefor and the assessing of the cost. In
making the assessments against property owners specifically benefitted, as well
as in condemnation proceedings, the same shall be governed as far as
practicable by laws relating to the opening and widening of streets.
SEC. 9.   PUBLIC LIBRARY AND TAX THEREFOR.
   The city shall have authority to establish and maintain a public library or
libraries within the city and to cooperate with any person, firm or corporation
upon such terms as the city council may prescribe, for the establishment of
such public library or libraries. To that end the council shall annually
appropriate out of the general revenue of the city, a fund for the support and
maintenance of the public library.
SEC. 10.   MUNICIPAL RADIO AND TELEVISION STATIONS.
   The city shall have full power or authority to acquire or own, within or
without the City of Dallas, either by purchase, donation, bequest, or
otherwise, all property that may be necessary for the purpose of establishing a
radio and television broadcasting station. The radio and television
broadcasting station may be used for the police and fire-rescue communications
system and such other communicating systems as the council may deem
appropriate. It shall be used for the convenience and edification of the people
of Dallas, and for such purpose the city council may appoint a suitable
commission to operate and conduct the same, and to exercise all powers in
connection therewith. The exercise of the power to operate the radio and
television broadcasting station shall be deemed governmental in character and
for municipal purposes. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 10)
SEC. 11.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 11)
SEC. 12.   OWNERSHIP OF MAPS, PLANS, WORK PRODUCT, ETC.
   All maps, plats, plans, profiles, reports, field notes, estimates, and other
memoranda of professional work done by the head of any department of the city
or under the department head’s direction and control during his or her tenure
or term of office, shall be the property of the city. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop.
No. 13)
SEC. 13.   APPOINTMENT AND TENURE OF COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS.
   (a)   During August of each odd-numbered year, the city council shall begin
the nomination process for all members of the commissions and boards provided
for in this Charter or which the city council may provide for by ordinance.
Such members shall serve for a term as provided by ordinance by the city
council not to exceed two years from October 1 or until their successors are
appointed and qualified, except that a member of a board or commission that is
only advisory in nature may not hold over in his or her position longer than
nine months after the expiration of his or her term or after the creation of a
vacancy in his or her position.
   (b)   The city council shall provide by ordinance for each commission and
board to have a number of members equalling or exceeding the number of members
of the city council, unless otherwise required by law. The appointments to
commissions and boards having a number of members equalling or exceeding the
number of members of the city council shall be made with each member of the
city council having at least one appointment. This subsection does not apply to
boards of employee retirement funds or boards to which the city manager is
required by ordinance to make nominations. The city council may waive the
application of this subsection to a particular board by a vote of three-fourths
of the members of the city council.
   (c)   The mayor shall appoint the chair of each commission and board from
among the members appointed in accordance with Subsection (b), subject to
confirmation by a majority of the city council.
   (d)   It is the policy of the city to include persons of all races and
ethnicity in the affairs of city government. Accordingly, the city council
shall, as nearly as may be practicable, cause the membership of commissions and
boards to reflect the racial and ethnic makeup of the city’s population.
(Amend. of 4-3-76, Prop. No. 2; Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1; Amend. of 11-8-
05, Prop. No. 7; Amend. of 11-4-14, Prop. No. 9)
SEC. 14.   BONDS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The city council may require any of the officers and employees of the city,
before entering upon the duties of their office, to execute a good and
sufficient bond with a surety company doing business in the State of Texas, as
approved by the city council. The bonds shall be in such amount as the council
may demand, payable to the City of Dallas, and conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties of the office. The premium on such bonds shall be
paid by the city. Bonds shall be required of the city manager, the chief
financial officer, the city controller, the purchasing agent, and the municipal
court clerk. (Amend. of 4-2-83, Prop. No. 6; Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 8)
SEC. 15.   TERMINATION NOTICE OF COUNCIL APPOINTEES.
   All employees appointed directly by the city council shall be given 30 days
notice prior to termination of employment, except when dismissed for misconduct
in office.
SEC. 16.   LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT.
   The enumeration of powers made in this Charter shall never be construed to
preclude, by implication or otherwise, the city from exercising the powers
incident to the judgment of local self-government, nor to do any and all things
not inhibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
SEC. 17.   BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   (a)   Other than members of the city council, no person shall be appointed
to more than two permanent boards or commissions of the City of Dallas at any
one time. Any member of any commission or board appointed by the city council
shall forfeit that office if the member misses more than three regular meetings
in succession, unless for medical reasons certified to by a physician or unless
excused by the board or commission of which he or she is a member and the city
council. In such case, the city council shall declare the position vacant and
appoint a new member to fill the vacancy.
   (b)   Upon initiation of the councilmember who occupies the city council
place of the nominating councilmember, the city council may, by a majority
vote, replace a board or commission member prior to completion of the member’s
two-year term. (Amend. of 11-8-05, Prop. No. 13; Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 18.   EMPLOYEES’ WAGES.
   The wages, hours and conditions of employment of any and all of the city
employees shall be fixed and approved by the city council.
SEC. 19.   REPORTS.
   All departments and boards of the city shall furnish such reports in the
form prescribed as may be requested by the city manager or the city council
concerning the activities of that department or board.
SEC. 20.   SEVERABILITY PROVISION.
   Should any word, clause, phrase, sentence, paragraph, section or chapter of
this Charter or amendment thereto, be held invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such ruling or judgment shall not affect the validity of any
other portion of this Charter or any amendment thereto, but same shall remain
in full force and effect, the provisions hereof being severable.
SEC. 21.   TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS TO THE 1989 AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this Charter that are approved at an election on August 12,
1989 create a new system of government that requires an orderly transition.
Accordingly, the following transitional provisions shall apply:
      (1)   The next regular general election for members of the city council
scheduled under the present Charter for May, 1991 is deferred to and shall be
held on the official election date in November, 1991. Any runoff elections
shall be held two weeks after the general election. All general elections
thereafter shall be held on the first Saturday in May of odd-numbered years or
on such other date as shall be fixed by law.
      (2)   The candidate filing dates that are prescribed in the present
Charter are, for the year 1991 only, reestablished at later dates in 1991 that
contain the same number of elapsed days prior to the general election date as
are provided in the Charter for the May, 1991 election.
      (3)   The terms of office of the persons holding office as members of the
city council on the first Saturday in May, 1991 are extended to the date that
their successors are elected and qualified after the general election in
November, 1991. Persons elected to the city council at the November, 1991
general election shall serve until their successors take office after the May,
1993 general election (except for the holder of the office of mayor who shall
serve until the May, 1995 general election). Thereafter, the terms of office
shall be as prescribed in this Charter, as amended.
      (4)   In applying the limitations on the terms of office of members of
the city council who first took office prior to November, 1991, the limitations
shall be measured from the date the member first took office on the city
council, and the period from November, 1991 to May, 1993 shall be counted as
one term. If, upon adoption and implementation of these amendments, a person
will have served as mayor for two consecutive terms, those two terms shall be
considered as equivalent to one four-year term in calculating eligibility for
an additional term in the general election held in November, 1991.
      (5)   Sections 1, 2, 3A, 4, 5, 9, and 14 of Chapter III; Sections 3, 4, 5
(a), 6, 7, and 8 of Chapter IV; Section 1 of Chapter XVI; Section 2 of Chapter
XVII; and Section 13 of Chapter XXIV shall take effect on the date council
members take office after the general election in November, 1991, except that
for the purposes of preparing city council district lines and for filing for
candidacy in that election, they shall take effect immediately.
      (6)   Section 13 of Chapter III, Policy-making Procedures and Oversight
Responsibilities, shall take effect January 1, 1990.
      (7)   Section 5(b) of Chapter IV, Redistricting Commission, shall take
effect January 1, 1991.
      (8)   All city charter amendments not referred to in Subsections (5),
(6), and (7), adopted at the August 12, 1989 election, shall take effect
immediately.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no amendment
that is approved at the election on August 12, 1989 shall be effective unless
and until the Voting Rights Section of the Civil Rights Division of the United
States Department of Justice issues a letter interposing no objection to the
implementation of the amendment, if voting rights review is required for the
amendment. (Amend. of 8-12-89, Prop. No. 1) [NOTE: The wording and structure of
this section may appear unusual or incomplete because of selective preclearance
by the United States Justice Department of the August 12, 1989 charter
amendments to this section].
SEC. 21[A].   SAVINGS PROVISION.
   The repeal of any provision, section or chapter of any charter by the
amendments to this Charter shall not affect or impair any act done or
obligation, right, license, permit or penalty accrued or existing under the
authority of the provision, section or chapter repealed. Such provision,
section or chapter shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purpose
of sustaining any proper action concerning any such obligation, right, license,
permit or penalty. In addition, any franchise, contract, permit or license
obtained under any provision, section or chapter repealed by any amendments to
this Charter shall remain effective for the term and under the conditions
prescribed by the repealed portion under which the franchise, contract, permit
or license was granted or issued; provided that if the franchise, contract,
permit or license provides that the same shall be governed by the Charter of
the City of Dallas, as amended, then the amended section shall control.
   All civil and criminal ordinances and all resolutions of a general and
permanent nature in force and effect when this Charter or any amendment thereto
shall become effective, which are inconsistent or in conflict with this Charter
or any amendment thereto, are hereby repealed except as herein provided. Where
any such civil or criminal ordinance or resolution of a general and permanent
nature in force and effect when this Charter or any amendment thereto, shall
become effective is consistent with and not in conflict with the provisions
hereto, same shall continue in full force and effect unimpaired by the
provisions hereof.
SEC. 22.   DALLAS FREEDOM ACT.
   (a)   This policy in this section shall be known as the Dallas Freedom Act.
   (b)   Pursuant to the home rule authority of the Texas Constitution, to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of Dallas, Texas,
the voters of Dallas hereby enact the Dallas Freedom Act, a policy to reform
marijuana enforcement by city personnel, with the specific goals of carefully
allocating scarce city resources, reducing the risk of discriminatory
enforcement practices, and focusing city resources on the highest priority
public safety concerns.
   (c)   Unless and until a binding act of a state or federal court requires
otherwise, the Dallas Police Department shall not make any arrest or issue any
citation for Class A or Class B misdemeanor marijuana possession, except in the
limited cases described by this policy.
   (d)   In the event of a binding act of a state or federal court which would
prevent the City of Dallas’s fulfillment of Subsection (c), the city’s policy
shall be to make enforcement of Class A and Class B misdemeanor marijuana
possession its lowest enforcement priority. In particular, the city shall
update its annual budget, police department manual, and relevant policies and
procedures to ensure that public safety resources are not wasted on misdemeanor
marijuana enforcement, and are instead targeted at other programs that best
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of Dallas.
   (e)   This policy shall not limit enforcement of misdemeanor marijuana
possession offenses if an offense is: (1) revealed as part of a felony
narcotics investigation that has been designated as “high priority” by a
commander, assistant chief of police, or chief of police; and/or (2) revealed
as part of the investigation of a violent felony. Dallas police officers shall
not issue any charge for misdemeanor possession of marijuana unless it meets
one or more of these exceptions.
   (f)   In any instance governed by this policy, if a Dallas police officer
has probable cause to believe that a substance is illegal marijuana, the
officer may seize the substance. If the officer seizes the substance, they must
write a report explaining the grounds for seizure and release any detained
person if possession of marijuana is the sole charge.
   (g)   A Class C misdemeanor citation for possession of drug residue or drug
paraphernalia shall not be issued in lieu of a possession of marijuana charge.
   (h)   No city funds or personnel shall be used to request, conduct, or
obtain tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) testing of any cannabis- related substance to
determine whether the substance meets the legal definition of marijuana under
state or federal law, except: (1) for purposes of toxicology testing to ensure
public safety; or (2) the investigation of a violent felony offense.
   (i)   Dallas police shall not consider the odor of marijuana or hemp to
constitute probable cause for any search or seizure, except in the limited
circumstances of a police investigation pursuant to Subsection (e).
   (j)   The city manager and chief of police shall ensure that: (1) city
policies and internal operating procedures are updated in accord with this
policy; and (2) Dallas police officers receive adequate training concerning
each of the provisions of this policy.
   (k)   Any violation of this policy may subject a Dallas police officer to
discipline as provided by the Texas Local Government Code or as provided by
city policy.
   (l)   The city manager, in consultation with the chief of police and other
relevant city personnel, shall prepare quarterly reports concerning the
implementation of this policy, to be presented to city council at a public
meeting subject to the Texas Open Meetings Act, and with the first report due
no later than 120 days following the effective date of this policy. Each report
shall include a summary of the city’s implementation of this policy and shall
include specific information concerning enforcement of misdemeanor marijuana
possession offenses, including total arrests made, total citations issued,
estimated personnel hours used in conducting enforcement activities, and
demographic information for each person charged with an offense, including age,
gender, race, and ethnicity. Each quarterly report shall also be submitted to
the Chair of the Community Police Oversight Board at the same time it is made
available to city council.
   (m)   In the event that any court finds any subsection of the Dallas Freedom
Act to be unlawful or unenforceable, that subsection shall be severed from this
policy and the rest shall continue in force. (Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 23.   PERFORMANCE DEADLINES.
   If the last day for performance of an act is a Saturday, Sunday, or
national, state, or local holiday, the act is timely if performed on the next
regular business day. (Amend. of 11-5-24)
CHAPTER XXV. CITIZEN ENFORCEMENT
   (Added by Amend. of 11-5-24)
SEC. 1.   RESIDENT ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Any resident of Dallas has standing and may bring an action against
the City of Dallas to require the city to comply with any of the provisions of
the charter, any city ordinance or any law of the State of Texas.
   (b)   A claimant is entitled to recover in an action brought under this
chapter:
      (1)   declaratory and injunctive relief against the city; and
      (2)   costs and reasonable attorney’s fees, if the court orders
injunctive or declaratory relief.
   (c)   The city’s governmental immunity to suit and from liability is waived
to the extent of liability created by the charter, city ordinance and/or Texas
state law.
   (d)   Claimants shall notify the city of their claim not later than sixty
days before the date such claimant files an action under this chapter. The
notice must reasonably describe the charter provision, ordinance, or state law
that the claimant believes has been or may be violated.
   (e)   “Resident” shall mean any person who resides in the City of Dallas,
and any firm, corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, trust,
estate, nonprofit, or association which is physically located in or otherwise
conducts business in the City of Dallas.
   (f)   If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this section is for
any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or
unenforceability of that section, paragraph, clause, or provision shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this section, and to this end, the
provisions of this section are declared to be severable. This section shall
supersede the Dallas City Code to the extent there are any conflicts. (Amend.
of 11-5-24)
Charter Comparative Table
NOTE - The following is a list of amendments to the Dallas City Charter and the
disposition of those amendments, beginning with the amendment of June 12, 1973.
Date of Amendment Proposition Number Disposition by Chapter and Section
Date of Amendment Proposition Number Disposition by Chapter and Section
6-12-73           1                  Ch. I, §2
                                     Ch. III, §§6,
                                     13,
                 5-9                14,
                                     15,
                                     17,
                                     19
                 10-11              Ch. IV, §§2,
                                     7
                 12                 Ch. V, §1
                 13                 Ch. VI, §1
                                     Ch. VIII, §§1,
                 15-19              2(2), (5),
                                     4-
                                     6
                 24                 Ch. XI, §3
                 26                 Ch. XII, §§1,
                                     3
                                     Ch. XIII, §§1,
                 27                 3,
                                     4
                 28                 Ch. XV, §7
                 29-30              Ch. XVI, §§4,
                                     6
                 31                 Ch. XII, §4
                                   Ch. XIII, §9
                                   Ch. XVI, §12
                 32                 Ch. XVI, §16
                 33-34              Ch. XVIII, §§4,
                                     11(2), (3)
                 35                 Ch. XXI, §10
                                     Ch. XXII, §§1 ,
                                     2,
                 36-40              4,
                                     6,
                                     7
                 41                 Ch. XXIII, §§1,
                                     2
                 42                 Ch. XXIV, §11
                 43                 Repeals Ch. XI, §§1, 2
                                   Repeals Ch. XIII, §9
                                   Repeals Ch. XV-XVI
                                   Repeals Ch. XVII, §§1, 2
                                   Repeals Ch. XVIII
                                   Repeals Ch. XX, §§1, 2
                                   Renumbers Ch. XII-XIV XIX-XXIX as Ch. XI-
                                     XXIV
                                   Renumbers Ch. XI, §3 as
                                     Ch. XI, §13
                                   Renumbers Ch. XVII, §3 as
                                     Ch. XI, §14
                                     Renumbers Ch. XX, §§3-9 as
                                   Ch. XV, §§1-
                                     7
4-3-76            1                  Ch. III, §1
                                     Ch. IV, §§4,
                                   6,
                                     8
                 2                  Ch. III, §§2,
                                     5
                                   Ch. XXIV, §13
                 3                  Repeals Ch. III, §13
                                     Adds
                                   Ch. IIIA, §§1-
                                     3
                 4                  Ch. VI, §§1,
                                     2
                 5                  Ch. XII, §4
                                   Ch. XIII, §9
                 6                  Repeals Ch. XVI, §15
                 7                  Ch. IX, §§1,
                                     2
                                   Repeals Ch. IX, §3
                                   Renumbers Ch. IX, §4 as
                                     Ch. IX, §3
                                   Ch. XI, §8
                                   Ch. XXII, §1
                                   Adds Ch. IXA, §§1-3
                 8                  Ch. XI, §§1,
                                     3
                 10                 Ch. II, §1(39)
                                   Ch. IV, §§1,
                                     2
                 11                 Ch. XXIII, §3
1-17-81           2                  Ch. III, §3A
                 3                  Ch. XV, §8
                 4                  Ch. XIX, §§10,
                                     12
4-2-83            1                  Ch. XVII, §4
                                     Ch., XXII, §§1-
                                   3,
                                     9
                 2                  Ch. IV, §§7,
                                     12
                                   Ch. V, §1
                                   Ch. XVIII, §§11-
                                     12
                 3                  Ch. I, §2
                                   Ch. XVIII, §6
                 4                  Ch. III, §5
                                     Ch. IV, §§2-
                                   3,
                                     11
                                   Ch. V, §2
                 5                  Ch. XIX
                 6                  Ch. III, §20
                                   Repeals Ch. IXA
                                   Ch. XI, §8
                                   Ch. XVII, §9
                                   Ch. XXI, §8
                                   Ch. XXII, §12
                                   Ch. XXIV, §14
                 7                  Ch. VII, §2
                                   Ch. XII, §4
                                   Ch. XIII, §9
                                     Ch. XVI, §§1-
                                     3,
                                   7,
                                     10-
                                     12
4-6-85            1                  Ch. III, §20
                 2                  Ch. VIII, §4
                 3                  Ch. XVI, §6
                 4                  Ch. XVI, §§1,
                                     12
                                     Ch. III, §§1,
                                     2,
8-12-89           1                  3A,
                                     5,
                                     9
                                     Ch. IV, §§3,
                                     4,
                                   5(a),
                                     6,
                                     7,
                                     8
                                   Ch. XVI, §1
                                   Ch. XVII, §2
                                   Ch. XXIV, §§13,
                                     21
                 2                  Ch. III, §13
                                   Ch. IX, §2
                                   Ch. XXIV, §21
                 4                  Ch. IV, §5(b)
                                   Ch. XXIV, §21
                 5                  Ch. III, §6
                                     Ch. IV, §§9,
                                   10,
                                     11
                 6                  Ch. IX, §1
                 7                  Ch. XI, §8
                 8                  Ch. XII, §1
                 9                  Ch. XV, §4
                 10                 Adds
                                     Ch. XVI, §12.1
                 11                 Ch. XVI, §16
                 12                 Ch. XVII, §4
                 13                 Ch. XVIII, §4
                 14                 Ch. XXII, §§1,
                                     6
                 15                 Ch. XXII, §11
5-1-93            1                  Ch. III, §1
                                     Ch. IV, §§4,
                                   5,
                                     6
                 3                  Ch. XXIV, §11
                 4                  Ch. X, §§3,
                                     4
                                     Ch. XXII, §§7,
                                   8,
                                     9
                 5                  Ch. III, §§6,
                                     8
                 6                  Ch. III, §5
                                     Ch. IV, §§2,
                                     7,
                                   8,
                                     9,
                                     11,
                                     12
                                   Ch. V, §§1,
                                     2
                                   Ch. XVIII, §§11,
                                     12
                 7                  Ch. XI, §§4,
                                     14
                                   Ch. XXI, §§3,
                                     8
                 8                  Ch. XII, §4
                                   Ch. XIII, §9
                                     Ch. XVI, §§1,
                                   6,
                                     11,
                                     12
                 9                  Ch. IIIA, §3
5-3-97            6                  Ch. II, §1
                                   Ch. XII, §§1-
                                     8
                                   Ch. XIII, §§1-
                                     9
                                   Ch. XVII, §6
                 7                  Ch. III, §1
                                   Ch. IV, §3
                 8                  Ch. XVI, §§2,
                                     9
                                     Ch. XX, §§1,
                 9                  2,
                                     7,
                                     8
                 10                 Ch. VII, §2
                 11                 Ch. XV, §7
                 12                 Ch. XIX, §§3,
                                     12
                 13                 Ch. XXIV, §11
5-5-01            1                  Ch. III, §4
11-8-05           2                  Ch. III, §§14,
                                     15
                                   Ch. IIIA, §§1,
                                     2
                                   Ch. VI, §1
                                   Ch. VII, §1
                                   Ch. IX, §1
                                     Renumbers Ch. IX, §§2-3 as
                                   Ch. IX, §§3-
                                     4
                                   Adds
                                     Ch. IX, §2
                 3                  Ch. VII, §3
                                   Adds
                                     Ch. VIII, §4A
                                     Ch. VIII, §§3,
                                   7,
                                     8,
                                     9
                                   Ch. XII, §6
                                   Ch. XVI, §9
                 4                  Ch. II, §1
                                   Ch. III, §5
                 5                  Ch. VI, §§1,
                                     2
                                   Ch. VII, §1
                                   Ch. XII, §§4,
                                     5
                                   Ch. XIII, §§3,
                                     9
                                     Ch. XVI, §§3,
                                     4,
                                   9,
                                     11,
                                     12
                 6                  Ch. II, §1
                                   Ch. III, §1
                                   Ch. IV, §3
                                   Adds
                                     Ch. IV, §13
                 7                  Adds
                                     Ch. II, §3
                                   Ch. IV, §5
                                   Ch. XVI, §1
                                   Ch. XXIV, §13
                 8                  Ch. III, §20
                                     Ch. XI, §§6,
                                   7,
                                     10,
                                     13
                                   Ch. XVII, §9
                                   Ch. XXII, §12
                                   Ch. XXIV, §14
                                     Ch. XIV, §§1,
                                     2,
                 9                  3,
                                     5,
                                     7,
                                     8
                                   Ch. XIX, §4
                 10                 Ch. II, §1
                                     Ch. XIII, §§1,
                                     2,
                                     4,
                                   5,
                                     6,
                                     7,
                                     8,
                                     9
                                   Ch. XVI, §16
                                   Ch. XXIV, §10
                 11                 Ch. III, §19
                                   Ch. XI, §3
                                   Ch. XVIII, §§7,
                                     15
                                   Repeals Ch. XXIV, §11
                 12                 Ch. I, §3
                                     Ch. III, §§3,
                                     10,
                                     11,
                 13                 15,
                                     17,
                                     19,
                                     20
                                   Ch. IIIA, §§1,
                                     2
                                   Ch. VI, §§1,
                                     2
                                   Ch. VII, §§1,
                                     3
                                   Ch. VIII, §§4,
                                     6
                                   Ch. IX, §3 (before renumbering)
                                   Ch. X, §2
                                     Ch. XI, §§2,
                                   11,
                                     13
                                   Ch. XIV, §8
                                   Ch. XV, §3
                                   Ch. XVI, §17
                                   Ch. XVIII, §13
                                     Ch. XIX, §§6,
                                   8,
                                     11,
                                     17
                                   Ch. XX, §§10,
                                     11
                                   Ch. XXII, §4
                                   Ch. XXIII, §§4,
                                     6
                                   Ch. XXIV, §§12,
                                     17
11-4-14           1                  Ch. XXI, §2
                 2                  Ch. XXII, §11
                 4                  Ch. XVI, §16
                 5                  Ch. XI, §2
                 6                  Ch. IV, §5
                 7                  Ch. III, §17
                                   Ch. VIII, §4A
                 8                  Ch. III, §4
                                     Ch. III, §§6 ,
                                     10,
                 9                  11,
                                     17,
                                     19,
                                     20
                                     Ch. XI, §§4,
                                     5,
                                   6,
                                     8,
                                     11
                                   Repeals Ch. XI, §13
                                   Ch. XV, §1
                                   Repeals Ch. XV, §7
                                   Ch. XVI, §§12,
                                     16
                                   Ch. XIX, §1
                                   Ch. XX, §§2,
                                     11
                                   Ch. XXII, §§1,
                                     11
                                   Ch. XXIV, §13
11-5-24                             Preamble
                                     Ch. III, §§ 3,
                                     3A,
                                   4,
                                     8,
                                     13,
                                     19
                                   Ch. IIIA, § 2
                                     Ch. IV, §§ 3,
                                   5,
                                     6
                                   Repeals Ch. IV, § 13
                                   Ch. VIII, § 6
                                   Ch. IX, § 2
                                     Adds
                                   Ch. IXA, §§ 1-
                                     3
                                   Ch. XI, §§ 1-
                                     3
                                   Adds
                                     Ch. XI, § 15
                                   Ch. XII, § 4
                                   Ch. XIII, §§ 2,
                                     9
                                   Ch. XIV, § 8
                                   Ch. XV, §§ 3,
                                     4
                                     Ch. XVI, §§ 1,
                                     3,
                                     6,
                                   7,
                                     10,
                                     11,
                                     12.1
                                   Ch. XVII, § 2
                                   Repeals Ch. XVIII, §§ 7, 15
                                   Ch. XVIII, § 11
                                   Ch. XIX, § 7
                                     Ch. XXII, §§ 2,
                                   4,
                                     10
                                   Repeals Ch. XXII, § 3
                                   Ch. XXIV, § 17
                                     Adds
                                   Ch. XXIV, §§ 22,
                                     23
                                   Adds
                                     Ch. XXV, § 1
                                    
 
 
 
VOLUME I
Contains 10/25 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 33233, passed 9-17-2025
PREFACE
   The Code, as originally published in 1960, consisted of two loose-leaf
volumes and constituted the first version and codification of the general
ordinances of the City of Dallas since 1941. With the 1978 printing, the
original two volumes were expanded by adding Chapter 51, the City’s Zoning
Ordinance. A third loose-leaf volume was added that contained the City’s
construction codes.
   When reprinted in 1990, the Code was completely recodified, reformatted,
repaginated, and reindexed. The 1990 Code consisted of three loose-leaf volumes
-- Volumes I and II contained Chapters 1 through 50 and Volume III contained
Chapter 51A, “Part II of the Dallas Development Code.” The construction codes
and Chapter 51, “Part I of the Dallas Development Code,” were available for
purchase separately.
   With this 1997 printing, the Code has been completely repaginated to remove
excess pages and has been converted to a computer format and font that will
facilitate the Code’s maintenance by the City Attorney’s Office. This 1997 Code
still consists of three loose-leaf volumes -- Volumes I and II contain Chapters
1 through 50, except for Chapter 16, and Volume III contains Chapter 51A. The
construction codes and Chapter 51, “Part I of the Dallas Development Code,” may
be purchased separately from the Building Inspection Division of the city.
Chapter 16, “Dallas Fire Code,” may be purchased separately from the Dallas
Fire Department.
   This Code contains ordinances passed or effective through May 31, 1997.
Supplements will be issued periodically so that copies of the Code may be kept
up-to-date. It is anticipated that the supplements will be published quarterly.
   All volumes of the Code, except the construction codes and the fire code,
and all ordinances amending the Code will be maintained on a word processing
system in the City Attorney’s Office. Copies of the Code and all supplements,
however, will be prepared and distributed through:
   American Legal Publishing Corporation
   525 Vine Street, Suite 310
   Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
   1-800-445-5588
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec.
1-1.   How code designated and cited.
Sec.
1-2.   Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.
Sec.
1-3.   Catchlines of sections.
Sec.
1-4.   Severability of parts of code.
Sec.
1-5.   Rules of construction.
Sec.
1-5.1   Culpable mental state.
Sec.
1-6.   Amendments or additions to code; printing.
Sec.
1-7.   Disannexation - Application.
Sec.
1-8.   Same - Procedure.
Sec.
1-9.   Notice to property owners; presumption of ownership.
Sec.
1-10.   Reserved.
Sec.
1-11.   Standard of judicial review for city board and commission decisions.
SEC. 1-1.   HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated “The Revised Code of Civil and Criminal
Ordinances of the City of Dallas” and may be so cited. Such code may also be
cited as the “Dallas City Code.”
SEC. 1-2.   PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so
far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the
adoption of “The Revised Code of Civil and Criminal Ordinances of the City of
Dallas”, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new
enactments.
SEC. 1-3.   CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.
SEC. 1-4.   SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by
the city council without the incorporation in this code, of any such
unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
SEC. 1-5.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances and resolutions
passed by the city council, the following rules contained in this section shall
be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the council:
   BOND. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing is sufficient if
properly drafted and executed.
   CITY. The words “city,” “the city,” or “this city” mean the city of Dallas,
Texas.
   CITY HEALTH AUTHORITY, CITY HEALTH OFFICER, AND DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH.
The words “city health authority,” “city health officer,” and “director of
public health” shall be construed to mean the director of the Dallas County
Health Authority.
   CITY SECRETARY, CHIEF OF POLICE or OTHER CITY OFFICERS OR DEPARTMENTS. The
words “city secretary”, “chief of police” or words designating any “other city
officers or departments” shall be construed to mean the city secretary, chief
of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the
city of Dallas, Texas.
   CODE. The words “the code” or “this code” shall mean “The Revised Code of
Civil and Criminal Ordinances of the City of Dallas.”
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. In construing this code, whenever a notice is required
to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding
or step in a proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or
such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which
such proceeding or step in a proceeding is to be had shall not be counted.
   CONVICTION means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or
foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has
not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned.
   COUNCIL. The words “the council” or “the city council” shall mean the mayor
and councilmen acting as the city council of Dallas, Texas.
   DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE. The words “Dallas Development Code” mean Chapters
51,
51A, and 51P.
   GENDER. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to include females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well
as to males.
   HIGHWAY. The term “highway”, when used in this code, shall include any
street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridges, viaducts,
tunnels, underpasses, overpasses and causeways in the city, dedicated or
devoted to public use.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
   MONTH. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
   NUMBER. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and
any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.
   OATH. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words
“affirm” and “affirmed”.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they
shall mean Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in
the city.
   OR, AND. “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or,” if the sense
requires it.
   OWNER. The word “owner”, applied to a building or land, shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant
or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations,
corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as
to individuals.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. The words “personal property” include every species of
property, except real property, as defined in this section.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. The words “preceding” and “following” mean next before
and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. The word “property” includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY. The words “real property” include land, tenements and
hereditaments.
   ROADWAY. The word “roadway” shall mean that portion of a street improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic and that portion of a street
used for drainage.
   SIDEWALK. The word “sidewalk” shall mean any portion of the street between
the curb or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, all
or a part of which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
   SIDEWALK AREA. The space between the lateral line of the roadway and the
boundary separating the public right-of-way and the adjacent private property.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. The words “signature” or “subscription” shall
include a mark when a person cannot write.
   STATE. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the
State of Texas.
   STREET. The term “street” shall include any highway, boulevard, alley,
street, avenue or public place or square, bridges, viaducts, culverts,
underpasses, overpasses, tunnels and causeways in the city, dedicated or
devoted to public use.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. The words “written” or “in writing” shall be
construed to include any representation other than oral of words, letters or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year. (Ord. Nos. 18828; 19455;
24637; 25371; 33224)
SEC. 1-5.1.   CULPABLE MENTAL STATE.
   (a)   A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an
offense under this code or another city ordinance that is punishable by a fine
not exceeding $500, unless the provision defining the conduct expressly
requires a culpable mental state.
   (b)   In accordance with Section 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code and
notwithstanding any code or ordinance provision to the contrary, a culpable
mental state is required for the commission of an offense under this code or
another city ordinance that is punishable by a fine exceeding $500.
   (c)   When a culpable mental state is required for the commission of an
offense under this code or another city ordinance, a person must have acted
knowingly or with knowledge, unless the provision defining the conduct
expressly requires a different degree of culpability.
   (d)   A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to the nature
of his conduct or to circumstances surrounding his conduct when he is aware of
the nature of his conduct or that the circumstances exist. A person acts
knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to a result of his conduct when he
is aware that his conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result. (Ord. Nos.
15105; 19455; 26274)
SEC. 1-6.   AMENDMENTS OR ADDITIONS TO CODE; PRINTING.
   (a)   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to
such ordinances, hereinafter enacted or presented to the city council for
enactment shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the “Dallas City Code,” and when done shall be part of the code.
Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and section
of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate
designation of chapter and section. For clarity in reading amendments to the
code, any language intended to be added to the code may be underscored in the
amending ordinance, and any language intended to be deleted from the code may
be inserted in its appropriate place in brackets and stricken through. These
markings, when used, and the deleted portions shall be removed when amendments
are printed in the code.
   (b)   A separate volume or volumes shall be added to the Dallas City Code
and shall contain the city’s Building Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, and
Electrical Code along with applicable administrative provisions.
   (c)   
Chapters 1 through
51A of the code shall be maintained by the city attorney on a word processing
system so that the code, as it exists on the system, is continuously updated as
amendments to the code are adopted by the city council. The city attorney shall
periodically cause supplements to the code to be printed, but not less than
once each year. When the supply of code books becomes short or when supplements
become so numerous as to make handling and selling of the code difficult, the
city attorney may cause the entire code to be reprinted in an up-to-date form
with all amendments included.
   (d)   When a supplement to the code is printed from the word processing
system maintained by the city attorney or when the entire code is reprinted
from this system, the supplement or code so printed shall be deemed the
official supplement or code of the city without further action of the city
council and shall be admitted as evidence in court without further proof. (Ord.
Nos. 15904; 18828; 19455)
SEC. 1-7.   DISANNEXATION - APPLICATION.
   (a)   When any territory exists, to the extent of at least three acres,
contiguous, unimproved and adjoining the lines of the city, the city council
may, by ordinance duly passed, discontinue such territory as a part of the
city, provided the application for such discontinuance or disannexation shall
set forth in writing the territory desired to be discontinued and describe the
territory desired to be discontinued by metes and bounds as in the case of
annexation of territory provided by the charter.
   (b)   Subsection (a) shall not be construed as limiting the authority of the
city to make mutually agreeable boundary changes with other municipalities in
accordance with state law. (Code 1941, Art. 29-1; Ord. 20059)
SEC. 1-8.   SAME - PROCEDURE.
   When the ordinance provided for in the preceding section has been duly
passed, the city council shall cause to be entered an order to such effect on
the minutes of the council. From and after the entry of such order, such
territory shall cease to be part of the city; provided, that the city council
may exercise its own discretion with reference to discontinuing any part of
such territory and in no case shall any territory be discontinued, except on
the application of the owner or owners of such territory and where the metes
and bounds of the territory that is sought to be discontinued are clearly set
forth in such application; provided further, that all applications for the
discontinuance of any territory shall be in writing as provided in this
section, and approved by the city engineer’s and the city attorney’s
departments. (Code 1941, Art. 29-2)
SEC. 1-9.   NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS; PRESUMPTION OF OWNERSHIP.
   (a)   Whenever the city is required by statute, rule, regulation, or
ordinance to send a notice to an owner of real property for the purpose of
enforcing a provision of this code, the notice may include the following
statement: “According to the real property records of            County, you
own the real property described in this notice. If you no longer own the
property, you must execute an affidavit stating that you no longer own the
property and stating the name and last known address of the person who acquired
the property from you. The affidavit must be delivered in person or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to this office not later than the
20th day after the date you receive this notice. If you do not send the
affidavit, it will be presumed that you own the property described in this
notice, even if you do not.”
   (b)   The notice described in Subsection (a) must be delivered in person or
by certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (c)   If the city sends a notice to the owner of the property to which the
notice relates, as shown by the real property records of the county in which
the property is located on or after the 10th day before the date the notice is
sent, and the record owner no longer owns the property, the record owner shall
execute an affidavit provided by the city with the notice stating:
      (1)   that the record owner no longer owns the property; and
      (2)   the name and last known address of the person who acquired the
property from the record owner.
   (d)   The record owner shall deliver the affidavit in person or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the city not later than the 20th day after
the date the record owner receives the notice.
   (e)   If the city receives an affidavit under Subsection (d), the city shall
send the appropriate notice to the person named in the affidavit as having
acquired the property. A notice sent under this subsection must include the
statement authorized by Subsection (a).
   (f)   Upon receiving an affidavit under Subsection (d), the city shall:
      (1)   maintain the affidavit on file for at least two years after the
date the affidavit was received; and
      (2)   deliver a copy of the affidavit to the chief appraiser of the
appraisal district in which the property is located.
   (g)   The city is considered to have provided notice to a property owner if
the city complies with the statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance under which
the notice is sent and if the city complies with:
      (1)   Subsection (a) and does not receive an affidavit from the record
owner; or
      (2)   Subsection (e) and does not receive an affidavit from the person to
whom the notice was sent under Subsection (e).
   (h)   If the city complies with this section and does not receive an
affidavit under Subsection (d), the record owner is presumed to be the owner of
the property for all purposes to which the notice relates.
   (i)   For purposes of this section, “real property” does not include a
mineral interest or royalty interest. (Ord. 21025)
SEC. 1-10.   RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 31872)
SEC. 1-11.   STANDARD OF JUDICIAL REVIEW FOR CITY BOARD AND COMMISSION
DECISIONS.
   Whenever this code or another city ordinance provides that a person may
appeal a decision of a city board or commission to district court, the appeal
is limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule unless expressly
provided otherwise by this code, another city ordinance, the city charter, or
state or federal law. (Ord. 23227)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
2-1.   Time within which city officers to deposit money.
Sec.
2-1.1.   Advance payment of certain fees, charges, and taxes required; interest
on delinquent accounts.
Sec.
2-2.   Delivery of books, etc., to successor in office.
Sec.
2-3.   Officers, etc., of city not to deal in city warrants or obligations.
Sec.
2-3.1.   Preservation of duties, powers, and functions of city manager.
Sec.
2-4.   Removal from office for misconduct or neglect of duty.
Sec.
2-5.   Labor unions - City employees not to organize or join.
Sec.
2-6.   Same - Same - Intent and purpose of provision.
Sec.
2-7.   Same - Same - Penalty for violating prohibitions.
Sec.
2-8.   Hearings and investigations as to city affairs - Subpoena powers of
person or body conducting same.
Sec.
2-9.   Same - Penalty for failure to testify, etc.
Sec.
2-10.   Property purchased by city at tax sale - City manager to execute
quitclaim deed upon redemption of same.
Sec.
2-11.   Same - Provisions of quitclaim deed.
Sec.
2-11.1.   Sale or release of interests in real property.
Sec.
2-11.2.   Acceptance of conveyance or acquisition by eminent domain where
consideration is $100,000 or less.
Sec.
2-11.3.   Real property acquisitions where consideration exceeds $500,000.
Sec.
2-12.   Legal advice.
Sec.
2-13.   Public utilities to pay expense of office of supervisor of public
utilities - Generally.
Sec.
2-14.   Same - Notice required.
Sec.
2-15.   Same - “Gross receipts” defined.
Sec.
2-16.   Eminent domain proceedings for personal property.
Sec.
2-17.   Payment of cost of publishing ordinance granting franchise or closing
street.
Sec.
2-17.1.   Fiscal notes.
Sec.
2-17.2.   Selection of city auditor; nominating commission.
Sec.
2-17.3.   Nondiscrimination in the provision of city services.
ARTICLE II.
ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEYS.
Sec.
2-18.   Qualifications and appointment.
Sec.
2-19.   Duties.
Sec.
2-20.   Compensation.
Sec.
2-20.1.   Guest assistant city attorney program.
ARTICLE III.
MANAGEMENT AND SALE OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY.
Division 1. Generally.
Sec.
2-21.   Inventory of real property.
Sec.
2-22.   Examination of need.
Sec.
2-23.   Decision to sell.
Sec.
2-24.   Procedures for the sale of unneeded real property by formal bid or
negotiation.
Sec.
2-24.1.   Procedures for the sale of unneeded real property by public auction.
Sec.
2-25.   Type of conveyance.
Sec.
2-26.   Bidder information.
Sec.
2-26.1.   City manager recommendation and award of sale.
Sec.
2-26.2.   Abandonment of public rights-of-way.
Sec.
2-26.3.   Reserved.
Division 2. Alternate Manner of Sale of Real Property to Nonprofit
Organizations for Affordable Housing.
Sec.
2-26.4.   Purpose.
Sec.
2-26.5.   Definitions.
Sec.
2-26.6.   Alternate method of sale for tax- foreclosed or seized real property.
Sec.
2-26.7.   Purchase proposals by nonprofit organizations; procedures and
requirements for city approval or rejection of proposals.
Sec.
2-26.8.   Multiple proposals for the same land.
Sec.
2-26.9.   Purchase price of land.
Sec.
2-26.10.   Quitclaim deed.
Sec.
2-26.11.   Restrictions on use of land.
Sec.
2-26.12.   Possibility of reverter with right of reentry.
Sec.
2-26.13.   Release of reverter rights and deed restrictions.
Sec.
2-26.14.   Appeals.
ARTICLE IV.
PROCUREMENT.
Division 1. Purchasing and Contracting Generally.
Sec.
2-27.   Definitions.
Sec.
2-28.   Office of procurement services; powers and duties of the director as
city purchasing agent.
Sec.
2-29.   Approval of plans and specifications.
Sec.
2-30.   General delegation of contracting authority.
Sec.
2-31.   Rules regarding expenditures not exceeding $50,000.
Sec.
2-32.   Rules regarding expenditures exceeding $50,000
Sec.
2-33.   Alternative methods of procurement for facility construction.
Sec.
2-34.   Personal, professional, and planning services.
Sec.
2-35.   Interest on certain late or delayed payments.
Sec.
2-36.   Contracts with persons indebted to the city.
Secs. 2-37. thru 2-37.1.9.   Reserved.
Division 2. Sale of Unclaimed and Surplus Property.
Sec.
2-37.2.   Authority to sell; deposit of cash.
Sec.
2-37.3.   Delivery of unclaimed property to director; use for city purposes.
Sec.
2-37.4.   Method of sale.
Sec.
2-37.5.   Time and place of sale; notice.
Sec.
2-37.6.   Records; reports to the director of finance; proceeds.
Sec.
2-37.7.   Destruction of restricted weapons; exceptions.
Sec.
2-37.8.   Lien on motor vehicles.
Sec.
2-37.9.   Purchase by certain persons prohibited.
Sec.
2-37.10.   Authority to sell surplus issue weapons to certain personnel.
Sec.
2-37.11.   Authority to sell uniforms to employees.
Sec.
2-37.12.   Sales of certain collectible property.
Sec.
2-37.13.   Sale of surplus library material.
Sec.
2-37.14.   Sale of personal property to other governmental entities.
Sec.
2-37.15.   Sale of unclaimed and surplus property at the city store.
Sec.
2-37.16.   Sale of surplus city-owned animals.
Sec.
2-37.17.   Donation of outdated or surplus firefighting equipment, supplies,
and materials.
ARTICLE IV-a.
OFFICE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
Sec.
2-38.   Created; director of economic development.
Sec.
2-39.   Duties of the director of economic development.
Sec.
2-40.   Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES.
Sec.
2-41.   Created; director of development services.
Sec.
2-42.   Duties of the director of development services.
ARTICLE V-a.
DEPARTMENT OF FACILITIES AND REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT.
Sec.
2-43.   Created; director of facilities and real estate management.
Sec.
2-44.   Duties of the director of facilities and real estate management.
Sec.
2-45.   Reserved.
ARTICLE V-b.
DEPARTMENT OF CONVENTION AND EVENT SERVICES.
Sec.
2-46.   Created; director of convention and event services.
Sec.
2-47.   Duties of the director of convention and event services.
ARTICLE V-c.
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC WORKS.
Sec.
2-48.   Created; director of transportation and public works.
Sec.
2-49.   Duties of the director of transportation and public works.
ARTICLE V-d.
WATER UTILITIES DEPARTMENT.
Sec.
2-50.   Created; director of water utilities.
Sec.
2-51.   Duties of the director of water utilities.
ARTICLE V-e.
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND URBAN DESIGN.
Sec.
2-52.   Created; chief planning officer.
Sec.
2-53.   Duties of the chief planning officer.
 
ARTICLE V-f.
DEPARTMENT OF EQUIPMENT AND FLEET MANAGEMENT.
Sec.
2-54.   Created; director of equipment and fleet management.
Sec.
2-55.   Duties of the director of equipment and fleet management.
Secs. 2-56 thru 2-60.   Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
Sec.
2-61.   Created; director of human resources.
Sec.
2-62.   Duties of director of human resources.
ARTICLE VII.
DEPARTMENT OF CODE COMPLIANCE.
Sec.
2-71.   Created; director of code compliance.
Sec.
2-72.   Duties of the director of code compliance.
ARTICLE VII-a.
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
Sec.
2-73.   Created; director of management services.
Sec.
2-74.   Duties of the director of management services.
ARTICLE VII-b.
OFFICE OF DATA ANALYTICS AND BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE.
Sec.
2-75.    Created; director of data analytics and business intelligence.
Sec.
2-75.1.    Duties of the director of data analytics and business intelligence.
ARTICLE VIII.
SOCIALLY RESPONSIBLE BANKING.
Sec.
2-76.   Purpose.
Sec.
2-77.   City banking contracts.
Sec.
2-78.   Statement of work and reporting.
Secs. 2-79 thru 2-80.   Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII-a.
CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY.
Division 1. Tort Claims.
Sec.
2-81.   Filing claims against the city.
Sec.
2-82.   Handling by city attorney.
Sec.
2-83.   Handling by director of risk management.
Sec.
2-84.   Payment of a property damage, personal injury, or wrongful death claim
without prior city council approval.
Sec.
2-85.   Non-waiver of notice of claim.
Division 2. Breach of Contract Claims.
Sec.
2-86.   Notice required for certain breach of contract claims.
Sec.
2-87.   Payment of a breach of contract claim without prior city council
approval.
Division 3. Miscellaneous Claims, Fines, Penalties, and Sanctions against the
City.
Sec.
2-88.   Handling and investigation of miscellaneous claims, fines, penalties,
and sanctions against the city.
Sec.
2-89.   Payment of a miscellaneous claim, fine, penalty, or sanction without
prior city council approval.
Secs. 2-90 thru 2-94.   Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
PERMIT AND LICENSE APPEAL BOARD.
Sec.
2-95.   Permit and license appeal board - Created; function; terms.
Sec.
2-95.1   Training.
Sec.
2-96.   Appeals from actions of department directors.
Sec.
2-97.   Resets and continuances of hearings before the permit and license
appeal board.
Sec.
2-98.   Public notice requirements for hearings on exemptions from locational
restrictions.
Sec.
2-99.   Appeals to state district court.
Sec.
2-100.   Reserved.
ARTICLE X.
PUBLIC ART PROGRAM.
Sec.
2-101.   Purpose.
Sec.
2-102.   Definitions.
Sec.
2-103.   Funding of the public art program.
Sec.
2-104.   Uses of monies in public art accounts.
Sec.
2-105.   Administration of the public art program - Responsibilities.
ARTICLE XI.
FILLING TEMPORARY VACANCIES.
Sec.
2-118.   Designation, appointment and duties of temporary acting and acting
city manager.
Sec.
2-119.   Designation, appointment and duties of temporary acting and acting
department directors; “department director” defined.
ARTICLE XII.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
Sec.
2-120.   Environmental commission - created; function; terms; meetings.
Sec.
2-121.   Technical resource panel.
Sec.
2-122.   Environmental health committee.
Secs. 2-123 thru 2-124.   Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII.
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. COMMUNITY CENTER BOARD.
Sec.
2-125.   Definitions.
Sec.
2-126.   Created; terms; membership; vacancies.
Sec.
2-127.   Functions and duties.
Sec.
2-128.   Reserved.
Sec.
2-129.   Treatment of budget.
ARTICLE XIV.
SOUTH DALLAS/FAIR PARK OPPORTUNITY FUND BOARD.
Sec.
2-130.   South Dallas/Fair Park Opportunity Fund board - Created; terms;
membership.
Sec.
2-131.   South Dallas/Fair Park Opportunity Fund board - Duties and
responsibilities.
Sec.
2-132.   Reserved.
ARTICLE XV.
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
Sec.
2-133.   Position of chief financial officer created.
Sec.
2-134.   Duties of the chief financial officer.
ARTICLE XV-a.
CITY CONTROLLER’S OFFICE.
Sec.
2-135.   Created; city controller as head of office.
Sec.
2-135.1.   Duties of the city controller.
ARTICLE XV-b.
OFFICE OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
Sec.
2-135.2.   Created; director of budget and management services.
Sec.
2-135.3.   Duties of the director of budget and management services.
ARTICLE XV-c.
OFFICE OF RISK MANAGEMENT.
Sec.
2-135.4.   Created; director of risk management.
Sec.
2-135.5.   Duties of the director of risk management.
ARTICLE XVI.
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY SERVICES.
Sec.
2-136.   Created; director of information and technology services.
Sec.
2-137.   Duties of director of information and technology services.
ARTICLE XVII.
DEPARTMENT OF SANITATION SERVICES.
Sec.
2-138.   Created; director of sanitation services.
Sec.
2-139.   Duties of the director of sanitation services.
ARTICLE XVII-a.
RESERVED.
Secs. 2-139.1 thru 2-139.2   Reserved.
ARTICLE XVIII.
SENIOR AFFAIRS COMMISSION.
Sec.
2-140.   Senior affairs commission - Created; terms; membership; meetings.
Sec.
2-141.   Senior affairs commission - Functions.
ARTICLE XIX.
OFFICE OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT.
Sec.
2-142.   Created; director of housing and community empowerment.
Sec.
2-143.   Duties of the director of housing and community empowerment.
Secs. 2-144 thru 2-146.   Reserved.
ARTICLE XX.
CITIZEN HOMELESSNESS COMMISSION
Sec.
2-147.   Purpose.
Sec.
2-148.   Created; membership; terms; meetings.
Sec.
2-149.   Duties and functions.
ARTICLE XXI.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
Sec.
2-150.   Community development commission created.
Sec.
2-151.   Duties and functions.
Sec.
2-152.   Standards of conduct.
ARTICLE XXI-a.
COMMISSION ON DISABILITIES.
Sec.
2-152.1.   Commission on disabilities - created; function; terms; meetings.
Sec.
2-152.2.   Definition.
Sec.
2-152.3.   Duties and responsibilities.
Sec.
2-152.4.   Technical resource panel.
ARTICLE XXII.
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY POLICE OVERSIGHT.
Sec.
2-153.   Purpose.
Sec.
2-154.   Created; director/monitor of office of community police oversight.
Sec.
2-154.1.   Duties of the director/monitor of the office of community police
oversight.
ARTICLE XXIII.
DEPARTMENT OF DALLAS ANIMAL SERVICES.
Sec.
2-155.   Created; director of Dallas animal services.
Sec.
2-156.   Duties of the director of Dallas animal services.
ARTICLE XXIV.
ANIMAL ADVISORY COMMISSION.
Sec.
2-157.   Created; membership; meetings.
Sec.
2-158.   Duties and responsibilities.
ARTICLE XXV.
YOUTH COMMISSION
Sec.
2-159.   Purpose.
Sec.
2-159.1.   Created; membership; terms; meetings.
Sec.
2-160.   Duties and responsibilities.
ARTICLE XXVI.
ARTS AND CULTURE ADVISORY COMMISSION.
Sec.
2-161.   Arts and culture advisory commission - Created; terms; membership;
meetings.
Sec.
2-162.   Arts and culture advisory commission - Duties and responsibilities.
ARTICLE XXVI-a.
OFFICE OF ARTS AND CULTURE.
Sec.
2-162.1   Created; director of arts and culture.
Sec.
2-162.2   Duties of the director of arts and culture.
Sec.
2-162.3.   Procurement of cultural services.
Sec.
2-162.4.   Contracts for radio station air time required; other radio station
contracts.
ARTICLE XXVII.
CIVIL SERVICE BOARD; ADJUNCT MEMBERS; ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES.
Sec.
2-163.   Special qualifications for adjunct members of the civil service board.
Sec.
2-164.   Administrative law judges: appointment; qualifications; termination of
contract.
Sec.
2-165.   Training.
Sec.
2-166.   Trial board responsibilities of civil service board members;
attendance.
ARTICLE XXVIII.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY.
Sec.
2-167.   Purpose and creation; adoption of state law; and administration of
stormwater drainage utility.
Sec.
2-168.   Definitions; stormwater drainage utility rates; exemptions; incentives
for residential- benefitted properties; billing and collection procedures.
Sec.
2-169.   Service area.
ARTICLE XXIX.
VETERAN AFFAIRS COMMISSION.
Sec.
2-170.   Veteran affairs commission - Created; terms; membership; meetings.
Sec.
2-171.   Veteran affairs commission - Functions.
ARTICLE XXX.
COLLEGE ADVISORY COMMISSION.
Sec.
2-172.    Purpose.
Sec.
2-173.    Created; membership; terms; meetings.
Sec.
2-174.    Duties and responsibilities.
ARTICLE XXXI.
RESERVED.
Secs. 2-175 thru 2-177.   Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 2-1.   TIME WITHIN WHICH CITY OFFICERS TO DEPOSIT MONEY.
   All officers of the city who receive money for or on account of the city in
any manner are hereby required to deposit same in the manner prescribed by the
chief financial officer. (Code 1941, Art. 19-2; Ord. 29645)
SEC. 2-1.1.   ADVANCE PAYMENT OF CERTAIN FEES, CHARGES, AND TAXES REQUIRED;
INTEREST ON DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   Unless a different time and method of payment is specifically provided
by another city ordinance, a city contract, or state or federal law, every fee,
charge, or tax required to be paid to the city for any license, permit, right,
privilege, property interest, or service must be paid in full to the city
before the license, permit, right, privilege, property interest, or service may
be issued, granted, conveyed, provided, or renewed.
   (b)   Except as provided in Subsection (c), any money owed to the city after
May 28, 1997 will accrue simple interest at the rate of 10 percent a year from
the day after the money became due until it is paid in full.
   (c)   The following types of money owed to the city are not subject to the
interest established in Subsection (b):
      (1)   Any fee, charge, or tax upon which the assessment of interest is
prohibited or otherwise regulated or provided for by another city ordinance or
state or federal law.
      (2)   A fee, charge, or tax charged or collected by the city under the
specific authority of a state or federal law, where the assessment of interest
is not provided for in the applicable state or federal law.
      (3)   A fee or charge for copies, documents, records, or other
information provided by the city under a request for public information.
      (4)   Money owed to the city under a contract that does not specifically
provide for the assessment of interest, that prohibits the assessment of
interest, or that specifically provides another method or rate of assessing
interest.
      (5)   Money owed under a judgment awarded to the city.
      (6)   A criminal or civil fine or penalty.
   (d)   In this section, “contract” means a contract required under Section 1,
Chapter XXII of the Dallas City Charter to be signed by the city manager and
approved by the city attorney before it will be binding on the city. (Ord.
23135)
SEC. 2-2.   DELIVERY OF BOOKS, ETC., TO SUCCESSOR IN OFFICE.
   Every officer or agent shall, upon going out of office, deliver to his
successor all books, papers, furniture and other things appertaining to his
office. (Code 1941, Art. 19-2)
SEC. 2-3.   OFFICERS, ETC., OF CITY NOT TO DEAL IN CITY WARRANTS OR
OBLIGATIONS.
   No officer of the city, nor any deputy, clerk or employee of any such
officer, nor any servant or agent of the city, shall, directly or indirectly,
by himself or by any other for his own or another’s benefit, deal in the
purchase of city warrants, bonds or other obligations of the city. (Code 1941,
Art. 19-3)
SEC. 2-3.1.   PRESERVATION OF DUTIES, POWERS, AND FUNCTIONS OF CITY MANAGER.
   (a)   Whenever this code, another city ordinance, or a city council
resolution delegates a duty, power, or function to a specific employee who is
responsible to the city manager, that duty, power, or function may, at the
discretion of the city manager as the chief administrative and executive
officer of the city, also be performed or exercised by the city manager or by
any assistant city manager or other city employee designated by the city
manager to perform or exercise that duty, power, or function.
   (b)   Nothing in Subsection (a) authorizes the city manager to designate a
person to perform or exercise a duty, power, or function when such a
designation would be inconsistent with the city charter or state law. (Ord.
22356)
SEC. 2-4.   REMOVAL FROM OFFICE FOR MISCONDUCT OR NEGLECT OF DUTY.
   Any officer of the city who shall refuse or willfully fail or neglect to
perform any duty enjoined upon him by law or ordinance, or shall, in the
discharge of his official duties, be guilty of any fraud, extortion,
oppression, favoritism, partiality or willful wrong or injustice, is guilty of
an offense, and may be removed from office for malfeasance in office as
provided by the charter and the civil service rules. (Code 1941, Art. 19-4;
19963)
SEC. 2-5.   LABOR UNIONS - CITY EMPLOYEES NOT TO ORGANIZE OR JOIN.
   It shall be unlawful for any officer, agent, or employee, or any group of
them, of the city to organize a labor union, organization or club of city
employees, or to be concerned with or a member thereof, whether such labor
union, organization or club is affiliated or not with any local, state,
national or international body or organization whose charter, bylaws, rules,
custom, policy, or practice govern or control, or has for its purpose the
governing or controlling of its members in matter of working time, working
conditions, or compensation to be asked or demanded of the city. (Code 1941,
Art. 19-6; Ord. Nos. 3392; 5364)
SEC. 2-6.   SAME - SAME - INTENT AND PURPOSE OF PROVISION.
   It is further the intent and purpose of Section
2-5 to prohibit any officer, agent or employee of the city from becoming a
member of any organization, which by its charter, rules, bylaws, practices,
policy, or conduct undertakes as a body, or through its representatives, to
represent its membership in any bargaining for wages, working conditions, rules
of employment or otherwise, or which may as a body, or through its
representatives or agents, attempt to influence local or state legislation
regarding conditions of employment, wages, hours or other matters affecting
their service, directly or indirectly, with the city. (Code 1941, Art. 19-6;
Ord. Nos. 3392; 5364)
SEC. 2-7.   SAME - SAME - PENALTY FOR VIOLATING PROHIBITIONS.
   Any person violating the terms or provisions of Section
2-5 shall be subject to summary dismissal by the city council, board, city
manager or officer having power to employ and discharge such officer, agent or
employee. (Code 1941, Art. 19-6; Ord. Nos. 3392; 5364)
SEC. 2-8.   HEARINGS AND INVESTIGATIONS AS TO CITY AFFAIRS - SUBPOENA POWERS OF
PERSON OR BODY CONDUCTING SAME.
   In all hearings and investigations that may hereafter be conducted by the
city council, the city manager, or any person or committee authorized by either
or both of them for the purpose of making investigations as to city affairs,
shall for that purpose subpoena witnesses and compel the production of books,
papers, and other evidence material to such inquiry in the same manner as is
now prescribed by the laws of this state for compelling the attendance of
witnesses and production of evidence in the corporation court. A person
receiving a subpoena in accordance with this section may, before the return
date specified in the subpoena, petition the corporation court for a motion to
modify or quash the subpoena. This provision for pre-compliance review applies
to all subpoenas, including but not limited to those issued pursuant to
Chapters III, XIII, and XVI of the City Charter or Sections 19-9, 20-10, 20A-8,
37-35, 37A-4, 40A-4, 46-10, or 50-3 of this code unless a separate pre-
compliance review is provided. (Code 1941, Art. 22-1; Ord. 31533)
SEC. 2-9.   SAME - PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO TESTIFY, ETC.
   Any person who refuses to be sworn or who refuses to appear to testify or
who disobeys any lawful order of the city council, the city manager, or any
person or committee authorized by either or both of them, fails to file a
motion to quash or otherwise demand a pre-compliance review of the subpoena in
accordance with Section 2-8, or who fails or refuses to produce any book,
paper, document, or instrument touching any matter under examination, or who is
guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the city
council, the city manager, or any person or committee authorized by either or
both of them in the matter of such investigation or inquiry after being
summoned to give or produce testimony in relation to any matter under
investigation, is guilty of an offense. (Code 1941, Art. 22-2; Ord. Nos. 19963;
31533)
SEC. 2-10.   PROPERTY PURCHASED BY CITY AT TAX SALE - CITY MANAGER TO EXECUTE
QUITCLAIM DEED UPON REDEMPTION OF SAME.
   In any case where the city has purchased a tax title to any property under
tax foreclosure or may hereafter become the purchaser of a tax title under
foreclosure proceedings or tax collector’s deed, the city manager is authorized
and directed to execute a quitclaim deed to such person entitled to redeem the
property after such person has paid over to the city the amount of taxes,
penalties, interest and costs, including the redemption penalty, if any, as
provided for by the charter. (Code 1941, Art. 22-3)
SEC. 2-11.   SAME - PROVISIONS OF QUITCLAIM DEED.
   The quitclaim deed mentioned in Section
2-10 shall provide that the city releases, quitclaims and surrenders to the
grantee such title or interest as it may have acquired, if any, by virtue of
the tax foreclosure proceedings and by virtue of the city becoming the
purchaser of the tax title under any tax collector’s, sheriff’s or constable’s
sale. It shall further provide that the instrument shall release the tax lien
and judgment lien on the property described, securing the taxes for the years
for which the judgment was recovered, and shall not in any way affect any taxes
not included in the judgment. (Code 1941, Art. 22-4)
SEC. 2-11.1.   SALE OR RELEASE OF INTERESTS IN REAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   Any sale of real property or any interest in real property, or the
execution of any instrument dealing with or releasing an interest in real
property, is sufficient to convey or release such interest when authorized by
resolution passed by a majority of the city council and signed by the city
manager, or his or her designee, and attested by the city secretary; except
that, when such instrument is in effect for a term of not more than one year,
is to a city public service franchise holder, and is made for the city’s
benefit, then the head of the department concerned is authorized, by permission
of the city manager, to execute the instrument conveying a temporary interest
in real property. When any instrument states on its face that it is authorized
by this section, it is deemed to have been properly authorized and sufficient
to convey or release the interest sought to be conveyed or released.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Subsection (a), the head of the department concerned,
or his or her designee, is authorized, by permission of the city manager, to
execute full or partial releases of:
      (1)   the following notes and liens, upon receipt of any required payment
to the city:
         (A)   a notice of intention to assess for paving;
         (B)   a mechanic’s and materialman’s lien contract for paving or for
water or sewer special assessments;
         (C)   a street paving certificate;
         (D)   a demolition lien;
         (E)   a closure lien;
         (F)   a lien imposed for civil penalties assessed by the municipal
court or the former urban rehabilitation standards board against a structure
found to be an urban nuisance;
         (G)   an abstract of judgment for civil penalties, court costs, and
attorney’s fees assessed on property by a court of competent jurisdiction;
         (H)   a weed cutting lien; and
         (I)   a promissory note secured by any of the liens described in this
subsection; and
      (2)   a lien on property that, upon investigation, is determined to have
been placed in error by the department concerned.
   (c)   Each release executed under Subsection (b) must refer to this section
by number, and this section will be the authority for the release. The release
may, but is not required to, be attested by the city secretary. The head of the
department concerned shall provide the executed and acknowledged release to the
property owner. Unless otherwise required by law or contract, the property
owner is responsible for recording the release at his or her own expense,
except that the head of the department concerned shall promptly file in the
official real property records of the county in which the property is located
an executed release of any lien placed in error by the department concerned.
   (d)   All instruments concerning the conveyance or release of an interest in
real property heretofore executed pursuant to a resolution of the city council
are in all respects ratified and confirmed as the action of the city council
the same as though separately authorized by ordinance. (Ord. Nos. 10893; 11424;
16024; 26517)
SEC. 2-11.2.   ACCEPTANCE OF CONVEYANCE OR ACQUISITION BY EMINENT DOMAIN WHERE
CONSIDERATION IS $100,000 OR LESS.
   (a)   The city manager is authorized to accept and approve on behalf of the
city any legal instrument executed by any person, which grants, gives, conveys,
quitclaims, or releases any right in real property, whether such right is fee
simple or any lesser title, estate, or right, where the total consideration to
be paid by the city for the title, estate, or right is $100,000 or less.
   (b)   The city manager is authorized to acquire any title, estate, or right
in real property by settlement, acceptance of a commissioner’s award, or
payment of a court judgment if:
      (1)   the city council has previously authorized eminent domain
proceedings on the real property; and
      (2)   the total consideration to be paid by the city for the title,
estate, or right in the real property is $100,000 or less.
   (c)   Any such grant, gift, conveyance, quitclaim, release, settlement,
acceptance of a commissioner’s award, or payment of a court judgment mentioned
in this section must be approved by:
      (1)   the head of the city department concerned;
      (2)   the city attorney; and
      (3)   the city controller, if the amount of cash consideration to be paid
by the city exceeds $10. (Ord. Nos. 12734; 15279; 17131; 19875; 20951; 32911)
SEC. 2-11.3.   REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITIONS WHERE CONSIDERATION EXCEEDS $500,000.
   If the consideration to be paid by the city for a proposed acquisition of an
interest in real property exceeds $500,000, the city manager must obtain two
independent fee appraisals of the real property interest to assist in
determining the current market value of the real property interest to be
acquired by the city. To the extent allowed by law and after a review of the
specific circumstances, the city council may, by resolution, waive the
requirement for two independent fee appraisals established under this section
and require only one independent fee appraisal instead. (Ord. Nos. 20818;
26804)
SEC. 2-12.   LEGAL ADVICE.
   Whenever any officer desires legal advice with regard to the performance of
his official duties, he shall apply to the city attorney for the same, and be
guided by his opinion in the matter. (Code 1941, Art. 19-5)
SEC. 2-13.   PUBLIC UTILITIES TO PAY EXPENSE OF OFFICE OF SUPERVISOR OF PUBLIC
UTILITIES - GENERALLY.
   All expenses and disbursements in connection with the maintenance and
operation of the office of supervisor of public utilities, including all
salaries of clerks, assistants, engineers, accountants, and the duly appointed
supervisor, shall be paid pro rata each month by the public service utilities
(exclusive of those operating on an annual flat charge basis), which are
subject to supervision by the supervisor of public utilities, under any law,
charter provision or franchise requirement. The pro rata contribution of each
public service utility shall be in relation to its preceding calendar year
gross receipts and shall be a percentage in relation to the calendar year total
gross receipts of all such public service utilities (exclusive of those
operating on an annual flat charge basis); provided, however, that any direct
pro rata contribution exempt by franchise provisions in which a per cent gross
receipts tax is provided in lieu of direct contribution to the payment on the
salary and expenses and charges of the supervisor of public utilities, and of
his assistants and subordinates shall be paid by the city from its general fund
and in conformity with required budgetary practice. The Dallas Railway &
Terminal Company shall pay a pro rata contribution in the relation that its
total gross receipts for the preceding calendar year bears to the calendar year
total gross receipts of all such public service utilities (exclusive of those
operating on an annual flat charge basis). The moneys collected under this
section shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the city. (Ord.
6622)
SEC. 2-14.   SAME - NOTICE REQUIRED.
   All payments due direct from any public service utility shall be made
monthly on notice from the supervisor of public utilities and such payment
received from public service utilities shall be made to the city and credited
to the general fund, to apply on the maintenance and operation expense of the
office of supervisor of public utilities. (Ord. 3488)
SEC. 2-15.   SAME - “GROSS RECEIPTS” DEFINED.
   Gross receipts means such term as is defined by the provisions of the
several franchises and shall apply to each utility company only in the manner
set forth in the franchise of each such utility. If the term “gross receipts”
is not used in the franchise of any utility subject to Section
2-13 then it shall include whatever equivalent term was used. (Ord. 3488)
SEC. 2-16.   EMINENT DOMAIN PROCEEDINGS FOR PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   When the city council considers it necessary for a public purpose, the
city may condemn public or private personal property, located inside or outside
the city, for any purpose authorized by state law or the city charter.
   (b)   The procedures used to condemn personal property will be the same as
those provided by state law for the condemnation of real property at the time
condemnation proceedings are initiated for the personal property.
   (c)   The measure of damages for the condemnation of personal property is
the local market value of the property at the time of the special
commissioners’ hearing, and, when less than the entire property is condemned,
any damage to the remaining property. The remainder damage will be measured by
the loss, if any, in the market value of the remaining property that is
proximately caused by the condemnation, considering the extent of the injury
and benefit to the remaining property. The injury or benefit considered must be
peculiar to the property owner and must relate to the property owner’s
ownership, use, or enjoyment of the property, but may not include any injury or
benefit that the property owner experiences in common with the general
community. (Ord. 25464)
SEC. 2-17.   PAYMENT OF COST OF PUBLISHING ORDINANCE GRANTING FRANCHISE OR
CLOSING STREET.
   The payment of the costs of publishing the ordinance, in the amount of $20,
shall be made a condition precedent to the granting of any request by the city
council for any franchise or the clearing of title by the abandoning or closing
of any street or alley. Such sum shall be paid in advance by the person seeking
such special privilege or franchise or the abandoning or closing of any street
or alley within five days after the granting of the request and prior to the
publication of the ordinance making the request effective. (Code 1941, Art.
117-3; Ord. 3756)
SEC. 2-17.1.   FISCAL NOTES.
   (a)   The city manager shall prepare a fiscal note to accompany any proposed
project or program presented to the city council if the project or program
increases or decreases revenues or causes the expenditure or diversion of funds
and the project or program is:
      (1)   to be considered by ordinance or resolution as an unbudgeted item;
      (2)   new and is to be considered as a part of the adoption of the annual
budget; or
      (3)   to be considered as part of the adoption of a bond program.
   (b)   A fiscal note shall include a statement of estimated revenues and
expenditures that will result from a proposed project or program in the current
and at least two future fiscal years.
   (c)   The city manager or his designee shall develop procedures and
standardized formats in which to present fiscal impact information. (Ord. No.
17938)
SEC. 2-17.2.   SELECTION OF CITY AUDITOR; NOMINATING COMMISSION.
   (a)   Before the end of each term of a city auditor, or at such other times
when a vacancy occurs or is anticipated to occur in the office of city auditor,
the city council shall appoint a nominating commission to select a city auditor
in accordance with Chapter IX, Section 1 of the city charter. The commission
shall be composed of five members, including a chair and vice-chair, meeting
the following qualifications:
      (1)   One member must be a representative selected by the board of
directors of the Dallas Chapter of one of the following professional
organizations, including the: Texas Society of Certified Public Accountants
(TSCPA); Institute for Internal Auditors (IIA); Information Systems Audit and
Control Association, Inc. (ISACA); Financial Executives International (FEI);
Association of Government Accountants (AGA); or other such organizations
experienced in accounting and auditing.
      (2)   Four members must meet any one of the following qualifications:
         (A)   Be a current or former managing or founding partner of a multi-
national public accounting firm with offices located in the city, excluding any
firm under current contract with the city to provide external audit services.
         (B)   Be one of the following persons associated with a publicly-
traded company headquartered in Dallas County that has at least 500 million
dollars in annual revenue:
            (i)   the current or former chief financial officer;
            (ii)   the current or former chief auditor of an internal audit
group; or
            (iii)   the current or former chief executive officer.
         (C)   Be a former mayor or council member of the city.
         (D)   Be a current or former city auditor of the city.
   (b)   A person appointed to the city auditor nominating commission under
Subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3)(B) of this section is not required to be a resident
or qualified voter of the city of Dallas.
   (c)   The commission shall, within 15 days after being appointed, hold its
first meeting to consider nomination of a person to serve as city auditor.
Within 180 days after its first meeting, the commission shall nominate to the
city council one or more candidates for city auditor selected by a majority of
the commission members. The city council shall, within 30 days after receipt of
the nomination, accept one of the nominated candidates or reject all of the
candidates.
   (d)   If the city council rejects all candidates nominated for city auditor,
it shall immediately notify the commission and request the nomination of
different
candidates. Commission members shall serve until the city council accepts a
candidate nominated by them to be city auditor.
   (e)   The director of human resources of the city shall assist the
commission, when necessary, in seeking and screening applicants for the
position of city auditor.
   (f)   Notwithstanding Subsections (a) through (e) of this section, at the
end of a city auditor’s term (including any period in which a city auditor is
holding over), the city council government performance and financial management
committee may, on its own initiative or at the direction of the city council,
act as a nominating commission and, by a majority vote, nominate the incumbent
city auditor for reappointment by the full city council. If a majority of the
government performance and financial management committee does not vote to
nominate the incumbent city auditor for another term, or if, upon receiving the
nomination from the finance and audit committee, a majority of the city council
does not vote to reappoint the incumbent city auditor for another term, then
the nominating process described in Subsections (a) through (e) must be
followed. (Ord. Nos. 20457; 21157; 22026; 22277; 22414; 25495; 25808; 30969)
SEC. 2-17.3.   NONDISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF CITY SERVICES.
   (a)   The city of Dallas will not discriminate because of a person's race,
color, age, religion, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity and
expression, genetic characteristics, national origin, disability, military or
veteran status, sex, political opinions, or affiliations in the provision of
services to the general public.
   (b)   This section does not create a private cause of action, nor does it
create any right or remedy that is the same or substantially equivalent to the
remedies provided under federal or state law. (Ord. Nos. 25041; 30828)
ARTICLE II.
ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEYS.
SEC. 2-18.   QUALIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENT.
   The city attorney shall select and nominate such assistants, including those
assigned to the municipal courts, as the city council shall determine are
necessary. Each position must be filled by a licensed attorney at law and must
be confirmed by the city council. (Code 1941, Art. 20-1; Ord. Nos. 7956; 13439;
22026; 24410)
SEC. 2-19.   DUTIES.
   Under the direction and control of the city attorney, assistant city
attorneys shall perform all duties required by the city charter, the Dallas
City Code, and any other ordinance or regulation which is enacted by the city
council. All powers which are conferred by the city charter on the city
attorney may be exercised by assistant city attorneys. (Code 1941, Art. 20-2;
Ord. 14995)
SEC. 2-20.   COMPENSATION.
   Each of the assistant city attorneys shall receive such compensation for his
services as may be fixed by the city council at the time of his appointment.
(Code 1941, Art. 20-3)
SEC. 2-20.1.   GUEST ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY PROGRAM.
   (a)   The city attorney is authorized to conduct a volunteer program known
as the guest assistant city attorney program. The purpose of the program is to
allow attorneys who are employed by private law firms or organizations that
provide pro bono legal services to obtain valuable trial experience on a
temporary and voluntary basis while, at the same time, providing a public
service that benefits the city and its citizens.
   (b)   The city attorney may, without further city council approval, enter
into arrangements with private law firms and organizations that provide pro
bono legal services within the city through which volunteer attorneys are
recommended and provided by the law firms and pro bono legal service
organizations to perform work in hearing officer’s court, municipal court, and
other courts, and to appear before city, state, or federal boards, commissions,
and agencies.
   (c)   To participate in the guest assistant city attorney program, a
volunteer attorney:
      (1)   must be approved by the city attorney;
      (2)   pass a conflict of interests check and a background check; and
      (3)   may not owe the city any delinquent taxes, fees, charges, or
penalties.
   (d)   While participating in the guest assistant city attorney program, a
volunteer attorney is not an employee of the city, except that, for purposes of
the city’s officer and employee liability plan, a volunteer attorney is deemed
a plan member under Section
31A-4(5)(D) of this code. The city is not liable for compensation or benefits
(including but not limited to workers’ compensation insurance coverage) to be
paid to the volunteer attorney during the period of participation in the guest
assistant city attorney program. Nothing in this section, or in any other
provision of this code, may be construed to require the city to pay a volunteer
attorney or the attorney’s firm or organization for services rendered during
the period of the volunteer attorney’s participation in the program.
   (e)   A volunteer attorney, while participating in the guest assistant city
attorney program, is subject to the direction of the city attorney and to the
direction of any assistant city attorney designated to supervise the volunteer
attorney.
      (1)   Guest assistant city attorneys prosecuting cases in municipal
court. A volunteer attorney may prosecute cases in the municipal court and
perform tasks incidental to work as a municipal prosecutor, if directed by the
city attorney. For purposes of this article, the city charter, and Section
45.201 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, a volunteer
attorney participating in the guest assistant city attorney program is deemed
an assistant city attorney while carrying out the limited duties of prosecuting
cases in municipal court and performing tasks incidental to work as a municipal
prosecutor.
      (2)   Guest assistant city attorneys not prosecuting cases in municipal
court. A volunteer attorney may handle cases in hearing officer’s court or
other courts, or appear before city, state, or federal boards, commissions, and
agencies, and perform tasks incidental to those duties, if directed by the city
attorney. For purposes of this article, the city charter, as amended, and any
other applicable laws, a volunteer attorney participating in the guest
assistant city attorney program is deemed an assistant city attorney while
carrying out the limited duties of handling cases in hearing officer’s court
and other courts, and appearing before city, state, or federal boards,
commissions, and agencies, and performing tasks incidental to those duties.
   (f)   While participating in the guest assistant city attorney program, a
volunteer attorney may not:
      (1)   perform any legal work for the city other than work described in
this section and approved by the city attorney or any assistant city attorney
designated to supervise the volunteer attorney; or
      (2)   represent any person in a lawsuit, claim, or other proceeding to
which the city is a party, if the interests of that person are adverse to the
interests of the city.
   (g)   While participating in the guest assistant city attorney program, a
private law firm or organization that provides pro bono legal services may not
represent any person in a lawsuit, claim, or other proceeding to which the city
is a party, if the interests of that person are adverse to the interests of the
city.
   (h)   A volunteer attorney, while participating in the guest assistant city
attorney program, is subject to the restrictions of
Chapter 12A of this code, as amended. A violation of any provision of
Chapter 12A, this section, or a directive of the city attorney or any assistant
city attorney designated to supervise the volunteer attorney may result in
termination of the volunteer attorney’s participation in the program. The city
attorney may also, in the city attorney’s discretion, terminate any arrangement
with the private law firm or organizations that provide pro bono legal services
that employs a volunteer attorney who commits a violation of any provision
described in this subsection.
(Ord. Nos. 24219; 30089)
ARTICLE III.
MANAGEMENT AND SALE OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY.
Division 1. Generally.
SEC. 2-21.   INVENTORY OF REAL PROPERTY.
   The city manager shall maintain, as part of the city’s computerized fixed
asset system, a descriptive roster of real property owned by the city. (Ord.
Nos. 17259; 28684)
SEC. 2-22.   EXAMINATION OF NEED.
   The city manager shall conduct an annual examination of the need for city-
owned real property. In conducting this analysis, the city manager shall
consider the city’s real property requirements expressed through master plans
for public facilities, including, but not limited to, libraries, water and
wastewater, police and fire, district service centers, streets, and parks. If
no need currently or prospectively exists as identified by specific master
plans, the real property shall be considered unneeded, and the city manager
shall report these findings to the city council and, when appropriate, submit
an analysis including zoning, land uses, and development potential in the
vicinity of the property. (Ord. Nos. 17259; 28684)
SEC. 2-23.   DECISION TO SELL.
   The city council shall determine whether real property should be offered for
sale by the city and whether any limitations should be placed on the future use
of the property. (Ord. Nos. 17259; 28684)
SEC. 2-24.   PROCEDURES FOR THE SALE OF UNNEEDED REAL PROPERTY BY FORMAL BID OR
NEGOTIATION.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements of Chapter 272 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended, and except as provided in Subsection (f) of this
section, the city manager shall follow the procedures described in this section
for the sale of real property other than property used as public right-of-way.
   (b)   If property has an estimated value of less than $100,000, the city
staff shall make an appraisal of the property to determine fair market value.
If property has an estimated value of $100,000 or more, the city manager shall
obtain an independent appraisal of the property to determine fair market value.
The appraisal shall be prepared for the city, and the appraiser shall be
selected by the city manager.
   (c)   In order to publicize the availability of property for sale and to
attract the attention of all potential buyers, at least 60 days before
initiation of formal bid procedures, the city manager shall:
      (1)   prepare a notice of the contemplated offer for sale and descriptive
information and send it to:
         (A)   all property owners within 200 feet of the property;
         (B)   real estate brokers known to be active within the immediate
community; and
         (C)   neighborhood associations within the immediate community;
      (2)   place a “for sale” sign or signs on the property; and
      (3)   if the estimated value of the property is more than $100,000 and
the property can be developed independently under the Dallas Development Code
and the Dallas Building Code, place display advertising giving notice of
availability of the property in appropriate newspapers or periodicals.
   (d)   If the property can be developed independently under the Dallas
Development Code and the Dallas Building Code and there is evidence of an
interest in the purchase of the property, the city manager shall initiate
formal bid procedures in accordance with state law and send bid invitations to
potential buyers.
   (e)   If the property cannot be developed independently under the Dallas
Development Code and the Dallas Building Code or is otherwise exempted from bid
procedures and publication requirements under state law and there is evidence
of an interest in the purchase of the property, the city manager shall initiate
negotiations for the sale of the property in accordance with Chapter 272 of the
Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
   (f)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   the sale or exchange of land to other governmental entities; or
      (2)   the sale of real property by public auction under Section
2-24.1 of this division.
   (g)   The procedures required by this section that are not required by state
law may be waived or modified, by city council resolution, with respect to a
particular parcel of land. (Ord. Nos. 17259; 17457; 20559; 28684)
SEC. 2-24.1.   PROCEDURES FOR THE SALE OF UNNEEDED REAL PROPERTY BY PUBLIC
AUCTION.
   (a)   Instead of selling real property pursuant to Section
2-24 of this division, the city may sell real property by public auction in
accordance with this section and Sections 253.008 and 272.001 of the Texas
Local Government Code, as amended.
   (b)   Before real property is offered for sale at a public auction, the city
council, by resolution, shall authorize the sale by public auction and
establish a reserve amount for the property that will be the minimum price
acceptable to the city for that property.
   (c)   Notice of a public auction for the sale of real property must be
published once a week, for three consecutive weeks before the auction, in a
newspaper of general circulation in a county in which the city is located, and,
if the real property is located in another county, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county in which the property is located. The first
publication of the notice must be before the 20th day before the date of the
auction. The notice must include:
      (1)   the description and location of the real property;
      (2)   the date, time, and location of the public auction; and
      (3)   the procedures to be followed at the public auction.
   (d)   A public auction to sell real property must be conducted in accordance
with procedures established by the city manager that are not in conflict with
this division, the city charter, Sections 253.008 and 272.001 of the Texas
Local Government Code, as amended, or other applicable law.
   (e)   The procedures required by this section that are not required by state
law may be waived or modified, by city council resolution, with respect to a
particular parcel of land. (Ord. 28684)
SEC. 2-25.   TYPE OF CONVEYANCE.
   The city attorney shall determine the type of conveyance or other instrument
to be executed by the city prior to the initiation of formal bid procedures or
public auction procedures, and this information may be included in the notice
when necessary. (Ord. Nos. 17259; 28684)
SEC. 2-26.   BIDDER INFORMATION.
   A bidder for the purchase of real property or an interest in real property
from the city, whether bidding through formal bid procedures or at a public
auction, must state the full name of the prospective purchaser as it should
appear in an instrument of conveyance. If a bid is made on behalf of another
person, firm, trust, partnership, association, or corporation, disclosure of
the facts relating to the agency may be required by the city manager. Failure
to furnish the information upon request, before or after bid acceptance, is
grounds for rejection of a submitted or accepted bid. (Ord. Nos. 17259; 28684)
SEC. 2-26.1.   CITY MANAGER RECOMMENDATION AND AWARD OF SALE.
   (a)   Formal bid procedures and negotiated sales. After receipt and
tabulation of bids using formal bid procedures or after reaching agreement for
a negotiated sale under Section
2-24 of this division, the city manager shall make a recommendation to the city
council. The city council may act by resolution to award or reject the sale.
Upon approval, the city attorney shall prepare and the city manager shall
execute an appropriate instrument of conveyance.
   (b)   Public auction.
      (1)   After receipt and tabulation of bids at a public auction under
Section
2-24.1 of this division, the city manager shall determine whether the highest
qualifying bid equals or exceeds the reserve amount established by the city
council for the real property.
      (2)   If the highest qualifying bid at the public auction equals or
exceeds the reserve amount established for the property, the city manager may,
without further council action, execute with the successful bidder a purchase
and sales agreement and an appropriate instrument of conveyance, as prepared by
the city attorney.
      (3)   If the highest qualifying bid is less than the reserve amount
established for the property, the city manager shall make a recommendation to
the city council, and the city council may, by resolution, accept or reject the
sale. Upon approval of a sale by the city council, the city attorney shall
prepare and the city manager shall execute a purchase and sales agreement and
an appropriate instrument of conveyance.
      (4)   For purposes of this subsection, “highest qualifying bid,” means
the highest bid received from a prospective purchaser who is financially
capable of purchasing the property and meets all qualifications established by
the city for ownership of the property. (Ord. Nos. 17259; 28684)
SEC. 2-26.2.   ABANDONMENT OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (a)   Application by property owner. A property owner whose property abuts a
public right-of-way may apply to the city manager for abandonment, in whole or
in part, of the abutting right-of-way. An application must be accompanied by:
      (1)   a nonrefundable application fee of $5,000, plus recording fees;
      (2)   the written concurrence of all persons who own property abutting
the area proposed to be abandoned; and
      (3)   copies of recorded deeds showing current ownership of all property
abutting the area proposed to be abandoned.
   (b)   Investigation and notice. Upon receipt of an application for
abandonment of a public right-of-way, the city manager or the city manager’s
designee shall investigate the request and send written notice of the requested
abandonment to all affected city departments, all public service franchise
holders, and, if the proposed right-of-way abandonment is outside of the
central business district freeway loop, then to all persons owning property
within 300 feet of the right-of- way proposed to be abandoned.
   (c)   Date of valuation. The date for establishing the market value of the
area proposed to be abandoned is the date the abandonment request is considered
by the city council. Any independent appraisal used to establish market value
for an abandonment must be performed not more than 180 days before the date on
which the city council considers the abandonment request. The city manager or
the city manager’s designee may require that a more current independent
appraisal be performed at the applicant’s expense if the city manager or the
city manager’s designee determines that the market value of the proposed
abandonment area has significantly changed since the date of the last
independent appraisal.
   (d)   Market value.
      (1)   If the estimated abandonment fee, to be established in accordance
with Subsection (f), is less than $20,000:
         (A)   the city staff may use the appraised land value per square foot,
as determined by the Dallas Central Appraisal District, of a fee simple
interest in a useable tract of an abutting property to determine market value
of the area proposed to be abandoned; or
         (B)   the city manager or the city manager’s designee may obtain an
independent appraisal of the property to determine the per-square- foot market
value of the area proposed to be abandoned, if the city manager or city
manager’s designee has reason to believe the proposed abandonment area has
experienced increases in property value.
      (2)   If the estimated abandonment fee is $20,000 or more, the city
manager or the city manager’s designee shall obtain an independent appraisal of
the property to determine the per-square-foot market value of the area proposed
to be abandoned.
      (3)   If an independent appraisal is obtained under Paragraph (1)(B) or
(2) of this subsection, the proposed abandonment area must be appraised as if
it were an assembled portion of the applicant’s abutting property. The
applicant shall pay the city the cost of an independent appraisal whether or
not the abandonment is approved.
   (e)   Cases of disputed value. If the first appraisal obtained by the city
is disputed by the applicant, the applicant shall obtain a second independent
appraisal at the applicant’s expense. If the city manager or the city manager’s
designee determines that there is a substantial difference between the two
appraisals, the city manager or the city manager’s designee shall engage an
independent appraiser to perform a review appraisal, the cost of which must be
paid by the applicant. The city manager or the city manager’s designee shall
then make a final determination of market value, which will be binding upon
both parties.
   (f)   Fees for abandonment. Before the city council authorizes the
abandonment of all or part of a public right-of-way, the applicant shall pay an
abandonment fee calculated in accordance with one of the following methods:
      (1)   Fee for a street, alley, or storm water management area
abandonment: an amount equal to the square footage of the area abandoned x the
market value of the area per square foot, or a $11,150 processing fee,
whichever is greater. If property rights are retained by the city, the
appraiser may, if warranted, discount the market value up to, but not
exceeding:
         (A)   15% for a full abandonment with any encumbrance or easement
retained;
         (B)   30% for an air rights abandonment;
         (C)   70% for a subsurface rights abandonment; and
         (D)   85% for an air rights abandonment deed restricted against use.
      (2)   Fee for an abandonment of a utility or drainage easement originally
dedicated to the city at no cost: $11,150 processing fee, plus $1,000 for each
easement in excess of five being abandoned.
      (3)   Fee for an abandonment of a utility or drainage easement originally
purchased by the city: an amount equal to the greatest of:
         (A)   the square footage of the area abandoned x the market value of
the area per square foot x 50%;
         (B)   the square footage of the area abandoned x the per-square-foot
purchase price of the easement when originally purchased by the city; or
         (C)   a $11,150 processing fee.
      (4)   Fee for an abandonment of a street, alley, or storm water
management area originally dedicated at no cost to the city when the original
dedicator applies for abandonment before the sale of abutting property has been
made: $11,150 processing fee.
   (g)   Other abandonment regulations. The following regulations govern
abandonment of public rights-of-way when applicable:
      (1)   If additional property owned by an applicant in the area of the
proposed abandonment is needed by the city for public streets or other public
purposes, the applicant may be allowed a square foot for sq
      (2)   An applicant will not be allowed a credit against the proposed
abandonment for the dedication of a utility easement or the conversion of a
right-of-way to a utility easement.
      (3)   An applicant will not be allowed a credit against the proposed
abandonment for conversion of a right-of-way to a private street, private
alley, or private drive, except when allowed under Subsection (h) of this
section.
      (4)   The fees and procedures specified in this section, except for the
processing fees required by Subsections (f), (g)(1), and (h)(4), may be waived
or modified for a particular parcel of land upon approval of the city council,
unless otherwise provided by another city ordinance, the city charter, or state
law.
   (h)   Abandonment credit for private streets, alleys, and drives.
      (1)   An applicant will be allowed a credit against the proposed
abandonment of a public right-of- way in a residential development if the
applicant is a developer who has acquired an area for development and agrees to
construct the following or is a homeowner or homeowner association who desires
to convert existing public streets and alleys in a development into the
following:
         (A)   private streets and private alleys in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH,
TH(A), CH, or central area district, as defined in the Dallas Development Code,
adequate to serve the area’s development, provided that:
            (i)   each private street or private alley complies with all
standards and requirements governing private streets and alleys set forth in
Section
51A-4.211 of the Dallas Development Code;
            (ii)   the applicant obtains a special use permit for each private
street or private alley as required by Section
51A-4.211 of the Dallas Development Code;
            (iii)   the applicant agrees to accept full responsibility for
maintenance of each private street or private alley; and
            (iv)   any existing public street or alley, when converted to a
private street or alley, may not be altered except as necessary to maintain the
street or alley in the same or better condition;
         (B)   private drives in an MF or MF(A) district, as defined in the
Dallas Development Code, provided that:
            (i)   each private drive is built to the same specifications as a
street dedicated to public use, with a minimum width of 24 feet with no curb
requirement, when adjacent to parking, and a minimum width of 20 feet with a
curb requirement, when not adjacent to parking; and
            (ii)   each private drive contains service easements including, but
not limited to, utilities, fire lanes, street lighting, government vehicle
access, mail collection and delivery access, and utility meter reading access;
or
         (C)   private drives in a multifamily housing development located
within a planned development district, provided that:
            (i)   each private drive or portion of a private drive for which a
credit is claimed is located within the city’s Intown Housing Program area,
which is described in Resolution Nos. 93-1822 and 96-0279 as that area
contained within a one-mile radius of the central business district;
            (ii)   each private drive is built to the same specifications as a
street dedicated to public use, with a minimum width of 24 feet with no curb
requirement, when adjacent to parking, and a minimum width of 20 feet with a
curb requirement, when not adjacent to parking;
            (iii)   each private drive contains service easements including,
but not limited to, utilities, fire lanes, street lighting, government vehicle
access, mail collection and delivery access, and utility meter reading access;
and
            (iv)   only that portion or side of a private drive that abuts
property used exclusively for multifamily housing is eligible for the credit.
      (2)   A private street, private alley, or private drive for which a
credit is allowed must be restricted to residential uses only for 40 years from
the date of passage of the abandonment ordinance, unless the restriction is
sooner removed by ordinance of the city council. If the restriction is removed
before the 40-year period expires, the applicant, or the applicant’s heirs,
successors, or assigns, shall pay a nonprorated abandonment fee calculated in
accordance with the requirements of this section as those requirements existed
on the date the abandonment ordinance was originally passed.
      (3)   If a public right-of-way is abandoned under this subsection to a
homeowner association for conversion to a private street, private alley, or
private drive, the ordinance authorizing the abandonment must include a
provision stating that, if the homeowner association becomes defunct, each
individual homeowner, and each homeowner’s heirs, successors, and assigns,
shall become liable for all of the terms and conditions of the abandonment
ordinance.
      (4)   Before the city council authorizes the abandonment of all or part
of a public right-of-way for conversion to a private street, private alley, or
private drive for which a credit is allowed under this subsection, the
applicant shall pay a fee of $11,150 for processing the transaction, plus all
applicable application, appraisal, and recording fees. (Ord. Nos. 17642; 18056;
19455; 19875; 23345; 24051; 24057; 25048; 25651; 26598; 27980; 28684; 29477;
32310; 32863; 32926)
SEC. 2-26.3.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 23694)
Division 2. Alternate Manner of Sale of Real Property to Nonprofit
Organizations for Affordable Housing.
SEC. 2-26.4.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   It is the intent of the city council in adopting this division to
establish, in accordance with Section 253.010 of the Texas Local Government
Code, as amended, an alternate manner of sale of tax-foreclosed and seized real
property to nonprofit organizations to provide for affordable housing in the
city.
   (b)   Nothing in this division may be construed to require the city council
to approve the sale of land to a nonprofit organization, to approve zoning
changes for the land, or to provide funding for any proposal submitted under
this division. (Ord. Nos. 23713; 24046; 25443)
SEC. 2-26.5.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   AFFORDABLE HOUSING means:
         (A)   owner-occupied housing that:
            (i)   is sold or resold under this division to a low-income
individual or family; and
            (ii)   has a purchase price and an estimated appraised value at
acquisition that does not exceed 95 percent of the “HUD 203B” maximum mortgage
amounts established and published annually by HUD in Part 203, Title 24 of the
Code of Federal Regulations, as amended; or
         (B)   renter-occupied housing for which housing expenses do not exceed
HUD fair market rents, as defined in Part 888, Title 24 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, as amended.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to administer this division, or the director’s authorized
representative.
      (3)   HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
      (4)   LAND or PROPERTY means any real property that has been acquired by
the city, for itself or as trustee for any other taxing unit, pursuant to
Chapters 33 and 34 of the Texas Property Tax Code, as amended, by:
         (A)   foreclosure of a tax lien; or
         (B)   seizure.
      (5)   LAND ASSEMBLY PROGRAM means a city program established by
Resolution No. 97-1504, as amended, that provides for the sale of tax-
foreclosed properties to qualified nonprofit organizations for the furtherance
of city-approved public purposes.
      (6)   LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUAL OR FAMILY means an individual or family whose
annual income does not exceed 80 percent of the median income for the Dallas
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, as determined annually by HUD, with
adjustments for smaller and larger families.
      (7)   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION means:
         (A)   a nonprofit corporation described by 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(3)
that:
            (i)   has been incorporated in the State of Texas for at least one
year;
            (ii)   has a corporate purpose to develop affordable housing that
is stated in its articles of incorporation, bylaws, or charter;
            (iii)   has at least one-fourth of its board of directors residing
in the city; and
            (iv)   engages primarily in the building, repair, rental, or sale
of housing for low-income individuals and families; or
         (B)   a joint venture or partnership between:
            (i)   a nonprofit corporation organized and existing under the laws
of the State of Texas that develops affordable housing for low-income
individuals and families as a primary activity to promote community-based
revitalization of the city; and
            (ii)   a nonprofit corporation or other nonprofit legal entity
composed of residents of or property owners in the community or neighborhood in
which land subject to a purchase proposal under this division is located.
      (8)   TAXING UNIT means a taxing unit, as defined in Section 1.04(12) of
the Texas Property Tax Code, as amended, that is a party to a judgment for
delinquent taxes on a property or that has acquired seized property pursuant to
a tax warrant. (Ord. Nos. 23713; 24046)
SEC. 2-26.6.   ALTERNATE METHOD OF SALE FOR TAX-FORECLOSED OR SEIZED REAL
PROPERTY.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any conflicting provision of Division 1 of this
article, land on which a tax lien has been foreclosed in favor of the city or
land that has been seized by the city may be sold to a nonprofit organization
for the purpose of providing affordable housing in accordance with this
division and Section 253.010 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
The land may be located anywhere within the corporate city limits, but must be
currently zoned for residential use.
   (b)   Any nonprofit organization purchasing land under this division must
develop the land for sale or lease of affordable housing units to low-income
individuals and families within three years of obtaining a quitclaim deed from
the city. The affordable housing may be single-family or multi-family units.
   (c)   Subject to approval by the governing bodies of all other affected
taxing units, the city council may by resolution:
      (1)   approve changes to a nonprofit organization’s proposal to develop
affordable housing on land purchased from the city under this division, with
any material changes being subject to the public hearing requirements set forth
in Section
2-26.7; and
      (2)   extend the three-year development period in which a nonprofit
organization is required to construct affordable housing units on land
purchased from the city under this division. (Ord. Nos. 23713; 24046; 25443)
SEC. 2-26.7.   PURCHASE PROPOSALS BY NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS; PROCEDURES AND
REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY APPROVAL OR REJECTION OF PROPOSALS.
   (a)   A nonprofit organization wanting to purchase land under this division
must submit a complete proposal to the director. The proposal must include all
of the following information:
      (1)   Evidence that the requestor is a qualified nonprofit organization.
      (2)   A plan to develop the land as either single-family or multi-family
affordable housing for low-income individuals or families in compliance with
this code and all other applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws.
      (3)   A timetable showing the commencement of construction, completion of
construction, and occupancy of affordable housing on the land by low- income
individuals or families.
      (4)   Evidence of a citizen participation plan or the approval of area
residents of the use of the land by the nonprofit organization.
      (5)   Identification and sources of the necessary project financing.
      (6)   Evidence that the requestor is not delinquent in payment to the
city of any fees, charges, taxes, or liens, or, if delinquent, has paid at
least one- third of the total amount owed and is currently on an approved
payout arrangement with the city.
      (7)   Evidence that the requestor is current on payment of taxes and
liens owed to any other affected taxing unit under the Texas Property Tax Code.
   (b)   At the time of submitting its proposal, the nonprofit organization
must also demonstrate to the director’s satisfaction its compliance with
approved development plans and timetables for all other property that the
nonprofit organization has acquired under this division or under the city’s
land assembly program. The city may not consider the proposal of any nonprofit
organization that the director finds is not in compliance with the development
plans, timetables, this code, or other applicable city ordinances or state or
federal laws on other properties acquired under this division or the land
assembly program.
   (c)   If, after investigating the facts set forth in the proposal, the
director determines that the nonprofit organization does not meet all
requirements for receiving a quitclaim of land under this division, the
director shall reject the proposal. The director shall notify the nonprofit
organization in writing of the director's decision. The notice must state the
reason the proposal was rejected and that the nonprofit organization may appeal
the director's decision under Section
2-26.14 of this division.
   (d)   If the director determines that the nonprofit organization meets all
requirements for receiving a quitclaim of land under this division, the
director shall route the proposal to the affected city departments and taxing
units for review. After receiving responses from all affected departments and
taxing units, the city manager shall recommend to the city council whether to
approve or reject the proposal.
   (e)   Not less than 10 calendar days before the city council takes action on
a proposal submitted under this section or holds a public hearing on a proposal
under Subsection (f) of this section, the director shall conspicuously post
notice of the proposal on each property that is subject to the proposal. The
notice must state that the property will be considered for purchase by a
nonprofit organization for the development of affordable housing and provide a
telephone number by which the public can obtain more information about the
proposal.
   (f)   The city council shall hold a public hearing before taking action on a
proposal submitted by a nonprofit organization described in Section
2-26.5(7)(A). The director shall send written notice of the public hearing to
all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the boundary of the area
subject to the proposal. The measurement of the 200 feet includes streets and
alleys. The notice must be given not less than 10 calendar days before the date
set for the hearing by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage
paid in the United States mail to the property owners as evidenced by the last
approved city tax roll. This notice must be written in English and Spanish if
the area subject to the proposal is located wholly or partly within a census
tract in which 50 percent or more of the inhabitants are persons of Spanish
origin or descent according to the most recent federal decennial census. The
director shall also give notice of the public hearing in the official newspaper
of the city not less than 10 calendar days before the hearing date. After
notice of a public hearing has been given, a nonprofit organization may not
amend its proposal without city council approval.
   (g)   A proposal must be adopted by resolution of the city council and by an
appropriate act of the governing body of each of the other affected taxing
units before any land may be quitclaimed to a nonprofit organization under this
division. (Ord. Nos. 23713; 25047; 27697; 32002; 33224)
SEC. 2-26.8.   MULTIPLE PROPOSALS FOR THE SAME LAND.
   If two or more nonprofit organizations request the same land, their
proposals will be considered as follows:
      (1)   A nonprofit organization that needs the land as an outparcel to
complete development of an affordable housing project will be given first
preference to acquire the land.
      (2)   A nonprofit organization that is certified by the city as a
community housing development organization, as that term is defined in Part
92.02, Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended, will be given
second preference to acquire the land if the land is located in its
neighborhood area of emphasis for the development of affordable housing, as
that area is defined in its certification by the city.
      (3)   If none of the nonprofit organizations is entitled to preference
under Subsection (1) or (2) of this section, or if more than one of the
nonprofit organizations is entitled to preference under Subsection (1) or (2)
of this section, the city council will evaluate the competing proposals for the
land and accept the one determined to be in the best interest of the city.
(Ord. 23713)
SEC. 2-26.9.   PURCHASE PRICE OF LAND.
   (a)   A nonprofit organization that purchases land under this division shall
pay the following amounts to the city for the land:
      (1)   a fixed price of $1,000 for up to 7,500 square feet of land
purchased under a single proposal, plus $0.133 for each additional square foot
of land purchased under the proposal, which amounts will be distributed by the
city in accordance with Section 34.06 of the Texas Property Tax Code, as
amended; and
      (2)   a sum equal to the actual fees charged by the county clerk for
recording in the real property records the sheriff’s deed and the quitclaim
deed for the land.
   (b)   No amount paid under this section may be refunded by the city, even if
the land reverts to the city under Section
2-26.12. (Ord. Nos. 23713; 24046)
SEC. 2-26.10.   QUITCLAIM DEED.
   (a)   Upon approval of a proposal under this division by the city council
and the governing bodies of all other affected taxing units, the city manager
is authorized to execute a quitclaim deed, approved as to form by the city
attorney, quitclaiming the land to the nonprofit organization, subject to the
possibility of reverter with right of reentry, deed restrictions, and the terms
and conditions of this division and the proposal and subject to any redemption
rights in the property provided by state law.
   (b)   The quitclaim deed to the land must contain all of the following:
      (1)   A copy or summary of the proposal from the nonprofit organization
for the land and a requirement that the land be developed by the nonprofit
organization in accordance with the proposal and the timetable specified in the
proposal.
      (2)   A possibility of reverter with right of reentry providing that:
         (A)   the property may revert to the city of Dallas under the
conditions set forth in Section
2-26.12 of this division; and
         (B)   the nonprofit organization and its successors and assigns shall
be responsible for removal of all liens and encumbrances against the property
that have occurred since the nonprofit organization received the quitclaim deed
from the city.
      (3)   Deed restrictions that:
         (A)   restrict:
            (i)   the sale and resale of owner-occupied property to low-income
individuals or families for five years after the date the deed from the
nonprofit organization to the initial homebuyer is filed in the real property
records of the county in which the property is located; and
            (ii)   the lease or occupancy of any rental property developed on
the land to low-income individuals or families for 15 years after the date of
initial occupancy of the property;
         (B)   require the nonprofit organization, for 15 years from the date
of initial occupancy of rental property developed on the land, to maintain 50
percent of any multi-family housing units for occupancy by low-income
individuals or families as affordable housing;
         (C)   require the nonprofit organization to develop all proposed
housing units on the land in accordance with this code and all applicable city
ordinances and state and federal laws within three years after receiving the
quitclaim deed to the land, or by the end of any extended development period
approved by the city council under Section
2-26.6(c), and to obtain inspections and approval of the housing units by the
city before initial occupancy;
         (D)   require any low-income individual or family who purchases a
housing unit on the land or, if a housing unit is not owner-occupied, the
nonprofit organization that constructed the rental housing unit to maintain
each housing unit and all improvements on the land in accordance with this code
and all applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws during the five-
year or 15-year affordability period, whichever applies;
         (E)   require the five-year and 15-year affordability restrictions of
this division, whichever applies, to be enforced:
            (i)   in the case of the initial sale of owner-occupied property,
by the nonprofit organization, which must submit to the director verification
of income information for the purchasers of the housing unit at least 30
calendar days prior to closing and receive the director’s written approval of
the low-income qualifications of that purchaser;
            (ii)   in the case of subsequent resales of owner-occupied
property, by the owner of the housing unit, who must submit verification to the
director of income information for a subsequent purchaser at least 30 calendar
days prior to closing and receive the director’s written approval of the low-
income qualifications of that purchaser; and
            (iii)   in the case of rental property, by the nonprofit
organization, which must submit to the director monthly tenant income and
rental information as specified and required by the director and permit the
city to conduct annual inspections of rental property for compliance with this
code and all applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws; and
         (F)   require the nonprofit organization to provide need-based social
services to tenants of any rental property developed on the land that contains
more than 25 housing units.
      (4)   An indemnification of the city and other affected taxing units by
the nonprofit organization.
      (5)   A statement and acknowledgement that the property is quitclaimed
subject to all redemption rights provided by state law.
      (6)   Such other terms and conditions as are required by the city for the
resale of tax-foreclosed or seized property, whichever applies. (Ord. Nos.
23713; 24046; 25443)
SEC. 2-26.11.   RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF LAND.
   (a)   A nonprofit organization may sell or lease housing units developed on
the property only to low-income individuals and families under the terms,
conditions, and restrictions of this division and the nonprofit organization’s
proposal and quitclaim deed.
   (b)   Land quitclaimed to a nonprofit organization under this division may
be resold to another nonprofit organization prior to development without the
property reverting to the city if:
      (1)   the city manager recommends the resale after reviewing the new
proposal submitted in compliance with Section
2-26.7; and
      (2)   the resale is approved by the city council and the governing bodies
of all other affected taxing units.
   (c)   Land quitclaimed to a nonprofit organization under this division may
not otherwise be resold, conveyed, or transferred prior to completion of the
development of affordable housing on the land and occupancy of the housing by
low-income individuals and families, except that a nonprofit organization may
grant a security interest in the property for purposes of developing the land,
subject to the city’s possibility of reverter with right of reentry and the
terms, conditions, and restrictions of this division and the nonprofit
organization’s proposal and quitclaim deed. (Ord. 23713)
SEC. 2-26.12.   POSSIBILITY OF REVERTER WITH RIGHT OF REENTRY.
   (a)   Land acquired by a nonprofit organization under this division may
revert to the city if the director determines that the nonprofit organization:
      (1)   has failed to take possession of the land within 90 calendar days
after receiving the quitclaim deed to the land;
      (2)   has failed to complete construction of affordable housing on the
land within three years after receiving the quitclaim deed to the land, or by
the end of any extended development period approved by the city council under
Section
2-26.6(c);
      (3)   is not developing the land in compliance with the timetable
specified in the nonprofit organization’s proposal;
      (4)   is unable to develop the land in compliance with its proposal
because a request for a zoning change has been denied;
      (5)   has incurred a lien on the property because of violations of this
code or other city ordinances within three years after receiving the quitclaim
deed to the land; or
      (6)   has sold, conveyed, or transferred the land without the consent of
the city and other affected taxing units within three years after receiving the
quitclaim deed to the land.
   (b)   Upon determination by the director that a condition described in
Subsection (a) of this section has occurred, the city manager is authorized to
execute an instrument, approved as to form by the city attorney, exercising
against the land the city’s possibility of reverter with right to reentry.
   (c)   The director shall file notice of the reverter and reentry of the land
by the city in the real property records of the county in which the land is
located, which notice must specify the reason for the reverter and reentry. The
director shall provide a copy of the notice to the nonprofit organization in
person or by mailing the notice to the nonprofit organization’s post office
address as shown on the tax rolls of the city or of the county in which the
land is located. (Ord. Nos. 23713; 25443)
SEC. 2-26.13.   RELEASE OF REVERTER RIGHTS AND DEED RESTRICTIONS.
   The city manager is authorized to execute instruments, approved as to form
by the city attorney, releasing the city’s possibility of reverter with right
of reentry and terminating the deed restrictions to the land upon compliance
with all terms and conditions of this division and the nonprofit organization’s
proposal. (Ord. 23713)
SEC. 2-26.14.   APPEALS.
   (a)   A nonprofit organization may appeal a decision of the director
rejecting the nonprofit organization’s proposal to purchase land under this
division if the nonprofit organization requests an appeal in writing, delivered
to the city manager not more than 10 calendar days after notice of the
director’s decision is received.
   (b)   The city manager or a designated representative shall act as the
appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing
officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and
make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing
under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling based on a
preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the
decision of the director being appealed. The decision of the hearing officer is
final as to available administrative remedies. (Ord. 23713)
ARTICLE IV.
PROCUREMENT.
Division 1. Purchasing and Contracting Generally.
SEC. 2-27.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   ALTERNATIVE DELIVERY METHOD means one of the methods authorized by
Chapter 2269 of the Texas Government Code, as amended, for contracting for
facility construction.
      (2)   CITY EXPENDITURE means the payment of money by the city directly to
a vendor or contractor pursuant to a city-awarded contract in consideration of
goods furnished to or services performed on behalf of the city, or in
consideration of the accomplishment of some other lawful public or municipal
purpose, regardless of the source or nature of the funds used by the city to
make payment and regardless of the form of contract used.
      (3)   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ITEM means the purchase, by competitive
sealed proposal as required in Section 252.021(d) of the Texas Local Government
Code, as amended, of goods or services pursuant to a community development
program established under Chapter 373 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, in which the source of the city expenditure for the purchase is
derived exclusively from an appropriation, loan, or grant of funds from the
federal or state government for community development purposes.
      (4)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to administer this chapter or the director's authorized
representatives.
      (5)   FACILITY has the meaning given that term in Chapter 2269 of the
Texas Government Code, as amended.
      (6)   GENERAL SERVICES means insurance (including insurance-related
services such as claims adjustment and policy administration), technical
services related to the purchase of a high technology item, or other types of
manual, physical, or intellectual labor performed on behalf of the city and
purchased for a lawful municipal purpose. The term does not include personal
services, professional services, planning services, or facility construction.
      (7)   GOODS means supplies, equipment, or other personal property,
including but not limited to high technology items, purchased and used for a
lawful municipal purpose.
      (8)   GOVERNMENTAL CONTRACT has the meaning given that term in Chapter
2252, Subchapter A, Texas Government Code, as amended.
      (9)   HIGH TECHNOLOGY ITEM means an item of equipment, goods, or services
of a highly technical nature, including but not limited to:
         (A)   data processing equipment and software and firmware used in
conjunction with data processing equipment;
         (B)   telecommunications equipment and radio and microwave systems;
         (C)   electronic distributed control systems, including building
energy management systems; and
         (D)   technical services related to those items listed in Paragraphs
(A) through (C) of this subsection.
      (10)   LOCAL BUSINESS means a business with a principal place of business
within the city.
      (11)   NONRESIDENT BIDDER has the meaning given that term in Chapter
2252, Subchapter A, Texas Government Code, as amended.
      (12)   PERSONAL SERVICES means any service personally performed by the
individual with whom the city has contracted.
      (13)   PLANNING SERVICES has the meaning given that term in Section
252.001, Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
      (14)   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS means:
         (A)   the headquarters of a business or the primary executive or
administrative office of a business from which the operations and activities of
the business are directed, controlled, and coordinated by its officers or
owners; or
         (B)   an established office, plant, store, warehouse, or other
facility where the majority of the business' operations and activities are
conducted and located, except that a location solely used as a message center,
post office box, mail drop, or similar service or activity that provides no
substantial function to the business is not a principal place of business.
      (15)   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES means those services defined as professional
services under state law applicable to municipal purchases or contracts,
including but not limited to services provided by accountants, architects,
artists, attorneys, auditors, construction managers, court reporters, doctors,
engineers, interior designers, optometrists, real estate appraisers, registered
nurses, land surveyors, scientists, and teachers.
      (16)   SERVICE ORDER means an authorization to make a payment under
$3,000, without the requirement of a contract, and on a form approved by the
city attorney. (Ord. Nos. 24243; 24410; 25047; 25819; 27697; 28705; 30654;
30828; 31872)
SEC. 2-28.   OFFICE OF PROCUREMENT SERVICES; POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR
AS CITY PURCHASING AGENT.
   (a)   There is hereby created a division of the city manager's office to be
known as the office of procurement services, the head of which shall be the
director of procurement services who shall be appointed by the city manager and
who shall be a person professionally competent by experience and training to
manage the office. The office will be composed of the director of procurement
services and such other assistants and employees as the city council may
provide by ordinance upon recommendation of the city manager.
   (b)   The director of procurement services shall perform the following
duties:
      (1)   Direct and administer the office of procurement services.
      (2)   Serve, or designate a person to serve, as the city purchasing
agent.
      (3)   Except where otherwise directed in this code, supervise all
purchases by the city, other than real property, in accordance with this
article and state law.
      (4)   Sell personal property of the city not needed for public use.
      (5)   Keep accurate inventories of all property under the director's
supervision.
      (6)   Maintain the store rooms and warehouses placed under the director's
supervision.
      (7)   Perform such other duties as are assigned by the city manager.
(Code 1941, Art. 27-1; Ord. Nos. 13104; 17157; 18094; 19312; 21674; 24243;
24410; 25047; 25819; 27697; 30654)
SEC. 2-29.   APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, if the director determines that
preparation of plans and specifications is necessary and practical for the
purchase of goods, general services, or facility construction, the director
shall require the preparation of the plans and specifications in cooperation
with the department concerned. The plans and specifications must be approved by
the director of the department concerned. If the plans and specifications are
approved, the director shall keep a copy of the plans and specifications on
file in the director's office and make the copy available for public inspection
in accordance with the state law requirements governing the retention of
records. The director may dispose of any plans and specifications that have
been on file in the director's office in accordance with the state law
requirements governing the disposal of records.
   (b)   This section does not apply to plans and specifications for facility
construction. (Ord. Nos. 12755; 13104; 14885; 17700; 18850; 19312; 20061;
24243; 25819; 30828; 31872)
SEC. 2-30.   GENERAL DELEGATION OF CONTRACTING AUTHORITY.
   (a)   Pursuant to Chapter XXII, Section 2(b) of the city charter, the city
council shall, by ordinance, establish rules under which a contract may be let
without city council approval. This section is established for that purpose. To
the extent that this section, the city charter, or another provision of this
code does not delegate approval authority for a particular contract, contract
amendment, or other legal instrument, it is presumed that the contract,
contract amendment, or other legal instrument must be approved by the city
council.
   (b)   This section may not be construed to delegate authority to approve,
without city council action, any contract, contract amendment, or other legal
instrument that is required by state law to be approved by the city council.
   (c)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   the city’s furnishing of ambulance service; water, wastewater,
storm water drainage, or sanitation utility service; or any other similar
municipal service to customers inside or outside of the city;
      (2)   a contract, contract amendment, or other legal instrument for which
approval authority is separately delegated by the city charter or another
section of this code; or
      (3)   the city’s grant of, or other action relating to, any license,
franchise, permit, or other authorization pursuant to its regulatory powers.
   (d)   The city manager is authorized to approve the following by
administrative action, without further city council action:
      (1)   A contract for the purchase of goods, general services, or facility
construction, or for any other lawful municipal purpose not specifically
described in this subsection, that requires a city expenditure not exceeding
$100,000, except that no formal administrative action is required for the
purchase of non-legal advertising placement (media buys).
      (2)   Except as provided in Paragraph (3), a change order to a contract
required by state law to be procured through competitive bid, competitive
sealed proposal, or an alternative delivery method that increases or decreases
the contract price by $50,000 or less, provided that the original contract
price may never be increased by more than 25 percent.
      (3)   A change order to a contract for facility construction (public
works project) required by state law to be procured through competitive bid,
competitive sealed proposal, or an alternative delivery method that increases
or decreases the contract price by $100,000 or less, provided that the original
contract price may never be increased by more than 25 percent.
      (4)   A contract for personal, professional, or planning services
requiring a city expenditure not exceeding $100,000, except that no formal
administrative action is required to execute a contract for real estate
appraisal services requiring a city expenditure not exceeding $50,000.
      (5)   An amendment to a contract not required by state law to be procured
through competitive bid, competitive sealed proposal, or an alternative
delivery method, which amendment increases the contract price by $100,000 or
less or causes any decrease in the contract price, except that approval of the
city council is required on an amendment that increases the contract price by
$100,000 or less if:
         (A)   the original contract price does not exceed $100,000 and the
amendment increases the total contract price to an amount greater than
$100,000; or
         (B)   the original contract price exceeds $100,000 and the amendment
increases the original contract price by more than 25 percent.
      (6)   The exercise of a renewal option of a contract required by state
law to be procured through competitive bid, competitive sealed proposal, or an
alternative delivery method, if the city expenditure required during the
renewal term does not exceed $100,000 or the renewal amount specified in the
resolution approving the original contract.
      (7)   The exercise of a renewal option of a contract not required by
state law to be procured through competitive bid or competitive sealed
proposal, if the city expenditure required during the renewal term does not
exceed $100,000 or the renewal amount specified in the resolution approving the
original contract.
      (8)   A contract with an intergovernmental agency pursuant to Chapter 791
of the Texas Government Code, as amended, that generates less than $100,000 of
revenue and does not require a city expenditure of upfront costs or other types
of funding in excess of $100,000.
   (e)   All contracts, contract amendments, or other legal instruments (except
purchase orders for supplies and equipment and change orders as described by
Chapter XXII, Section 1 of the city charter) must be signed by the city manager
and approved as to form by the city attorney. Purchase orders for supplies and
equipment must be signed by the director. Subject to the restrictions provided
by this code, the city charter, or state law, change orders may be approved by
formal administrative action or may, as the city manager directs, be signed by
the director of the department designated by the city manager to administer the
contract that is the subject of the change.
   (f)   The city manager may delegate the authority granted under this section
to the extent allowed by this code, the city charter, or state law. The city
manager may make rules and procedures, which are not in conflict with this
code, the city charter, or state law, concerning the form and substance of
administrative actions and the administration of contracting and change order
processes.
   (g)   Purchases for the park and recreation department must be made in
compliance with Chapter XVII, Section 4 of the city charter and this division.
(Ord. Nos. 24243; 25819; 28705; 30828; 31049; 31872)
SEC. 2-31.   RULES REGARDING EXPENDITURES NOT EXCEEDING $50,000.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided by this section, all purchases of goods,
general services, or facility construction under this section must be made by
the director after giving reasonable opportunity for competition under
procedures that are established by the director, with city manager approval,
and that are consistent with the purpose of this section.
   (b)   If the city expenditure for the purchase of goods, general services,
or facility construction exceeds $3,000, price quotations from not less than
three independent vendors or contractors, if available, must be secured. If
three independent vendors or contractors are not available, the director shall
secure such price quotations as will, in the director's judgment, ensure that
the city is purchasing the property or contracting for the best quality at the
lowest possible cost. If the city expenditure for the purchase of goods,
general services, or facility construction exceeds $3,000, the director shall
follow the procedures for contacting disadvantaged businesses prescribed in
Section 252.0215 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
   (c)   The director may, with prior authorization by city council resolution,
purchase goods, including high technology items, through a cooperative
purchasing program established pursuant to Chapter 271, Subchapter D, F, or G,
Texas Local Government Code, as amended, or through a cooperative purchasing
program established by interlocal agreement pursuant to Chapter 791, Texas
Government Code, as amended. Authorized participation in a cooperative
purchasing program satisfies the requirements of this section.
   (d)   The city manager may establish procedures for purchasing goods,
general services, or facility construction under this section through
electronic means, including but not limited to the Internet, to the extent the
procedures do not conflict with state law, the city charter, or other
provisions of this code.
   (e)   A contract for facility construction that requires a city expenditure
not exceeding $50,000 must provide that, in lieu of requiring performance and
payment bonds, no money will be paid to the contractor for any work under the
contract until the final completion and acceptance of the work by the city.
   (f)   The director may use a service order for minor services under $3,000,
including mail and delivery services, repair, restoration, and remediation
services necessary for a timely and efficient response to equipment failure or
facility damage. (Ord. Nos. 12755; 13104; 14885; 15279; 16801; 17700; 17777;
18850; 19312; 20061; 22434; 24243; 25819; 28705; 30828)
SEC. 2-32.   RULES REGARDING EXPENDITURES EXCEEDING $50,000.
   (a)   Advertisement. No city expenditure exceeding $50,000 may be made
without advertising for competitive bids or competitive sealed proposals
pursuant to Chapter 252, Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and this
division, or without following the advertisement requirements in Chapter 2269,
Texas Government Code, as amended, and this division, for alternative delivery
methods, except in cases of an immediate emergency, or where competitive
bidding, sealed proposal, or an alternative delivery method is not otherwise
required by state law or the city charter.
   (b)   Emergency expenditures. In cases of immediate emergency, the director
may make the necessary emergency expenditure, subject to the approval of the
city manager or a designee. If an emergency expenditure is made, a written
report setting out the emergency purchase, accompanied by a definite statement
of the occasion and the reasons for the purchase, must be submitted by the
director to the city manager for presentation to the city council for its
approval prior to payment for the purchase.
   (c)   Administratively authorized purchases. The following rules govern
purchases authorized administratively as described in Section
2-30(d)(1) of this division:
      (1)   If the purchase is for goods, the director or the director's
designee, or the city council if the purchase is being considered under
Subsection (c)(6), shall tabulate the bids or sealed proposals and shall select
the vendor or contractor with the lowest responsible bid (or with the most
advantageous proposal if the purchase is by competitive sealed proposal under
Chapter 252, Texas Local Government Code, as amended), or the vendor or
contractor who provides the best value if the bid specifications or
requirements indicate contract selection on a best value basis.
      (2)   If the purchase is for general services, the director or the
director's designee shall tabulate the bids or sealed proposals and present to
the city manager a recommendation as to the lowest responsible bidder (or as to
the most advantageous proposal if the purchase is allowed by competitive sealed
proposal under Chapter 252, Texas Local Government Code, as amended), or
present a recommendation as to who provides the best value if the bid
specifications or requirements indicate contract selection on a best value
basis. The city manager, or the city council if the contract is being
considered under Subsection (c)(6), shall select the contractor that provides
the lowest responsible bid, the most advantageous proposal, or the best value,
whichever applies.
      (3)   If the purchase is for facility construction, and an alternative
delivery method is not being used, the director or the director's designee
shall tabulate the bids or sealed proposals and present to the city manager a
recommendation as to the lowest responsible bidder or proposer. The city
manager, or the city council, if the contract is being considered under
Subsection (c)(6), shall select the contractor with the lowest responsible bid
or the most advantageous proposal.
      (4)   If the purchase is for facility construction, and an alternative
delivery method is being used, the director or the director's designee shall
present to the city manager a recommendation based on the applicable standard
in Chapter 2269, Texas Government Code, as amended.
      (5)   If, in the opinion of the city manager or the city council, if the
purchase is being considered under Subsection (c)(6) and no bid or sealed
proposal is satisfactory or it is otherwise in the best interest of the city,
the city manager or the city council may reject all bids or sealed proposals,
and the director may readvertise for competitive bids or competitive sealed
proposals.
      (6)   A member of the city council may request that a purchase or
contract be brought before the city council for consideration any time before
48 hours have elapsed after bid or proposal opening.
   (d)   Contracts requiring council approval. The following rules govern
competitive bid or sealed proposal contracts requiring a city expenditure
exceeding $100,000:
      (1)   The director or the director's designee shall tabulate the bids or
sealed proposals.
      (2)   If the purchase is for goods or general services, the city manager
shall recommend to the city council who, in the city manager's opinion,
provides the lowest responsible bid; the most advantageous proposal if the
purchase is by competitive sealed proposal under Chapter 252, Texas Local
Government Code, as amended; or the best value to the city if the bid
specifications or requirements indicate contract selection on a best value
basis. The city council shall determine which bidder provides the lowest
responsible bid, the most advantageous proposal, or the best value, whichever
applies, and, if that bidder or proposer is acceptable, approve the contract.
If, in the judgment of the city council, no bid or sealed proposal is
satisfactory or it is in the best interest of the city, then the city council
may reject all bids or sealed proposals.
      (3)   If the purchase is for facility construction, and an alternative
delivery method is not being used, the city manager shall recommend who, in the
city manager's opinion, is the lowest responsible bidder. The city council
shall determine the lowest responsible bidder and, if that bidder is
acceptable, approve the contract. If, in the judgment of the city council, no
bid or sealed proposal is satisfactory or it is in the best interest of the
city, then the city council may reject all bids.
      (4)   If the purchase is for facility construction, and an alternative
delivery method is being used, the director shall present to the city manager a
recommendation. The city manager shall then present a recommendation to the
city council. If, in the judgment of the city council, no bid, proposal, or
other offer is satisfactory or it is in the best interest of the city, then the
city council may reject all bids. All recommendations and determinations under
this subsection must be made according to the criteria set out in Chapter 2269
of the Texas Government Code, as amended.
      (5)   If all bids or sealed proposals are rejected, the city council may
authorize the director to readvertise or proceed otherwise, as may be
determined at the discretion of the city council, in accordance with state law.
The original specifications, as amended or changed, must be kept on file in the
office of the director in accordance with Section
2-29 of this division.
   (e)   Additional rules for competitive bids. The following additional rules
govern all purchases made by competitive bid, including purchases on a best
value basis, in accordance with Subsections (c) and (d) of this section:
      (1)   If there is a single responsive bid, the director, the city
manager, or the city council may consider the bid as the lowest responsible
bid.
      (2)   A nonresponsive bid has the effect of being a no bid and may not be
considered for any purpose.
      (3)   A bid that has been opened is not subject to amendment, alteration,
or change for the purpose of correcting an error in the bid price. This
restriction is not intended to alter, amend, or revoke the common law right of
a bidder to withdraw a bid due to a material mistake in the bid.
      (f)   Competitive sealed proposals. For the purchase of goods and general
services (including but not limited to community development items, high
technology items, and insurance) requiring a city expenditure exceeding
$50,000, the director may follow the competitive sealed proposal procedures
authorized in this division and in Chapter 252, Texas Local Government Code, as
amended. If the director chooses not to follow the competitive sealed proposal
process, the purchase must be competitively bid as required by this division
and by Chapter 252, Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
   (g)   Electronic procurement and reverse auctions. The city manager may
establish procedures for purchasing goods, general services, or facility
construction under this section through electronic means, including but not
limited to the Internet, to the extent the procedures do not conflict with
state law, the city charter, or other provisions of this code. The city manager
may also establish procedures for purchasing goods or general services pursuant
to the reverse auction method defined in Section 2155.062(d), Texas Government
Code, as amended, to the extent the procedures do not conflict with state law,
the city charter, or other provisions of this code.
   (h)   Competitive purchasing programs. The director may, with prior
authorization by city council resolution, purchase goods, including high
technology items, through a cooperative purchasing program established pursuant
to Chapter 271, Subchapter D, F, or G, Texas Local Government Code, as amended,
or through a cooperative purchasing program established by interlocal agreement
pursuant to Chapter 791, Texas Government Code, as amended. Authorized
participation in a cooperative purchasing program satisfies the requirements of
this section.
   (i)   Local preferences.
      (1)   Where a contract is required to be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder and a competitive bid is received from a nonresident bidder,
the city may not award a governmental contract to the nonresident bidder unless
the nonresident's bid is lower than the lowest bid submitted by a responsible
Texas resident bidder by the same amount that a Texas resident bidder would be
required to underbid a nonresident bidder to obtain a comparable contract in
the state in which the nonresident's principal place of business is located.
This requirement does not apply to a contract involving federal funds.
      (2)   In a purchase for goods, general services, or facility construction
through competitive bid, if one or more bids are received from a local business
whose bid is within five percent of the lowest responsible bid received from a
bidder who is not a local business, a contract for facility construction in an
amount less than $100,000 or a contract for goods or general services in an
amount less than $500,000 may be awarded to:
         (A)   the bidder with the lowest responsible bid; or
         (B)   the local business if the city council determines, in writing,
that the bid submitted by the local business offers the city the best
combination of contract price and additional economic development opportunities
for the city created by the contract award, including employment of residents
of the city and increased tax revenue to the city.
      (3)   In a purchase for goods through competitive bid, if one or more
bids are received from a local business whose bid is within three percent of
the lowest responsible bid received from a bidder who is not a local business,
a contract in an amount of $500,000 or more may be awarded to:
         (A)   the bidder with the lowest responsible bid; or
         (B)   the local business if the city council determines, in writing,
that the bid submitted by the local business offers the city the best
combination of contract price and additional economic development opportunities
for the city created by the contract award, including employment of residents
of the city and increased tax revenue to the city.
      (4)   Subsection (i)(2) of this section does not apply to the purchase of
telecommunication services or information services, as those terms are defined
by 47 U.S.C. Section 153, as amended.
      (5)   Subsections (i)(2) and (i)(3) of this section do not prohibit the
city from rejecting all bids. (Ord. Nos. 24243; 25819; 28705; 30828; 31872)
SEC. 2-33.   ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROCUREMENT FOR FACILITY CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   The city council finds that, in general, the methods of procuring a
contractor to perform facility construction established in Chapter 2269, Texas
Government Code, as amended, provide a better value for the city than the
methods set forth in Chapter 252, Texas Local Government Code, as amended. The
provisions of Chapter 2269, Texas Government Code, as amended, are therefore
adopted for use in procuring a contract for facility construction, superseding
any conflicting provisions in the city charter.
   (b)   The city manager is authorized, in accordance with Chapter 2269, Texas
Government Code, as amended, to choose which method of contractor selection
provides the best value for the city on each facility construction project,
subject to the applicable provisions of Sections
2-30 through
2-32 of this division. The city manager may, by administrative directive,
establish procedures for choosing the method of contractor selection and to
conduct the selection process, to the extent the procedures do not conflict
with state law or Sections
2-30 through
2-32 of this division.
   (c)   If, in the case of an individual facility construction project, the
city manager finds that there is better value in following the methods of
procurement authorized in Chapter 252, Texas Local Government Code, as amended,
the city manager is authorized to secure a contractor in accordance with the
rules of that state law. If the procedures of Chapter 252, Texas Local
Government Code, as amended, are used to procure a facility construction
contract, the award of the contract must be to the lowest responsible bidder or
to a local business when allowed under Section
2-32(h) of this division. The rules of Section
2-32(b) and (c) of this division also apply to an award made under this
subsection. (Ord. Nos. 25819; 28705; 30828)
SEC. 2-34.   PERSONAL, PROFESSIONAL, AND PLANNING SERVICES.
   Personal, professional, or planning services must be procured, regardless of
who approves the contract, in accordance with applicable state law and through
procedures established by the city manager or a designee that are not in
conflict with this article or applicable state law. (Ord. Nos. 24243; 25819)
SEC. 2-35.   INTEREST ON CERTAIN LATE OR DELAYED PAYMENTS.
   Unless otherwise authorized by the city council, at the request of the city
manager, no contractor of the city is entitled to interest on any late or
delayed payment that is caused by any good faith claim or dispute in connection
with the contract, or that the city has a right or obligation to withhold under
the contract or state or federal law, nor is any contractor entitled to
attorney’s fees in any dispute to collect such payments. (Ord. Nos. 18850;
19312; 20061; 22434; 24243; 25819)
SEC. 2-36.   CONTRACTS WITH PERSONS INDEBTED TO THE CITY.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b), a bidder, proposer, or other
person interested in receiving the award of a contract from the city or
entering into any other transaction with the city shall be deemed
nonresponsible and shall be denied any contract or other transaction with the
city if that bidder, proposer, or other person is indebted to the city or is
delinquent in any payment owed to the city under a contract or other legal
obligation.
   (b)   Disqualification under Subsection (a) of a bidder, proposer, or other
person interested in contracting with or entering into a transaction with the
city may be waived by the city council, after a review of the specific
circumstances, if the waiver is deemed to be in the best interest of the city.
(Ord. 25819)
SECS. 2-37 THRU 2-37.1.9.   RESERVED.
   (Ord. Nos. 21856; 24243; 25819)
Division 2. Sale of Unclaimed and Surplus Property.
SEC. 2-37.2.   AUTHORITY TO SELL; DEPOSIT OF CASH.
   (a)   The following property may be sold by the city in the manner provided
in this article:
      (1)   abandoned, stolen, or recovered property, except motor vehicles,
that remain unclaimed with the city for 60 days, whether or not the owner is
known;
      (2)   abandoned, stolen, or recovered motor vehicles that remain
unclaimed with the city for 30 days, whether or not the owner is known;
      (3)   personal property owned by the city that has been declared surplus,
obsolete, worn out, or useless by the head of a department and that is no
longer needed for public use; except that microcomputer equipment and software
covered by the microcomputer executive plan policy must be disposed of in
accordance with that policy; and
      (4)   city-owned firearms and firearm accessories and ammunition that the
chief of police has declared surplus or obsolete and has recommended for use as
trade-ins on new property of the same general type.
   (b)   Property listed in Subsection (a)(4) may be traded only to a person
holding a federal firearms license.
   (c)   Items of personal property, the sale of which is restricted by
criminal law, may only be sold by the city if the sale is in accordance with
all applicable provisions of the law containing the restrictions.
   (d)   Cash money that is abandoned, stolen, or recovered, that remains
unclaimed with the police department for 60 days, and that is not being held
for evidence, whether or not the owner is known, must be deposited in the
general fund of the city unless the money is of collector quality. Money of
collector quality may be sold as other personal property. (Ord. Nos. 15519;
18201; 18212; 19312; 21877; 22153; 27865; 29478, eff. 10/1/14)
SEC. 2-37.3.   DELIVERY OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY TO DIRECTOR; USE FOR CITY
PURPOSES.
   (a)   The chief of police or the director of the department holding property
shall give the director a list of all unclaimed property subject to sale under
this article and shall deliver the listed property, except motor vehicles, to
the director before the date of sale. The director shall give the chief of
police or other department director a receipt which indicates in detail all
property delivered. The chief of police shall retain custody of motor vehicles
until a sale is made.
   (b)   If in reviewing the list of unclaimed property subject to sale, the
director determines that certain items of property could be used by the city,
he may recommend to the city manager that the items be used for city purposes
rather than sold. If the city manager believes that it is in the best interests
of the city, he may authorize the director to remove specific items from the
list of property subject to sale and to convert the items to use for city
purposes. (Ord. Nos. 15519; 19312)
SEC. 2-37.4.   METHOD OF SALE.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (h) or (i), the director
shall sell unclaimed property and surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless
property by public auction or by accepting sealed bids, to the highest bidder.
The property may be auctioned, each piece individually or in assembled lots,
whichever the director determines will bring the best price obtainable, except
for motor vehicles which must be sold individually unless in accordance with
Subsection (b). If in the opinion of the director the highest bid on a
particular item is not sufficient, the director may refuse the bid and hold the
item for sale at another time.
   (b)   Unclaimed motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts on which the vehicle
identification numbers have been destroyed, mutilated, or removed may be sold
in assembled lots in accordance with this section if the following requirements
are met:
      (1)   The vehicles and vehicle parts must be sold as scrap metal only and
may not be reconstructed or made operable after the sale.
      (2)   The vehicles and vehicle parts must be sold to a demolisher who
owns an auto crusher located within the city.
      (3)   A representative of the city auto pound must witness the demolition
of the vehicle and vehicle parts to ensure that no parts are removed for use or
resale.
      (4)   All notification and other requirements of Chapter 683, Texas
Transportation Code, as amended, that are applicable to the disposal of
abandoned motor vehicles must be met.
   (c)   If the director receives a group of 10 or more identical items for
sale, the director may sell a minimum of three of the items at public auction
and then advertise in the official newspaper of the city and sell the remaining
items at a price not less than the average price obtained for the auctioned
items.
   (d)   When sale is to be by acceptance of sealed bids, the bids must remain
in the office of the city secretary for public inspection at least 48 hours
after the bids are opened.
   (e)   Except as provided in Subsection (f), the director may accept the
following in exchange for the sale of items by any method of sale:
      (1)   cash money;
      (2)   personal or business checks if proper identification is shown;
      (3)   a bank credit card that the city honors pursuant to contractual
arrangements with a bank; or
      (4)   new property of the same general type, if the items are city-owned
property declared surplus or obsolete by the head of the department holding the
property and recommended by the city manager for use as trade-ins on the new
property.
   (f)   The director may only accept new property of the same general type in
exchange for the sale of city-owned firearms or firearm accessories or
ammunition that the chief of police has declared surplus or obsolete and has
recommended for use as trade-ins on the new property.
   (g)   Electronic procurement and reverse auctions. The city manager may
establish procedures for purchasing goods, general services, or facility
construction under this section through electronic means, including but not
limited to the Internet, to the extent the procedures do not conflict with
state law, the city charter, or other provisions of this code. The city manager
may also establish procedures for purchasing goods or general services pursuant
to the reverse auction method defined in Section 2155.062(d), Texas Government
Code, as amended, to the extent the procedures do not conflict with state law,
the city charter, or other provisions of this code.
   (h)   The director may, in lieu of conducting a sale by public auction or
sealed bids, return surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless property to the
contract vendor or original manufacturer and accept a refund or a credit toward
the purchase of new property of the same general type if the contract with the
vendor or manufacturer requires the acceptance of returns or trade-ins at a
price or refund rate of not less than the current fair market value of the
property.
   (i)   The director may, in lieu of conducting a sale by public auction or
sealed bids, sell unclaimed property and surplus, obsolete, worn out, or
useless property at the city store in accordance with Section
2-37.15 of this article. (Ord. Nos. 15519; 19312; 19640; 21877; 22153; 22403;
25819; 31872)
SEC. 2-37.5.   TIME AND PLACE OF SALE; NOTICE.
   (a)   After determining the time and place for a public auction, acceptance
of sealed bids, or sale of identical items, the director shall give notice of
the auction, acceptance, or sale, by:
      (1)   advertising in the official newspaper of the city for three
consecutive days, the last publication date to be not less than seven days
before the date of the auction, acceptance, or beginning of sale; and
      (2)   sending by certified mail to the last known address of the owner of
unclaimed property, if the name of the owner is known, 14 days before the date
of auction, acceptance, or beginning of sale.
   (b)   The notice must contain the time and place of auction, acceptance, or
sale and a general listing of the property to be sold. (Ord. Nos. 15519; 17672;
19312)
SEC. 2-37.6.   RECORDS; REPORTS TO THE DIRECTOR OF FINANCE; PROCEEDS.
   (a)   The director shall keep accurate records of all sales and shall submit
reports to the director of finance containing:
      (1)   the time, place, and method of sale; and
      (2)   copies of receipts given for all sales that describe the items sold
and show the price paid or other value given for the items.
   (b)   The director shall keep sales tickets covering each transaction for 30
months, at which time they may be destroyed.
   (c)   The director shall deposit all proceeds received for sales to the
credit of the appropriate fund. (Ord. Nos. 15519; 17672; 19312; 21877)
SEC. 2-37.7.   DESTRUCTION OF RESTRICTED WEAPONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   All clubs, explosive weapons, firearm silencers, handguns, illegal
knives, knuckles, shotguns, rifles, semi-automatic assault weapons, machine
guns, and short-barrel firearms that are abandoned, stolen, or recovered and
remain unclaimed with the police department for six months and are not being
held for evidence, or that are owned by the city and have been declared surplus
or obsolete by the chief of police, must be destroyed in the presence of:
      (1)   three police officers of the rank of lieutenant or higher; or
      (2)   one police officer of the rank of lieutenant or higher, a
representative of the city council, and a representative of the crime
commission; or
      (3)   two police officers of the rank of lieutenant or higher and a
representative of the city council or crime commission.
   (b)   The witnesses shall make a report under oath to the city council,
listing the make, model, type, and serial number of the weapons destroyed and
stating the time, date, place, and manner of destruction.
   (c)   This requirement of destruction does not apply to:
      (1)   handguns or other restricted firearms that the chief of police has
determined to be serviceable, which shall be kept in reserve by the police
department for use in the event of civil disorder or disaster;
      (2)   city-owned firearms or firearm accessories or ammunition that the
chief of police has declared surplus or obsolete and has recommended for use as
trade-ins on new property of the same general type; or
      (3)   handguns or other restricted firearms that the chief of police has
determined are required for training purposes or other law enforcement
activities, or whose parts are needed for repair of departmental weapons. (Ord.
Nos. 15519; 17386; 18201; 18212; 19312; 20044; 22153)
SEC. 2-37.8.   LIEN ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
   The city shall have a lien on all motor vehicles taken into custody for the
actual towing expense, storage charges, and service fee as provided in Section
28-4 of this code and for an administrative fee of $150, plus any reasonable
attorney’s expenses, if the motor vehicle is processed for auctioning. This
lien is superior to all other liens and claims except liens for ad valorem
taxes and may be satisfied by sale of the motor vehicle. (Ord. Nos. 15519;
16287; 17547; 19312; 19742)
SEC. 2-37.9.   PURCHASE BY CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The following persons shall not, directly or indirectly, submit a bid
for, purchase, or acquire ownership of, personal property sold pursuant to the
provisions of this article:
      (1)   City employees who work in the city manager's office or in the
department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this
article.
      (2)   The person who determines that the property is surplus, obsolete,
worn out, or useless.
      (3)   City officials, as defined in Paragraph
12A-2(24) of the Dallas City Code.
      (4)   Former city officials, as defined in Paragraph
12A-2(20) of the Dallas City Code, for one year after their term of office
ends.
   (b)   In addition to other penalties, a person who violates this section
forfeits his employment.
(Ord. Nos. 15519; 17672; 19312; 30391)
SEC. 2-37.10.   AUTHORITY TO SELL SURPLUS ISSUE WEAPONS TO CERTAIN PERSONNEL.
   (a)   Upon recommendation of the chief of police, the director shall sell to
a police officer, park ranger, retired police officer, retired police reserve
officer, retired park ranger, or retired security officer a weapon that was
issued to the officer if the weapon is surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless
property.
   (b)   Upon recommendation of the municipal court administrator, the director
shall sell to a retired city marshal or retired deputy city marshal a weapon
that was issued to the city marshal or deputy city marshal if the weapon is
surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless property.
   (c)   Upon recommendation of the fire chief, the director shall sell to a
retired fire investigator who is a certified peace officer a weapon that was
issued to the officer if the weapon is surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless
property.
   (d)   An officer is not “retired” for purposes of this section unless the
officer:
      (1)   receives a disability pension;
      (2)   has vested rights in a retirement pension and has completed 10
years of service in the department; or
      (3)   has completed 20 years of service in the city as a police reserve
officer.
   (e)   The price of a weapon sold under this section shall be its fair market
value as determined by the director or its original cost depreciated by five
percent a year, whichever amount is less. In no event may a weapon be sold for
less than $25. If a weapon is sold under this section for less than its fair
market value, the difference between the purchase price and the fair market
value shall be considered as part of the officer’s agreed compensation for
services provided to the city.
   (f)   The director shall treat all funds received for sales under this
section the same as other funds received for sales under this article. (Ord.
Nos. 17672; 19312; 19679; 20910)
SEC. 2-37.11.   AUTHORITY TO SELL UNIFORMS TO EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   The director may sell to a city employee any uniform or portion of a
uniform worn by the employee if the uniform or portion of the uniform is
surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless property.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, “uniform” means clothing of a
distinctive design or fashion issued by the city to the employee and required
to be worn by the employee while on the job. The term “uniform” includes hats,
helmets, shirts, badges, pants, coats, shoes, and boots, but does not include
weapons or equipment.
   (c)   The price of any uniform or portion of a uniform sold under this
section shall be not less than its fair market value as determined by the
director.
   (d)   The director shall treat all funds received for sales under this
section the same as other funds received for sales under this article. (Ord.
Nos. 17672; 19312)
SEC. 2-37.12.   SALES OF CERTAIN COLLECTIBLE PROPERTY.
   (a)   In this chapter:
      (1)   ARTS AND CULTURE DIRECTOR means the director of the office of arts
and culture of the city or a designated representative.
      (2)   COLLECTIBLE PROPERTY means an item of personal property owned by
the city under the care and control of the Dallas Museum of Art originally
acquired for exhibition, collection, or study, including, but not limited to,
any work of art, antique, memorabilia, rare object, art education material or
display, or other item of lasting interest or value.
   (b)   Collectible property owned by the city under the care and control of
the Dallas Museum of Art may be sold, exchanged, or otherwise disposed of in
accordance with this section.
   (c)   All sales of collectible property must be under the direction and
control of the arts and culture director, who shall function for this purpose
in the place of the director.
   (d)   The arts and culture director shall sell, exchange, or otherwise
dispose of particular collectible property designated for sale by the Dallas
Museum of Art by one of the following methods:
      (1)   public auction;
      (2)   silent auction (public sale by unsealed written bids); or
      (3)   sale by sealed bids from one or more interested person.
   (e)   A sale of collectible property may be held at any city, place, or
location determined advisable by the arts and culture director.
   (f)   The arts and culture director may accept collectible property of at
least like value in exchange for collectible property if, in the judgement of
the arts and culture director, it is in the interest of the city to do so, and
if an offer of exchange constitutes the highest bid for collectible property to
be sold.
   (g)   The arts and culture director shall sell collectible property to the
highest bidder. The arts and culture director's decision as to the sufficiency
and acceptance of the highest bid is final and no further approval is required.
   (h)   The arts and culture director shall deposit all proceeds received from
the sale of collectible property to the credit of a fund designated for that
purpose.
   (i)   Proceeds of a sale of collectible property must be used by the Dallas
Museum of Art to purchase other collectible property, such acquisition being of
similar type and identified in the name of the original donor whenever
feasible. Proceed of an exchange will be placed directly in the collection of
the Dallas Museum of Art.
   (j)   The Dallas Museum of Art will preserve in its permanent files a record
of all collectible property sold or exchanged and will record the source of
funds or collectible property used to acquire other collectible property with
proceeds of a sale or an exchange.
   (k)   The arts and culture director shall follow the notice and record
keeping requirements of Sections
2-37.5 and
2-37.6. (Ord. Nos. 17815; 19312; 21421; 22026; 23694; 31049; 31333, eff. 10/1/
19)
SEC. 2-37.13.   SALE OF SURPLUS LIBRARY MATERIAL.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   SURPLUS LIBRARY MATERIAL means books, magazines, records, films,
and any other audio or visual material no longer needed by a public library.
The term does not include furnishings, equipment, or other capital assets.
      (2)   LIBRARY DIRECTOR means the director of the municipal library
department of the city.
   (b)   Surplus library material owned by the city may be sold, exchanged, or
otherwise disposed of in accordance with this section.
   (c)   The library director shall, in the place of the director, direct and
control the sale, exchange, or other disposition of surplus library material.
   (d)   Surplus library material shall be sold or exchanged at its present
market value. The library director shall appoint a qualified appraiser to
determine the present market value of the surplus library material.
   (e)   The library director shall deposit all proceeds received from the sale
of surplus library material in a fund designated for that purpose.
   (f)   Proceeds from the sale of surplus library material shall be used to
purchase other library material. (Ord. Nos. 18623; 19312)
SEC. 2-37.14.   SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY TO OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES.
   (a)   The director may approve the intermittent sale of personal property
from city inventories to a political subdivision or agency of the state or to
an entity of the federal government.
   (b)   The price of any city personal property sold under this section shall
be not less than the fair market value of the property as determined by the
director.
   (c)   The director shall keep an accurate record of every sale under this
section and shall submit reports to the city controller containing the
following information:
      (1)   the time, place, and method of sale; and
      (2)   a copy of each receipt given for the sale that describes:
         (A)   the item sold;
         (B)   the governmental entity purchasing the item; and
         (C)   the price received by the city for the item.
   (d)   The director shall keep every sales ticket covering a sale under this
section for 36 months, at which time the sales ticket may be destroyed.
   (e)   The director shall deposit all proceeds received from a sale under
this section to the credit of the appropriate city fund. (Ord. 20559)
SEC. 2-37.15.   SALE OF UNCLAIMED AND SURPLUS PROPERTY AT THE CITY STORE.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   CITY STORE means a location designated by the director where
unclaimed property and surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless property is
offered for sale to the public.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the “director” as defined in Section
2-27 of this article.
   (b)   Unclaimed property and surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless
property may be sold, exchanged, or otherwise disposed of at the city store in
accordance with this section.
   (c)   The director shall direct and control the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of unclaimed property and surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless
property at the city store.
   (d)   Unclaimed property and surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless
property must be sold or exchanged for not less than its present market value.
The director shall determine the present market value of all property offered
for sale at the city store. In determining present market value, the director
may refer to prices at which similar property is offered for retail sale at
other locations throughout the United States.
   (e)   The director shall keep accurate records of all sales of unclaimed
property and surplus, obsolete, worn out, or useless property at the city
store. The records must include:
      (1)   the date, time, and place of sale; and
      (2)   copies of receipts given for all sales that describe the items sold
and show the price paid or other value given for the items. (Ord. Nos. 22873;
25819)
SEC. 2-37.16.   SALE OF SURPLUS CITY-OWNED ANIMALS.
   (a)   In this section, SURPLUS CITY-OWNED ANIMAL means an animal owned by
the city that is no longer needed by the city.
   (b)   A surplus city-owned animal may be sold, exchanged, or otherwise
disposed of in accordance with this section.
   (c)   The director of the department holding a surplus city-owned animal
shall, in the place of the director of procurement services, direct and control
the sale, exchange, or other disposition of the animal.
   (d)   A surplus city-owned animal must be sold, exchanged, or otherwise
disposed of for not less than its present market value. The director of the
department holding the surplus city-owned animal, with the approval of the
director of procurement services, shall determine the present market value of
the surplus city-owned animal.
   (e)   The director of the department holding a surplus city-owned animal
shall keep an accurate record of the disposition of the animal. The record must
include:
      (1)   the date, time, place, and method of sale, exchange, or other
disposition; and
      (2)   a copy of each receipt given for the sale, exchange, or other
disposition that describes the animal and shows the price paid or other value
given to the city for the animal.
   (f)   The director of the department holding a surplus city-owned animal
shall deposit all proceeds received from the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of the animal in a fund designated for that purpose.
   (g)   Section 2-37.9 of this article, which places restrictions on who may
submit a bid for, purchase, or acquire ownership of personal property sold
under this article, does not apply to a surplus city-owned animal disposed of
in accordance with this section. (Ord. Nos. 24588; 25047; 30654)
SEC. 2-37.17.   DONATION OF OUTDATED OR SURPLUS FIREFIGHTING EQUIPMENT,
SUPPLIES, AND MATERIALS.
   (a)   In lieu of conducting a sale under other provisions of this division,
the city council, by resolution, may donate outdated or surplus equipment,
supplies, and other materials used in fighting fires to:
      (1)   an underdeveloped country, pursuant to Article 3, Section 52h of
the Texas Constitution; or
      (2)   the Texas Forest Service or a successor agency authorized to
cooperate in the development of rural fire protection plans, pursuant to
Article 3, Section 52i of the Texas Constitution. (Ord. 25511)
ARTICLE IV-a.
OFFICE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
SEC. 2-38.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
   There is hereby created a division of the city manager’s office to be known
as the office of economic development of the city, the head of which shall be
the director of economic development who shall be appointed by the city
manager. The office of economic development will be composed of the director of
economic development and such other assistants and employees as the city
council may provide by ordinance upon recommendation of the city manager. (Ord.
25834)
SEC. 2-39.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
   (a)   The director of economic development shall perform the following
duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the office of economic development.
      (2)   Represent the city in negotiating contracts with private developers
for joint venture projects or development incentives.
      (3)   Plan and supervise the city’s efforts to attract and retain
businesses.
      (4)   Participate in the preparation and revision of the capital
improvement program.
      (5)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 25834)
SEC. 2-40.   RESERVED.
ARTICLE V.
DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES.
SEC. 2-41.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES.
   There is hereby created the department of development services of the city,
the head of which shall be the director of development services who shall be
appointed by the city manager. The department of development services will be
composed of the director of development services and such other assistants and
employees as the city council may provide by ordinance upon recommendation of
the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 25047; 27697; 32002)
SEC. 2-42.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES.
   (a)   The director of development services shall perform the following
duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the department of development services.
      (2)   Add to, delete from, modify or otherwise specify the property area
determined to be acquired with community development funds.
      (3)   Advise the city manager, in cooperation with the chief planning
officer and others designated by the city manager, on matters affecting the
urban design and physical development of the city.
      (4)   Participate with the chief planning officer in developing and
recommending to the city manager a comprehensive plan for the city.
      (5)   Participate with the chief planning officer in reviewing and making
recommendations regarding proposed actions implementing the comprehensive plan.
      (6)   Participate in the preparation and revision of the capital
improvement program.
      (7)   Administer the regulations governing the subdivision and platting
of land in accordance with state and local laws.
      (8)   Participate in the planning relating to urban redevelopment, urban
rehabilitation, and conservation intended to alleviate or prevent slums,
obsolescence, blight, or other conditions of urban deterioration.
      (9)   Serve as secretary to the landmark commission.
      (10)   Supervise the engineering, construction, and paving of all
streets, boulevards, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways when the work is being
done by a private developer.
      (11)   Supervise the engineering and construction of the storm sewers and
storm drainage systems when the work is being done by a private developer.
      (12)   Administer, implement, and enforce city regulations relating to
the construction of public water and wastewater infrastructure improvements by
private developers.
      (13)   Provide for the administration, implementation, and enforcement of
the city's construction codes.
      (14)   Perform plan reviews and inspections for new construction and
renovation of fixed facilities for food products establishments.
      (15)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager
or by ordinance of the city council.
   (b)   Whenever the directors of property management, planning and
development, and sustainable development are referred to in any city ordinance
or resolution or in any contract, license, permit, franchise, or other
agreement granted or executed by the city, those terms mean the director of
development services. (Ord. Nos. 25047; 25834; 27697; 29478; 32002)
ARTICLE V-a.
DEPARTMENT OF FACILITIES AND REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT.
SEC. 2-43.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF FACILITIES AND REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT.
   There is hereby created the department of facilities and real estate
management of the city of Dallas, at the head of which shall be the director of
facilities and real estate management who shall be appointed by the city
manager. The director must be a person professionally competent by experience
and training to manage the department. The department will be composed of the
director of facilities and real estate management and other assistants and
employees the city council may provide by ordinance upon recommendation by the
city manager. (Ord. Nos. 23694; 30994; 32789)
SEC. 2-44.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF FACILITIES AND REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT.
   The director of the department of facilities and real estate management
shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the department of facilities and real
estate management.
      (2)   Have responsibility for the design, construction, operation,
maintenance, repair, renovation, and expansion of all public buildings
belonging to or used by the city, except as otherwise provided by the city
manager, the city charter, or ordinance or resolution of the city council.
      (3)   Provide for the maintenance and upkeep of the grounds around all
public buildings, except as otherwise provided by the city manager, the city
charter, or ordinance or resolution of the city council.
      (4)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council.
      (5)   Supervise the purchase and sale of all real property of the city,
not to include property operated by the Housing Department or Dallas Water
Utilities.
      (6)   Manage real property under the director's supervision including
approval of short term month-to-month leases.
      (7)   Determine pursuant to the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real
Properties Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 the public necessity for the
acquisition of real property, when the property is purchased in whole or in
part with community development grant funds.
      (8)   Solicit proposals from independent appraisers for the furnishing of
appraisals of real property when appropriate. (Ord. Nos. 23694; 30239; 30994;
32789; 33224)
SEC. 2-45.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 19312)
ARTICLE V-b.
DEPARTMENT OF CONVENTION AND EVENT SERVICES.
SEC. 2-46.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF CONVENTION AND EVENT SERVICES.
   There is hereby created the department of convention and event services of
the city, the head of which shall be the director of convention and event
services who shall be appointed by the city manager. The department shall be
composed of the director of convention and event services and such other
assistants and employees as the city council may provide upon recommendation of
the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 14216; 17226; 22026; 23694; 24053)
SEC. 2-47.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF CONVENTION AND EVENT SERVICES.
   (a)   The director of convention and event services shall perform the
following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the department of convention and event
services.
      (2)   Supervise and manage the facilities of the convention center,
reunion arena, the municipal produce market, Union Station, and other
facilities of the city as designated by the city manager or by ordinance or
resolution of the city council.
      (3)   Supervise and administer the special events program of the city,
except as otherwise provided by the city manager, the city charter, or
ordinance or resolution of the city council.
      (4)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council.
   (b)   The director of convention and event services and any designated
representatives may represent the city in negotiating and contracting with
persons planning to use the facilities of the convention center, reunion arena,
the municipal produce market, Union Station, or any other facility under the
management of the director of convention and event services. (Ord. Nos. 14216;
17226; 22026; 23694; 24053; 31049)
ARTICLE V-c.
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC WORKS.
SEC. 2-48.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC WORKS.
   (a)   There is hereby created the department of transportation and public
works of the city of Dallas, at the head of which shall be the director of
transportation and public works who shall be appointed by the city manager. The
director must be a person professionally competent by experience and training
to manage the department, and be an engineer registered to practice in the
State of Texas or registered in another state with reciprocal rights, a
planner, or possess an equivalent combination of education and experience. The
department will be composed of the director of transportation and public works
and such other assistants and employees as the city council may provide by
ordinance upon recommendation of the city manager.
   (b)   Whenever the director or department of public works and transportation
is referred to in this code or any other city ordinance, rule, or regulation,
the term means the director or department of transportation and public works,
or any other director or department of the city to which certain former public
works and transportation functions or duties have been transferred by the city
council or city manager. (Ord. Nos. 30654; 32864)
SEC. 2-49.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC WORKS.
   The director of transportation and public works shall perform the following
duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the department of transportation and
public works.
      (2)   Supervise the engineering, opening, construction, and paving of all
streets, boulevards, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways, except when the work
is being done by a private developer.
      (3)   Supervise the engineering and construction of the storm sewers and
storm drainage systems associated with a paving project, except when the work
is being done by a private developer.
      (4)   Approve the location of equipment and facilities installed under,
on, or above the public right- of-way.
      (5)   Provide for the maintenance and repairs of streets, alleys,
medians, and public rights-of-way, as designated by the city manager.
      (6)   Provide for street hazard and emergency response.
      (7)   Supervise the engineering and construction of the storm sewers and
storm drainage systems associated with a paving project, except when the work
is being done by a private developer.
      (8)   Provide for the maintenance and repair of traffic control devices
and street lights, as designated by the city manager.
      (9)   Manage neighborhood traffic calming, construction zone traffic, and
block parties.
      (10)   Plan, design, construct, maintain, and operate, by contract or
with city employees, the public lighting system that illuminates highways,
streets, and other public ways in the city, except as provided otherwise by the
city manager, the city charter, or ordinance or resolution of the city council.
      (11)   Supervise the engineering, planning, and construction, of all
traffic signals, school flashers, dynamic message signs, striping, and signing
on public rights-of-way.
      (12)   Develop and recommend to the city manager a comprehensive
transportation plan for the city.
      (13)   Review and make recommendations regarding proposed actions
implementing the transportation plan.
      (14)   Coordinate with DART, TxDOT, and other entities for the planning,
construction, and maintenance of all transportation-related improvements within
the city.
      (15)   Supervise the Thoroughfare Plan amendment process and supervise
the implementation of the Dallas Bike Plan.
      (16)   Supervise the coordination of engineering and construction of
traffic signals, streetlights, and associated transportation operations
elements when the work is being done by a private developer.
      (17)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager
or by ordinance of the city council.
(Ord. Nos. 30654; 32002; 32789; 32864)
ARTICLE V-d.
WATER UTILITIES DEPARTMENT.
SEC. 2-50.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF WATER UTILITIES.
   There is hereby created the water utilities department of the city of
Dallas, at the head of which shall be the director of water utilities who shall
be appointed by the city manager. The department shall be composed of the
director of water utilities and such other assistants and employees as the
council may provide by ordinance upon recommendation of the city manager. (Ord.
14215)
SEC. 2-51.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF WATER UTILITIES.
   The director of water utilities shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Supervise the water, wastewater (municipal and industrial), and
storm drainage systems, mains, pump stations, filtration plants, sanitary
wastewater treatment plants, reservoirs and all plants, properties, and
appliances incident to the operation of the water, wastewater (municipal and
industrial), storm drainage utilities of the city.
      (2)   Make recommendations to the city manager concerning the need for
acquisition of additional water rights, appear before the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality, legislative committees and such other bodies as may be
necessary for the acquisition of water rights; negotiate with the proper
departments of the federal and state governments for the maintenance and
acquisition of additional water rights; plan and program a waterworks system
for the future growth of the city; conduct negotiations with customer cities,
other public entities and industries for the furnishing of raw water and
treated water; conduct negotiations with customer cities, other public entities
and industries for the furnishing of treated waste water for irrigation and
industrial use; and conduct negotiations with federal, state, and local
agencies for obtaining supplies of raw water.
      (3)   Make recommendations to the city manager concerning the need for
expansion and improvements of the waste water collection and treatment system;
and conduct negotiations with customer cities for the treatment of waste water.
      (4)   Make recommendation to the city manager concerning the need for
expansion and improvements of the stormwater drainage system, floodplain and
drainage management, and maintenance and repairs of the Dallas Floodway Levee
System.
      (5)   Conduct negotiations with federal, state, and local agencies
regarding wastewater and stormwater legislation and permitting.
      (6)   Make recommendations to the city manager as to rates and connection
charges for the water utilities department necessary to defray the costs of
proper maintenance, operation, expansion, and extension of the water or
municipal and industrial waste water or stormwater systems and facilities,
treatment plants, reservoirs, appurtenances, facilities, and land owned and
operated by the water utilities department.
      (7)   Supervise and administer special collections.
      (8)   Provide for flood protection and education.
      (9)   Provide for the implementation of the Trinity River Corridor
project.
      (10)   Perform other duties as may be required by the city manager or by
ordinance of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 14215; 27697; 30675; 30994)
ARTICLE V-e.
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND URBAN DESIGN.
SEC. 2-52.   CREATED; CHIEF PLANNING OFFICER.
   There is hereby created the department of planning and urban design, the
head of which shall be the chief planning officer who shall be appointed by the
city manager. The department of planning and urban design will be composed of
the chief planning officer and such other assistants and employees as the city
council may provide by ordinance upon recommendation of the city manager. (Ord.
Nos. 29478; 29882)
SEC. 2-53.   DUTIES OF THE CHIEF PLANNING OFFICER.
   The chief planning officer shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the department of planning and urban
design.
      (2)   Advise the city manager, in cooperation with others designated by
the city manager, on matters affecting the urban design and physical
development of the city.
      (3)   Develop and recommend to the city manager a comprehensive plan for
the city.
      (4)   Review and make recommendations regarding proposed actions
implementing the comprehensive plan.
      (5)   Participate in the preparation and revision of the capital
improvement program.
      (6)   Coordinate all planning relating to urban redevelopment, urban
rehabilitation, and conservation intended to alleviate or prevent slums,
obsolescence, blight, or other conditions of urban deterioration.
      (7)   Provide services related to historic districts, historic
structures, and potential historic districts and structures.
      (8)   Administer the historic district tax incentive programs.
      (9)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council.
      (10)   Give advice and provide staff assistance to the board of
adjustment, the plan commission, and the landmark commission in the exercise of
their responsibilities. (Ord. Nos. 29478; 29882; 30239; 32002; 32557)
ARTICLE V-f.
DEPARTMENT OF EQUIPMENT AND FLEET MANAGEMENT.
SEC. 2-54.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF EQUIPMENT AND FLEET MANAGEMENT.
   There is hereby created the department of equipment and fleet management of
the city of Dallas, at the head of which shall be the director of equipment and
fleet management who shall be appointed by the city manager. The department
will be composed of the director of equipment and fleet management and other
assistants and employees as the city council may provide by ordinance upon
recommendation of the city manager. (Ord. 30994)
SEC. 2-55.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF EQUIPMENT AND FLEET MANAGEMENT.
   The director of equipment and fleet management shall perform the following
duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the department of equipment and fleet
management.
      (2)   Maintain and repair all automotive and heavy motor-driven equipment
owned by the city and used in municipal operations, except as otherwise
provided by the city manager.
      (3)   Maintain an inventory control over all automotive and heavy motor-
driven equipment and parts owned by the city, except as otherwise provided by
the city manager, and make reports as may be required by the city manager.
      (4)   Control all automotive and heavy motor-driven equipment used for
municipal purposes with the advice and assistance of the using department,
except as otherwise provided by the city manager.
      (5)    Provide advice and assistance to all departments and agencies of
the city government in the purchase of all automotive and heavy motor-drive
equipment to be used for municipal purposes.
      (6)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 30994)
SECS. 2-56 THRU 2-60.   RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI.
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
SEC. 2-61.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
   There is hereby created the department of human resources of the city of
Dallas, at the head of which shall be the director of human resources who shall
be appointed by the city manager. The department will be composed of the
director of human resources and other assistants and employees as the city
council may provide by ordinance upon recommendation of the city manager. (Ord.
22026)
SEC. 2-62.   DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
   The director of human resources shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the department of human resources.
      (2)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 22026; 28424)
SECS. 2-63 THRU 2-70.   RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII.
DEPARTMENT OF CODE COMPLIANCE.
SEC. 2-71.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF CODE COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   There is hereby created the department of code compliance of the city
of Dallas, at the head of which shall be the director of code compliance who
shall be appointed by the city manager. The director must be a person
professionally competent by experience and training to manage the department.
The department will be composed of the director of code compliance and other
assistants and employees as the city council may provide by ordinance upon
recommendation of the city manager.
   (b)   Whenever the director or department of streets, sanitation, and code
enforcement services is referred to in relation to a code enforcement
responsibility in this code or in any other city ordinance, the term means the
director or department of code compliance. (Ord. 23666)
SEC. 2-72.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF CODE COMPLIANCE.
   The director of the department of code compliance shall perform the
following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the department of code compliance.
      (2)   Supervise and administer code enforcement programs of the city,
except as otherwise provided by the city manager.
      (3)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 23666; 28424; 30240)
ARTICLE VII-a.
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
SEC. 2-73.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
   There is hereby created a division of the city manager’s office to be known
as the office of management services, the head of which shall be the director
of management services who shall be appointed by the city manager. The office
of management services will be composed of the director of management services
and other assistants and employees as the city council may provide by ordinance
upon recommendation of the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 25517; 27697)
SEC. 2-74.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
   The director of management services shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the office of management services.
      (2)   Supervise and administer vital statistics.
      (3)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 25517; 27697; 30675)
ARTICLE VII-b.
OFFICE OF DATA ANALYTICS AND BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE.
SEC. 2-75   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF DATA ANALYTICS AND BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE.
   There is hereby created a division of the city manager's office to be known
as the office of data analytics and business intelligence, the head of which
shall be the director of data analytics and business intelligence, who shall be
appointed by the city manager and who shall be a person professionally
competent by experience and training to manage the office. The office will be
composed of the director of data analytics and business intelligence and other
assistants and employees as the city council may provide by ordinance upon
recommendation of the city manager. (Ord. 31658)
SEC. 2-75.1.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF DATA ANALYTICS AND BUSINESS
INTELLIGENCE.
   The director of data analytics and business intelligence shall perform the
following duties:
   (1)   Supervise and administer the office of data analytics and business
intelligence.
   (2)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or by
ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 31658)
ARTICLE VIII.
SOCIALLY RESPONSIBLE BANKING.
SEC. 2-76.   PURPOSE.
   In return for the privilege of safeguarding and investing the community's
wealth and doing business with the city, financial institutions have a
continuing and affirmative obligation to serve the credit and other financial
needs of all communities, including and especially minority and low- and
moderate-income communities and older adults, consistent with applicable laws
and safety and soundness. The city shall assess financial institutions'
performance in meeting community needs and use this assessment as a factor in
its decision to place municipal deposits in and conduct other business with
financial institutions. (Ord. 32211)
SEC. 2-77.   CITY BANKING CONTRACTS.
   (a)   Powers and duties of the city treasurer.
      (1)   In selecting and monitoring qualified depositories for city moneys
in accordance with Dallas City Charter,
Chapter III, Section 20, the city treasurer shall have the power and duty to:
         (A)   require that prospective bidders provide the city with data on
their socially responsible banking practices;
         (B)   use socially responsible banking performance as a factor in
determining the winning bid;
         (C)   accept bids for depository services only from financial
institutions that have received a rating of "satisfactory" or "outstanding" in
their most recent Community Reinvestment Act review by the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or the
Federal Reserve Board;
         (D)   include in contracts for depository services a statement of work
in accordance with Section
2-78(a) that provides a framework for socially responsible banking; and
         (E)   gather an annual report required to be submitted by city
depositories by May 1 or the first business day following May 1 if May 1 falls
on a non-business day in accordance with Section
2-78. The city treasurer may accept an annual Environmental, Social, and
Governance (ESG) report (or other similar document) produced in the ordinary
course of business by the financial institution, provided it substantially
addresses the requirements set forth in this Section
2-78. If the financial institution does not produce an annual ESG report or the
annual ESG report does not substantially address the requirements in this
subparagraph, the city treasurer shall require delivery of an annual report in
accordance with Section
2-78.
      (2)   With written notice to the city council, the city treasurer may
waive the requirement in Section
2-77(a)(1)(C):
         (A)   if no qualified bidders apply;
         (B)   if the federal program is no longer applicable; or
         (C)   to satisfy a compelling city need.
      (3)   The city treasurer shall provide an annual briefing to the
appropriate city council committee. The committee shall review the
implementation, effectiveness, and enforcement of Section
2-77(a)(1)(E) and make recommendations to city council regarding the
authorization of city depositories.
      (4)   The city treasurer may request a voluntary report, consistent with
that required by Section
2-77(a)(1)(E), from other financial institutions with which the city does
business.
   (b)   Disqualification from contracting. Any depository that fails to submit
to the city the required reporting information in accordance with Section
2-77(a)(1)(E) may be prohibited from entering into any contract with the city
as a qualified depository for city moneys for a period of five years. (Ord.
32211)
SEC. 2-78.   STATEMENT OF WORK AND REPORTING.
   (a)   Statement of work. The statement of work for financial institutions in
which the city places municipal deposits must include factors related to
socially responsible banking that comply with this subsection. With written
notice to the city council, the city treasurer may deviate from this subsection
to make necessary updates to reflect new devices, products, or technology to
this scope of work. The statement of work must include:
      (1)   a statement of the bank's commitment to implementing a long-term
community reinvestment strategic plan to address disparities in its lending and
investment activities in the City of Dallas, including how the depository will
match or exceed peer lending performance in targeting capital access and credit
needs, and a copy of the bank's existing long-term community reinvestment
strategic plan, with appropriate redactions for proprietary information;
      (2)   a statement certifying that the depository institution has policies
and procedures in place to prevent it and its affiliates from becoming a high-
cost lender or a predatory lender consistent with Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency regulations, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB)
regulations, or, for state-chartered institutions, practices defined by the
FDIC's Supervisory Policy on Predatory Lending; and
      (3)   a comprehensive analysis of community banking needs and the
depository's community involvement and reinvestment, small business lending and
community development, home ownership and consumer credit programs, distressed
homeowners programs; products and services that are advantageous for the city
and its residents, and other ESG practices in accordance with this paragraph.
         (A)   Community involvement and reinvestment.
            (i)   The bank shall report to the city on its efforts to invest in
low and moderate income areas and minority census tracts.
            (ii)   The bank shall report if it is collaborating with and
supporting any non-profit organizations focused on providing financial
services, education, and asset building for low-income people in the city.
            (iii)   The bank shall report if it is collaborating with and
supporting any organization that provides free tax preparation services in the
city that target lower-income workers to help them take advantage of the Earned
Income Tax Credit and other tax credits.
            (iv)   The bank shall report on its community development
activities (such as investments, lending, and services) to demonstrate the
bank's response to the credit, financial, and banking needs of low to moderate
income individuals in the city, based on census tracts or zip codes provided by
the city.
         (B)   Community banking needs.
            (i)   The bank shall support and participate in programs that
strive to reach traditionally underserved populations as described in the
Community Reinvestment Act. These may include unbanked, under banked, and low-
income populations.
            (ii)   The bank shall provide easy-to-understand fee schedules and
make a reasonable effort to offer fair, responsible, and affordable small-
dollar loans.
         (C)   Home ownership and consumer credit.
            (i)   The bank shall participate in outreach and educational
opportunities aimed at providing information on loan modifications and
alternatives to foreclosures for borrowers experiencing financial hardship; and
            (ii)   The bank shall collaborate with HUD-certified housing
counseling services.
         (D)   ESG practices. The bank shall participate in community-based
causes and activities established to create responsible lending and
reinvestment in moderate- to low-income neighborhoods and communities of color.
   (b)   Reporting. Any banking contract must include a requirement that the
bank provide information to the city in accordance with this subsection.
      (1)   Residential lending information.
         (A)   The bank shall provide the total number and the total dollar
amount of residential loans for one- to four-family dwellings applied for and
originated during the previous calendar year in each of the following
categories:
            (i)   Home purchase loans, both federally insured and conventional
loans.
            (ii)    Refinancings of home loans.
            (iii)   Home improvement loans.
            (iv)   Home equity loans.
            (v)   Loans for second residences and investment properties.
         (B)   The bank shall report the number and percentage of loans to low-
and moderate-income borrowers and by race and ethnicity.
         (C)   The bank shall provide peer comparisons for the percent of all
loans made by all lenders to borrowers.
         (D)   The data gathered in accordance with this paragraph must be for
the entire city by census tract or zip code. The city shall provide the census
tract or zip code data. For home loans, fixed-rate loans must be reported
separately from adjustable-rate loans.
      (2)   Small business lending information.
         (A)   The city shall assess a bank's small business lending practices
based upon data published by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).
The bank shall provide the city a copy of the most recently available Dallas
data published by the CFPB.
         (B)   The bank shall provide the number and dollar amount of small
business loans originated during the previous calendar year for the entire city
by zip code or census tract and for minority- and women-owned business
enterprises in the entire city. Loans to small businesses with annual revenues
above $1 million must be reported separately from loans to small businesses
with annual revenues under $1 million consistent with CFPB reporting
requirements. The bank may use data reporting procedures mandated by the
federal Community Reinvestment Act for reporting small business loans with peer
comparisons.
      (3)   Community development loans and investments. The bank shall provide
the number and dollar amount of community development loans and investments
including loans and investments for affordable housing, small business
development, economic development, and community facilities for the entire city
by census tract or zip code. The bank may use definitions of community
development found in federal Community Reinvestment Act regulations. For each
loan and investment, the bank shall indicate if the loan or investment was for
affordable housing, small business development, economic development, community
facilities, and other such categories requested by the city treasurer.
      (4)   Checking, savings, and loan products. Information on selected
checking, savings, prepaid card, small dollar loan, and other products marketed
to Dallas residents, including information on fees, interest, and features.
      (5)   Branch closures. The bank shall provide the city with at least 30
days advance written notice of branch closures within the city or at the same
time as the notice to customers consistent with Section 42, "Notice of Branch
Closure," of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDIC).
      (6)   The bank shall provide an update to the information it submitted as
part of its proposal in accordance with Section
2-78(a), focused on the results of its efforts since the prior submission, and
any changes of note to its partnerships, participation, or activities. (Ord.
32211)
SECS. 2-79 THRU 2-80.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. Nos. 17226; 17393; 31049)
ARTICLE VIII-a.
CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY.
Division 1. Tort Claims.
SEC. 2-81.   FILING CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY.
   Any person wishing to file a claim against the city shall file the claim
with the office of risk management in compliance with the form requirements and
six- month notice requirements set forth in Sections 1, 2, and 3, Chapter XXIII
of the city charter. (Ord. Nos. 21674; 22026; 26225; 28424; 27805)
SEC. 2-82.   HANDLING BY CITY ATTORNEY.
   The city attorney is authorized to investigate, settle, and recommend
disposition of all claims against the city that are alleged to have resulted
from any act or omission of an officer, servant, or employee of the city. (Ord.
Nos. 14211; 20527; 22026; 26225; 28424; 28705)
SEC. 2-83.   HANDLING BY DIRECTOR OF RISK MANAGEMENT.
   The director of risk management is authorized to assist the city attorney in
investigating, settling, and recommending disposition of any claim against the
city for property damage, personal injury, or wrongful death that is alleged to
have resulted from the negligent act or omission of an officer, servant, or
employee of the city. The director of risk management is further authorized to
investigate, at the request of the city attorney, any other claim against the
city. (Ord. Nos. 20527; 22026; 26225; 28424; 28705)
SEC. 2-84.   PAYMENT OF A PROPERTY DAMAGE, PERSONAL INJURY, OR WRONGFUL DEATH
CLAIM WITHOUT PRIOR CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   (a)   The city controller shall, without prior city council approval, pay a
claim for property damage, personal injury, or wrongful death that has been
settled for an amount that does not exceed $25,000 when payment is recommended
by the city attorney, or by the director of risk management when assisting the
city attorney in handling the claim, and approved by the city manager, except
that payment of a meritorious claim, in whatever amount, must be approved by
the city council as required by Section 4, Chapter XXIII of the city charter.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, claims for property damage, personal
injury, and wrongful death resulting from the same occurrence may be considered
as separate claims. (Ord. Nos. 14211; 15279; 17353; 20527; 21354; 22026; 24415;
26225; 28424; 28705)
SEC. 2-85.   NON-WAIVER OF NOTICE OF CLAIM.
   The delegation of authority to the city attorney or the director of risk
management prescribed by this division does not grant the city attorney or the
director of risk management authority to waive the six months written notice of
claim requirement contained in Sections 1 and 2, Chapter XXIII of the city
charter. (Ord. Nos. 14211; 20527; 22026; 26225; 28424; 28705)
Division 2. Breach of Contract Claims.
SEC. 2-86.   NOTICE REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN BREACH OF CONTRACT CLAIMS.
   (a)   In this division:
      (1)   CITY CONTRACT or CONTRACT means a written contract that is properly
executed or entered into by the city.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the city department that is
responsible for administering the city contract that is the subject of a claim
filed pursuant to this section, or the director’s designee.
      (3)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, partnership, professional
corporation, limited liability company, or any other legally constituted and
existing business entity, other than the city.
   (b)   This section applies to any alleged breach of contract by the city
occurring on or after January 30, 2006.
   (c)   A person may not file or maintain a lawsuit or alternative dispute
resolution proceeding to recover damages for the city’s breach of a city
contract unless, as a condition precedent and a jurisdictional prerequisite to
the filing of the lawsuit or proceeding:
      (1)   the person files a notice of claim with the city manager in
writing, in the form prescribed in Subsection (d) of this section, not later
than 180 days after the date of occurrence of the event that gives rise to the
breach of contract claim; and
      (2)   the city council, or the city manager in the case where a change
order or contract amendment may be authorized by administrative action or
administrative change order, neglects or refuses to pay all or part of the
claim on or before the 90th day after the date of presentation of written
notice in accordance with this section.
   (d)   The written notice of claim required under Subsection (c) must:
      (1)   state the facts giving rise to the alleged breach;
      (2)   state the legal theory justifying recovery for the alleged breach;
      (3)   state the amount the person seeks in damages; and
      (4)   include supporting documentation indicating how those damages were
calculated.
   (e)   The city attorney is authorized to investigate, evaluate, and
recommend settlement or disposition of any breach of contract claim made
against the city pursuant to this section.
   (f)   The city manager and the director shall assist the city attorney in
the investigation, evaluation, and recommendation processes related to the
settlement and disposition of a breach of contract claim made against the city
pursuant to this section.
   (g)   The delegation of authority conferred under Subsection (e) or (f) does
not include the authority to waive any requirements of this section.
   (h)   Nothing in this section supersedes, modifies, or excuses compliance
with any other requirement for notices established by any city contract, law,
or equity.
   (i)   A person filing a claim under this section is not entitled to recover
attorney’s fees, either as a part of the damages calculated in the notice of
claim or in any subsequent lawsuit or alternative dispute resolution
proceeding.
   (j)   Nothing in this section may be construed as waiving the city’s
governmental immunity from suit or liability.
   (k)   The provisions of this section are incorporated by reference into all
existing and future city contracts.
   (l)   The city manager may, with the concurrence of the city attorney, elect
to treat a notice received pursuant to this section as a demand for nonbinding
mediation. If the city manager treats the notice as a demand for nonbinding
mediation, the city manager shall, within a reasonable time, notify the person
filing the claim of that election and of the applicable procedures to be
followed. The notice of nonbinding mediation extends by 60 days the applicable
period for responding to a claim notice set forth in Subsection (c)(2). (Ord.
Nos. 26225; 28705)
SEC. 2-87.   PAYMENT OF A BREACH OF CONTRACT CLAIM WITHOUT PRIOR CITY COUNCIL
APPROVAL.
   The city controller shall, without prior city council approval, pay a breach
of contract claim that has been settled for an amount that does not exceed
$25,000 when payment is recommended by the city attorney and approved by the
city manager. (Ord. 28705)
Division 3. Miscellaneous Claims, Fines, Penalties, and Sanctions against the
City.
SEC. 2-88.   HANDLING AND INVESTIGATION OF MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS, FINES,
PENALTIES, AND SANCTIONS AGAINST THE CITY.
   (a)   The city attorney is authorized to investigate, evaluate, and
recommend settlement or disposition of:
      (1)   any claim made against the city (other than a property damage,
personal injury, or wrongful death claim governed by
Division 1 of this article or a breach of contract claim governed by
Division 2 of this article); or
      (2)   any fine, penalty, or sanction imposed upon the city.
   (b)   The city manager or the city manager’s designee shall assist the city
attorney in the investigation, evaluation, and recommendation processes related
to the settlement and disposition of a claim, fine, penalty, or sanction under
this division. (Ord. 28705)
SEC. 2-89.   PAYMENT OF A MISCELLANEOUS CLAIM, FINE, PENALTY, OR SANCTION
WITHOUT PRIOR CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   The city controller shall, without prior city council approval, pay any
claim made against the city (other than a property damage, personal injury, or
wrongful death claim governed by
Division 1 of this article or a breach of contract claim governed by
Division 2 of this article) or any fine, penalty, or sanction imposed upon the
city that has been settled for an amount that does not exceed $25,000 when
payment is recommended by the city attorney and approved by the city manager.
(Ord. 28705)
SECS. 2-90 THRU 2-94.   RESERVED. 
(Ord. Nos. 20527; 26225; 28705)
ARTICLE IX.
PERMIT AND LICENSE APPEAL BOARD.
SEC. 2-95.   PERMIT AND LICENSE APPEAL BOARD - CREATED; FUNCTION; TERMS.
   (a)   There is hereby created the permit and license appeal board of the
city, which shall be composed of 15 members. Each city council member shall
appoint one member to the board. The mayor shall appoint the board chair, and
the full city council shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   The permit and license appeal board shall hear appeals of department
directors’ actions on licenses and permits issued by the city filed in
accordance with Section
2-96 of this chapter and requests for exemptions from locational restrictions
filed in accordance with Section
14-2.3,
14-2.4, or
41A-14 of this code, whichever applies.
   (c)   Each member shall be appointed for a two- year term beginning on
October 1 of each odd- numbered year. All members shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified. (Ord. Nos. 18200; 21153; 21514; 22259;
23386; 25002; 29645)
SEC. 2-95.1.   TRAINING.
   (a)   Every person appointed as a member of the permit and license appeal
board must attend a one-day training course before hearing an appeal under
Section
2-96 of this chapter or a request for an exemption from locational restrictions
under Section
14-2.3,
14-2.4, or
41A-14 of this code, whichever applies. The training course will include, but
not be limited to:
      (1)   an orientation session concerning the powers and duties of the
permit and license appeal board and the procedures and requirements for hearing
appeals and requests for exemptions from locational restrictions;
      (2)   instruction in the city’s ordinances governing the various licenses
and permits issued by the city that may be involved in appeals to the permit
and license appeal board;
      (3)   instruction concerning locational restrictions contained in
Chapters 14 and
41A of this code and the procedures and requirements for obtaining exemptions
from those restrictions; and
      (4)   a mock hearing or an observation of an actual hearing.
   (b)   A person who fails to attend the one-day training course within 90
days from the date of appointment as a member of the permit and license appeal
board shall forfeit that position with the city, and that position becomes
vacant. (Ord. Nos. 23386; 23736; 25002)
SEC. 2-96.   APPEALS FROM ACTIONS OF DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS.
   (a)   If the director of a city department denies, suspends, or revokes a
license or permit over which the director has regulatory authority, and no
appeal is provided by ordinance to another city board, the action is final
unless the applicant, licensee, or permittee files a written appeal to the
permit and license appeal board with the city secretary within 10 calendar days
after the date of receiving notice of the director’s action.
   (b)   If a written request for an appeal hearing is filed with the city
secretary within the 10-day limit, the permit and license appeal board shall
hear the appeal. The city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within 60
days after the date the appeal is filed.
   (c)   The permit and license appeal board shall hear and consider evidence
offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply.
The permit and license appeal board shall decide the appeal on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing if there is a dispute of
fact, otherwise the board shall decide the appeal in accordance with the
provisions of this code. The board shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action
of the director by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority decision on a
motion leaves the director’s decision unchanged. A hearing of the permit and
license appeal board may proceed if a quorum of the board is present. The
decision of the permit and license appeal board is final as to administrative
remedies, and no rehearing may be granted. (Ord. Nos. 18200; 20279; 21185;
23386; 25002)
SEC. 2-97.   RESETS AND CONTINUANCES OF HEARINGS BEFORE THE PERMIT AND LICENSE
APPEAL BOARD.
   (a)   A request for a reset or continuance of an appeal hearing or of a
hearing on an exemption from a locational restriction must be granted by the
city secretary if the request is received in writing by the city secretary not
less than 10 days before the scheduled hearing date.
   (b)   The city secretary may not grant any request for a reset or
continuance received less than 10 days before a scheduled hearing date, unless
the city secretary, after notifying all parties to the appeal or exemption
hearing of the request, determines that:
      (1)   exigent, compelling, or exceptional circumstances exist that:
         (A)   were unforeseen by and beyond the control of the person
requesting the reset or continuance; and
         (B)   require immediate action or attention by the person requesting
the reset or continuance; and
      (2)   no opposing party will be unreasonably damaged or inconvenienced by
the reset or continuance.
   (c)   Notwithstanding Subsection (a) of this section, a party that has been
granted one reset of a scheduled hearing may not be granted another reset of
any scheduled hearing for the same appeal or request for an exemption unless
the city secretary makes the determinations required by Subsection (b) of this
section. (Ord. Nos. 23386; 25002)
SEC. 2-98.   PUBLIC NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR HEARINGS ON EXEMPTIONS FROM
LOCATIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   If a permit or license is denied because of a locational restriction and the
applicant is seeking an exemption to the locational restriction from the permit
and license appeal board, a nonrefundable public notice fee of $100 must be
paid to the director of development services at the time the written request
for the exemption hearing is filed. Not less than 10 days before the hearing
date, the director of development services shall publish notice of the hearing
in a newspaper of general circulation and provide written notice of the hearing
to all neighborhood associations registered with the department of development
services to receive zoning notices for the area in which the subject of the
exemption is located. The director of development services may waive the $100
public notice fee upon receipt of an affidavit from the applicant showing
financial hardship. (Ord. Nos. 23386; 25002; 25047; 27697; 32002)
SEC. 2-99.   APPEALS TO STATE DISTRICT COURT.
   Once the decision of the permit and license appeal board is final under
Section
2-96 of this chapter for an appeal of a department director’s action on a
license or permit or under Section
14-2.3,
14-2.4, or
41A-14 of this code, whichever applies, for a request for an exemption from a
locational restriction, the decision may be appealed to the state district
court by the city, by the applicant, licensee, or permittee, or by any other
person aggrieved by the decision. An appeal to the state district court must be
filed within 20 days after the date of the board’s final decision. An appeal to
the state district court is limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence
rule. (Ord. Nos. 18200; 20279; 21185; 23386; 25002)
SEC. 2-100.   RESERVED.
ARTICLE X.
PUBLIC ART PROGRAM.
SEC. 2-101.   PURPOSE.
   The city recognizes the importance of expanding the opportunities for its
citizens to experience public art and other projects resulting from the
creative expression of its visual artists in public places of the city. The
city further recognizes the substantial economic benefits to be gained in the
form of increased tourism through enhancement of public spaces and consequent
retail activity throughout the city. A policy is established in this article to
include works of art and design services of artists in certain city capital
improvement projects. (Ord. Nos. 20064; 20267)
SEC. 2-102.   DEFINITIONS.
      (1)   ANNUAL PUBLIC ART PROJECTS PLAN means a prioritized list, to be
recommended by the arts and culture advisory commission and approved by the
city council, of visual projects, including budgets and recommended design
approaches, developed by the public art committee in consultation with city
departments anticipating capital improvement projects.
      (2)   BONDS means all general obligation bonds, revenue bonds,
certificates, notes, or other obligations authorized and issued by the city.
      (3)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (4)   CITY BOND PROCEEDS means the proceeds from bonds payable from a
pledge of all or part of any revenues, funds, or taxes, or any combination
thereof. The term does not include proceeds of bonds authorized and issued by
the city to refund or otherwise refinance other bonds.
      (5)   CITY CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECT means any permanent public
improvement project paid for wholly or in part by monies appropriated by the
city to construct, improve, or renovate a building, including its appurtenant
facilities, a decorative or commemorative structure, a park, a street, a
sidewalk, a parking facility, a utility, or any portion thereof, within the
city limits or under the jurisdiction of the city. This term includes projects
at the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport only upon approval of the public
art program by the airport board and the city of Fort Worth.
      (6)   DEMOLITION COSTS means payments for any work needed for the removal
of a building or other existing structure from city property.
      (7)   EQUIPMENT COSTS means payments for any rolling stock, equipment, or
furnishing that is portable and of standard manufacture or that is installed as
part of normal major maintenance, whether portable or affixed. The term does
not include an item, whether portable or affixed, that is custom designed or
specially fabricated for a facility.
      (8)   NORMAL MAJOR MAINTENANCE COSTS means payments for any work needed
to maintain and preserve city property in a safe and functional condition,
including, but not limited to, the cleaning, replacement, and repair of floors,
ceilings, roofs, landscaping, and plumbing, mechanical, and electrical systems.
      (9)   PUBLIC ART ACCOUNT means a separate account established within each
capital improvement project fund by the city to receive monies appropriated to
the public art program; provided that:
         (A)   city bond proceeds to be used for the public art program must be
maintained in the respective bond funds established in accordance with the city
ordinance authorizing the issuance of the bonds; and
         (B)   monies from non-bond sources that are appropriated from a city
fund to be used for the public art program must be maintained in a separate
account within that fund.
      (10)   PUBLIC ART ADMINISTRATION FUND means an annual appropriation from
each public art account for administration of the public art program.
      (11)   PUBLIC ART COLLECTION means all city-owned artworks that are not
under the care and control of nonprofit institutions operating under management
agreements with the city.
      (12)   PUBLIC ART COMMITTEE means a subcommittee of the arts and culture
advisory commission appointed to oversee quality control of the public art
program and projects and to report to and recommend to the arts and culture
advisory commission the scope of projects, artworks, and artists for the public
art program. The public arts committee shall be composed of three members who
are full city council appointments to the arts and culture advisory commission
and eight members who are professionally qualified residents appointed by the
arts and culture advisory commission.
      (13)   REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION COSTS means payments made for the
purchase of parcels of land, and any existing buildings, structures, or
improvements on the land, and costs incurred by the city for appraisals or
negotiations in connection with the purchase. (Ord. Nos. 20064; 20267; 20456;
21972; 31049)
SEC. 2-103.   FUNDING OF THE PUBLIC ART PROGRAM.
   (a)   Appropriations. Beginning January 1, 1989, all appropriations for city
capital improvement projects, whether financed with city bond proceeds or city
monies from any other source, shall include an amount equal to 1.5 percent of
the total capital improvement project appropriation, or an amount equal to 0.75
percent of the total appropriation for a project that is exclusively for
street, storm drainage, utility, or sidewalk improvements, to be used for
design services of artists, for the selection, acquisition, commissioning, and
display of artworks, and for administration of the public art projects. Monies
appropriated as part of one project, but not deemed necessary by the city
council in total or in part for the project, may be expended on other projects
approved under the annual public art projects plan; provided that proceeds from
bonds issued and authorized for a particular use or purpose shall not be used
or diverted for a different use or purpose.
   (b)   Grants and contributions from non-city sources. Beginning January 1,
1989, each city department shall include in every application to a granting
authority for a capital improvement project grant an amount for artists’
services and artworks in accordance with this article. The public art
appropriation shall apply to all capital improvement projects financed with
grants or contributions from private persons or governmental or public
agencies, subject to conditions of the granting or contributing person or
agency. If the public art appropriation is not allowed as a reimbursable
expense, only the city- funded portion of the project is subject to the public
art appropriation.
   (c)   Method of calculation. The minimum amount to be appropriated for
artists’ services and artworks is equal to the total city capital improvement
project appropriation multiplied by 0.015, or by 0.0075 if the project is
exclusively for street, storm drainage, utility, or sidewalk improvements;
provided that amounts budgeted for real property acquisition costs, demolition
costs, equipment costs, normal major maintenance costs, financing costs, costs
paid for from the contingency reserve fund, capital reserve funds, or interest
earnings on city bond proceeds, costs of any below-grade water or wastewater
improvements, and costs of resurfacing or repair of existing streets,
sidewalks, and appurtenant drainage improvements are not subject to the
calculation.
   (d)   Public art accounts. Amounts appropriated pursuant to this article
shall be established by the city manager, or his designee, in a public art
account within each capital improvement project fund. Contributions to the
public art program from private sources shall be deposited into a separate
public art account, subject to any donor’s conditions within the instrument of
conveyance. Disbursements from each public art account must be made in
accordance with the annual public art projects plan and this article.
   (e)   City bond financed projects.
      (1)   This article shall apply to a city capital improvement project
financed with proceeds from:
         (A)   general obligation bonds authorized and approved by the voters
on or after January 1, 1989; or
         (B)   revenue bonds, certificates, notes, or other obligations
authorized and approved by the city council on or after January 1, 1989.
      (2)   This article shall not apply to any refunding bond proceeds.
      (3)   The public art appropriation on a city capital improvement project
financed with city bond proceeds shall be established in the fiscal year in
which the bonds are sold.
      (4)   In developing the capital improvement program for bond-financed
capital improvement projects, the city manager may recommend that the city
council exempt certain bond-financed capital improvement projects from the
application of this article. The city manager’s recommendations shall govern
unless the city council provides otherwise.
      (5)   If a city capital improvement project is financed with city bond
proceeds, the use of any amounts appropriated for artists’ services and works
of art in accordance with this article must be consistent with any voted
proposition approved by the voters of the city, any resolution or ordinance
adopted by the city council authorizing issuance of the bonds, and applicable
state or federal law. In no event shall city bond proceeds be used for public
art maintenance purposes.
   (f)   Water and wastewater utility projects.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the public art
appropriation for that portion of a city capital improvement project financed
with Dallas water utilities department revenues shall not exceed 0.75 percent
of the total water utilities revenues appropriated for the capital improvement
project.
      (2)   This article shall not apply to:
         (A)   any city capital improvement project financed with Dallas water
utilities department revenues that is located outside the city limits; or
         (B)   any below-grade capital improvement financed with Dallas water
utilities department revenues, whether or not the below-grade improvement is
part of a city capital improvement project that involves at-grade or above-
grade improvements.
   (g)   City council exclusions. When adopting the capital budget each year,
the city council may exclude individual city capital improvement projects from
the application of this article. (Ord. Nos. 20064; 20267)
SEC. 2-104.   USES OF MONIES IN PUBLIC ART ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   Monies appropriated under this article may be used for artists’ design
concepts and for the selection, acquisition, purchase, commissioning,
placement, installation, exhibition, and display of artworks. Artworks must be
of a permanent nature and may be integral to the architecture or incorporated
into the city capital improvement project.
   (b)   Up to 20 percent of the total annual public art appropriation shall be
used to establish the public art administration fund and may be used to pay the
costs incurred in the administration of the public art program, including
project administration, artist- selection-related costs, architect’s fees where
collaboration is involved, design, drawing, and maquette costs, community
education, insurance, curatorial services, identifying plaques, documentation,
publicity, and such other purposes as may be deemed appropriate by the city
council for the administration of the public art program. (Ord. Nos. 20064;
20267)
SEC. 2-105.   ADMINISTRATION OF THE PUBLIC ART PROGRAM - RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   Arts and culture advisory commission and the office of arts and
culture. The arts and culture advisory commission, acting in cooperation with
the director of arts and culture, shall have the following duties and
responsibilities associated with the administration of the public art program:
      (1)   The overall administration of the public art program, including the
selection of resident members of the public art committee, the establishment of
program policies and guidelines, the recommendations of program budgets, and
the approval of all selection juries and all other recommendations made by the
public art committee to the arts and culture advisory commission.
      (2)   The establishment of policies and guidelines to facilitate and
encourage the donation of high quality artworks to the city.
      (3)   The establishment of policies and guidelines to ensure that the
long-term collection of artworks by the city represents a broad range of
artistic schools, styles, tastes, and media, without giving exclusive support
to any particular one, and gives consideration to affirmative action.
      (4)   The review of a survey, to be updated annually, of the condition of
the public art collection. The survey must include a report on the condition of
each artwork, prioritized recommendations for the restoration, repair, and
maintenance of the artwork, and estimated costs.
      (5)   The recommendation of an annual designation of funds for repair and
maintenance of the public art collection. Any recommendation involving a work
of art for which operation or maintenance costs exceed $5,000 a year must be
accompanied by a detailed fiscal note.
   (b)   Public art committee. The public art committee shall have the
following duties and responsibilities associated with the administration of the
public art program, with all decisions and recommendations made by the public
art committee being subject to the review and approval of the arts and culture
advisory commission and, when required, the city council:
      (1)   The commission of artworks; the review of the design, execution,
and placement of artworks; and the overseeing of the removal of artworks from
the public art collection.
      (2)   The designation of sites for implementation of the public art
program; the recommendation of the scope and budget of public art program
projects; and the overseeing of the artist selection process.
      (3)   The selection of juries, to be composed of professionals in the
visual arts and design fields and members of the community, who will recommend
artists and artworks of the highest quality.
      (4)   The education of the community on the public arts program.
      (5)   The review and recommendation for approval of any artworks proposed
to be donated to the city. (Ord. Nos. 20064; 20267; 20456; 21972; 22026; 23694;
31049; 31333, eff. 10/1/19)
SECS. 2-106 THRU 2-117.   RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI.
FILLING TEMPORARY VACANCIES.
SEC. 2-118.   DESIGNATION, APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF TEMPORARY ACTING AND
ACTING CITY MANAGER.
   The following procedures shall be used to fill the position of city manager
where a temporary vacancy of the type specified occurs in that position, and
such successors shall be responsible for the duties as ascribed thereto:
   (a)   Designation and duties of temporary acting city manager. The city
manager shall, by written memorandum filed with the city secretary and with
copies forwarded to each member of the city council, the city auditor, the city
attorney and all other department directors, designate one of his assistants
who shall have and exercise the powers and duties of the city manager during
his absence from the city for any reason. Any documents, orders or official
papers signed by him shall be presumed to have been signed during the absence
of the city manager and in his official capacity while so acting. The authority
and responsibility of the city manager shall continue to exist concurrently
with those of the temporary acting city manager and he shall resume his duties
upon his return.
   (b)   Appointment and duties of acting city manager.
      (1)   In the event the city manager is absent from the city for an
extended period of time for whatever reason or is unable to perform his duties
by reason of any illness or disability, the city council may appoint a
temporary successor to be titled acting city manager to perform the duties of
the city manager until his return to the city or his recovery from such illness
or disability. During such period of time, the city manager shall be relieved
of his authority and responsibilities.
      (2)   In the event the position of city manager becomes vacant by reason
of termination or dismissal, the city council may appoint a temporary successor
as acting city manager to perform the duties of city manager, pending the
selection and appointment of a successor on a permanent basis.
      (3)   Any such temporary appointment shall be made at a regular meeting
of the city council by majority vote, and a copy of the memorandum of
appointment shall be promptly furnished the mayor, each member of the city
council, the city attorney and to department directors.
      (4)   During the term of a temporary appointment, the acting city manager
shall have the powers and duties of the city manager, as set forth in the
charter, ordinances and resolutions. (Ord. 13015)
SEC. 2-119.   DESIGNATION, APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF TEMPORARY ACTING AND
ACTING DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS; “DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR” DEFINED.
   As used herein, the term “department director” means the official of any
department of the city whose title is “director,” “chief” or “manager” thereof
or any other official who is the head of any administrative department or
office of the city.
   The following procedures shall be used to fill vacancies as they may occur
with respect to the director of any city department, and the successor in
office shall be responsible for the duties as ascribed thereto:
   (a)   Designation and duties of temporary acting department director. Every
department director shall, by written memorandum filed with the city manager in
the case of those appointed by him and with the city secretary, city auditor
and the city attorney, designate one of his assistants to be temporary acting
department director who shall have and exercise the powers of the department
director during his absence from the city for any reason. The authority and
responsibility of the department director shall continue to exist concurrently
with the temporary acting department director, and he shall resume his duties
upon his return.
   (b)   Appointment and duties of acting department director.
      (1)   In the event a department director is absent from the city for an
extended period of time, or is deemed by the city council, city manager, board
or commission that has the appointing authority with respect to the department
director, to be unable to perform his duties by reason of any illness or
disability, the appointing authority may appoint a temporary successor, with
the title of acting department director, to perform the duties of the
department director until his return to the city, or his recovery from such
illness or disability.
      (2)   In the event a department director’s position is vacated by reason
of termination or dismissal, or if a new department is established, the
appointing authority may appoint an acting department director to exercise the
duties of the position pending the selection and appointment of the department
director on a permanent basis.
      (3)   Appointments to positions of acting department director made by the
appointing authority shall be by memorandum and a copy of such memorandum shall
promptly be furnished the city manager, in cases of action by the council, a
commission or board, the city secretary, the city auditor and the city
attorney. The city secretary shall retain in an official file a signed copy of
every such memorandum for a period of five years from the date thereof.
      (4)   During the term of such appointment, the acting department director
shall have the same powers and duties of the department director, as set forth
in the charter, ordinances and resolutions. During such term of appointment,
the department director shall be relieved of his authority and
responsibilities. (Ord. 13015)
ARTICLE XII.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
SEC. 2-120.   ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION - CREATED; FUNCTION; TERMS; MEETINGS.
   (a)    There is hereby created an environmental commission of the city,
which shall be composed of 15 voting members of the general public and eight
non-voting technical expert members. Each city council member shall appoint one
voting member to the commission. The mayor shall appoint the commission chair;
and the full council shall appoint the vice-chair. The non-voting technical
experts shall be appointed by the full council from each sector of the
comprehensive environmental and climate action plan ("CECAP"). Two of the
general public members must have public health experience. All other general
public members must have a minimum of two years environmental experience or a
minimum of two years of neighborhood environmental advocacy.
      (1)   Public health experience may be demonstrated through documented
experience which meets the Center for Disease Control's definition of public
health that includes promoting healthy lifestyles, researching disease and
injury prevention, and detecting, preventing, and responding to infectious
diseases. This qualification may include employment with a health-related
entity such as a hospital, clinic, a public health organization, or a non-
profit focused on improving local public health.
      (2)   Environmental experience may be demonstrated through documented
education, professional registrations or certifications, or expertise in one or
more areas of the CECAP. This qualification may include, but is not limited to,
citizen-science certifications, or a bachelor of science or arts in related
engineering, environmental sciences, environmental management systems, natural
sciences, architecture, landscape architecture, agriculture, and other
documented backgrounds related to local, state, and federal laws, or
environmental regulations.
      (3)   Neighborhood environmental advocacy may be demonstrated through
documented residency in neighborhoods negatively impacted by environmental
issues, with related experience with local neighborhood issues including, but
not limited to, transportation, water and waste management, zoning and land use
issues, or experience relevant to one or more sections of the CECAP.
   (b)   A quorum exists when there are physically present a simple majority of
the number of members officially appointed to the environmental commission,
regardless of the total number of members actually provided for the
environmental commission, except that a quorum may not be fewer than six
members. Issues are decided by a simple majority of the members present. Each
member who is present and entitled to vote must vote in accordance with
Chapter 8 of the Dallas City Code.
   (c)   The environmental commission shall advise on the CECAP implementation
and environmental issues which arise in the city.
   (d)   All members shall be appointed for an initial term to expire on June
14, 2023. Subsequent appointments shall be made in September of each odd-
numbered year for a two-year term beginning October 1. All members shall serve
until their successors are appointed and qualified. A vacancy for the unexpired
term of any members shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment was made. The members shall serve without compensation.
   (e)   The commission, unless there is no business for the commission to
consider, must meet at least once per month and may hold additional meetings at
the call of the chair. The commission shall receive public comment at every
meeting of the commission, standing committees, and ad hoc committees.
   (f)   The commission shall adopt, subject to approval of city council,
rules, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances, governing its
proceedings and establishing committees of the commission.
   (g)   This article expires on June 14, 2027, unless reenacted with an
amendment prior to that date. The city council shall review this section and
hold a public hearing on the matter prior to that date. (Ord. Nos. 31847;
32466; 33115)
SEC. 2-121.   TECHNICAL RESOURCE PANEL.
   (a)   There is hereby created a technical resource panel to be composed of
eight members appointed by the city council to serve as non-voting technical
members of the commission.
      (1)   The technical resource panel is not a board or commission subject
to
Chapter 8 of this code or
Chapter XXIV, Section 13 of the city charter.
      (2)   The city manager may nominate members of the first technical
resource panel, as recommended by the Office of Environmental Quality and
Sustainability, through consultation with the Environment and Sustainability
Task Force, for approval by the full council.
      (3)   Following the initial appointments, future technical resource panel
members may be nominated by the city manager, as recommended by the Office of
Environmental Quality and Sustainability, through consultation with the
Environmental Commission, for approval by the full council.
   (b)   Each member of the technical resource panel must have at least four
years of experience in one of the eight sectors of the CECAP, causing each
sector to be represented on the panel. Additionally, appointments to the panel
must, to the extent possible, be representative of the ethnic diversity of the
city.
   (c)   Members of the technical resource panel are not required to be
residents of the city or qualified voters in the city.
   (d)   Members of the technical resource panel serve two-year terms and are
subject to the same conflict of interest and confidentiality restrictions that
are applicable to members of the commission. Members of the technical resource
panel are subject to forfeiture of membership on the same basis as members of
the commission.
   (e)   Members of the technical resource panel shall attend and fully
participate in all meetings and deliberations of the commission, including
closed sessions, but shall not be entitled to vote as members of the
commission.
   (f)   The technical resource panel shall use its expertise and experience in
environmental matters to assist the commission to the fullest extent possible
in the review of all issues coming before the commission.
   (g)   The technical resource panel does not have any oversight
responsibility or oversight authority with respect to the commission.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits the commission from seeking
additional outside technical expertise and advice, as necessary. (Ord. 31847)
SEC. 2-122.   ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH COMMITTEE.
   (a)   There is hereby created a committee of the environmental commission to
be known as the environmental health committee, hereinafter called the
"committee", composed of five members. The committee shall be appointed within
60 days following the effective date of the establishment of the commission.
The committee shall be composed of the two general public members of the
commission having public health experience and three additional members from
general public not currently serving on the commission, appointed by the
chairman of the commission. Initial appointments to the committee shall expire
on June 14, 2023. Subsequent appointments shall be made in September of each
odd-numbered year for a two-year term beginning October 1 and members shall
serve without compensation. The chairman of the commission shall designate a
chairman and vice- chairman of the committee from the members of the commission
having public health experience. The commission chairman may appoint up to
three alternate members to the committee who serve in the absence of one or
more regular members when requested to do so by the chairman or by the city
manager. The alternate members serve for the same period and are subject to
removal the same as regular members. The commission chairman shall fill
vacancies occurring in the alternate membership the same as in the regular
membership.
   (b)   The committee shall meet at least once per quarter with additional
meetings upon call by the committee chairman or a simple majority of the
committee members. A simple majority of the members present shall constitute a
quorum and issues shall be decided by a simple majority vote of the members
present. The Office of Environmental Quality and Sustainability shall furnish
support to the committee.
   (c)   The function of the committee shall be to advise the commission on
environmental health issues as they arise across the city, including, but not
limited to, potential health aspects of environmental policy recommendations
from the commission to the city council and to address specific community
public health concerns with an identified environmental origin. (Ord. 31847)
SECS. 2-123 THRU 2-124. RESERVED.
(Repealed by Ord. 24316)
ARTICLE XIII.
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. COMMUNITY CENTER BOARD.
SEC. 2-125.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   (1)   MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. COMMUNITY CENTER means the group of buildings
located in the 2900 block of Forest Avenue in the city that are in proximity to
one another and in which the city and other agencies or organizations offer a
consolidation of various community services into a single delivery system in
response to the needs of the community.
   (2)   SERVICES means the functions and work performed by community agencies
concerned with the health, education, social, physical, economic and other
related needs to improve the quality of the urban environment. Such services
may be provided by privately or publicly sponsored organizations and agencies.
   (3)   SERVICE AREA means the geographical area within the city primarily
served by the Martin Luther King, Jr. community center, as shall be delineated
by the city council.
   (4)   BOARD means the Martin Luther King, Jr. community center board. (Ord.
Nos. 13384; 14941; 15574; 15955)
SEC. 2-126.   CREATED; TERMS; MEMBERSHIP; VACANCIES.
   (a)   There is hereby created the Martin Luther King, Jr. community center
board, which shall consist of 15 members. Each city council member shall
appoint one member to the board. The mayor shall appoint the chair, and the
full city council shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   Each member shall be appointed for a two- year term beginning on
October 1 of each odd- numbered year. All members shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
   (c)   If a vacancy occurs in a board position held by a member appointed
directly by the city council, the city council shall appoint a new member to
serve for the unexpired term. If a vacancy occurs in a board position held by a
member appointed from service area nominations, the vacancy may not be filled,
and that position will not be counted in determining total board membership for
quorum purposes. (Ord. Nos. 13384; 14083; 14941; 15574; 15955; 15979; 21153;
21514; 22259; 29645)
SEC. 2-127.   FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   The board shall serve in an advisory capacity and shall make
recommendations to the city center manager concerning programs and policies
within the service center.
   (b)   The board shall submit an annual report to the city council in
accordance with Section
8-1.1 of this Code. (Ord. Nos. 13384; 14941; 15955)
SEC. 2-128.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 17393)
SEC. 2-129.   TREATMENT OF BUDGET.
   The budget of the center shall be approved by the city council and treated
as is the budget of other city departments by referring it to the city manager
through the usual budget administration process. (Ord. Nos. 13384; 14941;
15955)
ARTICLE XIV.
SOUTH DALLAS/FAIR PARK OPPORTUNITY FUND BOARD.
SEC. 2-130.   SOUTH DALLAS/FAIR PARK OPPORTUNITY FUND BOARD - CREATED; TERMS;
MEMBERSHIP.
   (a)   There is hereby created the South Dallas/Fair Park Opportunity Fund
board of the city, which shall be an advisory body of 15 members. Each city
council member shall appoint one member to the board. The mayor shall appoint
the chair, and the full city council shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   Each member shall be appointed for a two-year term beginning on
October 1 of each odd- numbered year. All members shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
   (c)   Members of the board must meet the following qualifications:
      (1)   Eight members must meet any of the following qualifications:
         (A)   Be a resident of the South Dallas/Fair Park Opportunity Fund
program area as defined by city council resolution.
         (B)   Be a representative of a cultural institution or other facility
permanently housed at Fair Park.
         (C)   Be the owner or operator of a business in the South Dallas/Fair
Park Opportunity Fund program area as defined by city council resolution.
         (D)   Be actively involved in the South Dallas/Fair Park community.
      (2)   Seven members must have substantial knowledge and expertise in any
of the following areas:
         (A)   Housing development.
         (B)   Business development and operations.
         (C)   Non-profit management and operations.
         (D)   General community development principles and practices.
      (3)   In addition to the qualifications listed in Paragraphs (1) and (2)
of this subsection, at least two of the board members must have loan
underwriting experience.
   (d)   The city manager or a designated representative shall serve as an ex
officio, nonvoting member of the board. (Ord. Nos. 20570; 21153; 21514; 21765;
22414; 26811; 29645; 30905)
SEC. 2-131.   SOUTH DALLAS/FAIR PARK OPPORTUNITY FUND BOARD - DUTIES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The board shall act as an advisory body to the city manager and the
city council and shall:
      (1)   recommend to the city manager guidelines and projects for the
expenditure of the South Dallas/Fair Park Opportunity Fund; and
      (2)   perform other duties assigned by the city council or requested by
the city manager.
   (b)   The city manager shall present the recommendations of the board, along
with any recommendations of the city manager, to the city council. (Ord. Nos.
20570; 22414; 26811; 30905)
SEC. 2-132.   RESERVED.  
(Ord. Nos. 20570; 26811; 30905)
ARTICLE XV.
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
SEC. 2-133.   POSITION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER CREATED.
   There is hereby created the position of the chief financial officer of the
city. The chief financial officer shall be appointed by the city manager and
shall be a person professionally competent by experience and training to
perform the duties of the position. (Ord. Nos. 22026; 24410; 27697)
SEC. 2-134.   DUTIES OF THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
   (a)   The chief financial officer shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Direct the cash and debt management programs of the city with
authority to make the following investment and redemption decisions:
         (A)   Purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued,
securities that are permissible investments under state law with money that is
not required for the immediate necessities of the city and as the chief
financial officer determines is wise and expedient, and sell or exchange
securities for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the
securities so purchased.
         (B)   From time to time redeem the securities in which city money has
been invested so that the proceeds may be applied to the purposes for which the
original purchase money was designated or placed in the city treasury.
         (C)   Prepare a written report, at least once a year, describing the
investment position of the city as of the end of the date of the report.
      (2)   With the approval of the city manager, and in accordance with
Subsection (b), sell at the current market price shares of stock or corporate
bonds received from time to time by the city as a gift, donation, or bequest or
as a result of a bankruptcy proceeding; deposit the proceeds of each sale,
netted after payment of any commissions and other related expenses, in the
appropriate city fund; and carry out any terms of the gift, donation, or
bequest.
      (3)   Direct the accounting function of the city and specifically:
         (A)   establish and maintain an adequate and efficient accounting and
financial information system for the city;
         (B)   maintain comprehensive accounts of all real, personal, and mixed
property of the city; and
         (C)   maintain comprehensive accounts of all receipts and
disbursements of money, separating under proper headings each source of receipt
and the cause of each disbursement.
      (4)   Prepare and transmit regular reports detailing the activities of
all city departments, including but not limited to:
         (A)   a summary statement of the revenues and expenses of the
preceding period, transmitted to the city manager, detailed as to the
appropriations and funds, in such manner as to show the financial condition of
the city and of such department, division, and office as of the last day of the
period, reflecting the condition of each of the city funds, showing the budget
appropriation, the amount expended to the date of the report, and the
unexpended balance; and
         (B)   periodic and annual financial reports, including an annual
balance sheet.
      (5)   Serve, or designate a person to serve, as the assessor and
collector of taxes of the city and direct the assessment and collection of
taxes in accordance with state law,
Chapter 44 of this code, and Chapter XIX of the charter of the city, including
those billing and collection functions of the city as may be provided for by
contract or assigned by the city manager or ordinance.
      (6)   Administer the public utility franchises granted by the city.
      (7)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council.
   (b)   The chief financial officer shall conduct any sale authorized under
Subsection (a)(2) of this section as soon as is reasonably possible following
receipt of the stock or corporate bonds, using the city’s financial advisor or
investment advisor. The city manager is authorized to execute such documents,
authorizations, assignments, and endorsements as necessary to accomplish the
sale. The chief financial officer shall provide confirmation of each sale to
the director of the department designated by the city manager to carry out any
terms of the gift, donation, or bequest. The chief financial officer shall keep
an accurate record of each sale transaction.
   (c)   Whenever the director of finance is referred to in the city charter,
this code, or any other city ordinance, the term means the chief financial
officer.
   (d)   Whenever the director of public utilities or the director of consumer
services is referred to in a franchise granted by the city, those terms mean
the chief financial officer. (Ord. Nos. 22026; 23694; 24410; 27697)
ARTICLE XV-a.
CITY CONTROLLER’S OFFICE.
SEC. 2-135.   CREATED; CITY CONTROLLER AS HEAD OF OFFICE.
   There is hereby created a division of the city manager’s office to be known
as the city controller’s office of the city, the head of which shall be the
city controller who shall be appointed by the city manager. The city controller
must be a person professionally competent by experience and training to manage
the office. The office shall be composed of the city controller and such other
assistants and employees as the city council may provide upon recommendation of
the city manager. (Ord. 27697)
SEC. 2-135.1.   DUTIES OF THE CITY CONTROLLER.
   The city controller shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the city controller’s office.
      (2)   Direct the accounting function of the city and specifically:
         (A)   establish and maintain an adequate and efficient accounting and
financial information system for the city;
         (B)   maintain comprehensive accounts of all real, personal, and mixed
property of the city; and
         (C)   maintain comprehensive accounts of all receipts and
disbursements of money, separating under proper headings each source of receipt
and the cause of each disbursement.
      (3)   Prepare and transmit regular reports detailing the activities of
all city departments, including but not limited to:
         (A)   a summary statement of the revenues and expenses of the
preceding period, transmitted to the city manager, detailed as to the
appropriations and funds, in such manner as to show the financial condition of
the city and of such department, division, and office as of the last day of the
period, reflecting the condition of each of the city funds, showing the budget
appropriation, the amount expended to the date of the report, and the
unexpended balance; and
         (B)   periodic and annual financial reports, including an annual
balance sheet.
      (4)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 27697)
ARTICLE XV-b.
OFFICE OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
SEC. 2-135.2.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
   There is hereby created a division of the city manager's office to be known
as the office of budget and management services of the city of Dallas, at the
head of which shall be the director of budget and management services, who
shall be appointed by the city manager and who shall be a person professionally
competent by experience and training to manage the office. The office will be
composed of the director of budget and management services and other assistants
and employees as the city council may provide by ordinance upon recommendation
of the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 27697; 30654; 31658)
SEC. 2-135.3.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
   The director of budget and management services shall perform the following
duties:
   (1)   Supervise and administer the office of budget and management services.
   (2)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or by
ordinance of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 27697; 29478; 30654; 31658)
ARTICLE XV-c.
OFFICE OF RISK MANAGEMENT.
SEC. 2-135.4.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF RISK MANAGEMENT.
   There is hereby created a division of the city manager’s office to be known
as the office of risk management of the city of Dallas, at the head of which
shall be the director of risk management, who shall be appointed by the city
manager and who shall be a person professionally competent by experience and
training to manage the office. The office will be composed of the director of
risk management and other assistants and employees as the city council may
provide by ordinance upon recommendation of the city manager. (Ord. 28424)
SEC. 2-135.5.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF RISK MANAGEMENT.
   The director of risk management shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the office of risk management.
      (2)   Administer the risk management program of the city, including, but
not limited to, liability and workers’ compensation programs, procurement of
insurance policies for the city, loss control initiatives, and performance of
risk assessments.
      (3)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 28424)
ARTICLE XVI.
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY SERVICES.
SEC. 2-136.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY SERVICES.
   (a)   There is hereby created the department of information and technology
services, the head of which shall be the director of information and technology
services who shall be appointed by the city manager and who shall be a person
professionally competent by experience and training to manage such department.
   (b)   In addition to the office of director of information and technology
services, there will also be such additional personnel as may be necessary for
the administration of the department as the council may provide, upon
recommendation of the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 13718; 19312; 22026; 23694;
31333)
SEC. 2-137.   DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SERVICES.
   The director of information and technology services shall perform the
following duties:
      (1)   Provide all information services for administration of the affairs
of the city of Dallas to be used in municipal operations of the city and make
such reports as may be required by the city manager.
      (2)   Acquire, maintain, and operate all telephone and radio
communications systems used in municipal operations.
      (3)   Obtain and maintain radio licences from the Federal Communications
Commission on behalf of all city departments and ensure compliance with all
applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
      (4)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 13718; 19312; 19679; 22026; 23694;
31333, eff. 10/1/19)
ARTICLE XVII.
DEPARTMENT OF SANITATION SERVICES.
SEC. 2-138.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF SANITATION SERVICES.
   There is hereby created the department of sanitation services of the city of
Dallas, at the head of which shall be the director of sanitation services who
shall be appointed by the city manager. The director must be a person
professionally competent by experience and training to manage the department.
The department will be composed of the director of sanitation services and
other assistants and employees as the city council may provide by ordinance
upon recommendation of the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 13718; 15004; 22026; 23666;
23694)
SEC. 2-139.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF SANITATION SERVICES.
   The director of the department of sanitation services shall perform the
following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the department of sanitation services.
      (2)   Supervise and administer the city's solid waste collection and
disposal system, which is a utility of the city and includes, but is not
limited to, all facilities, equipment, services, and programs relating to the
collection, removal, disposal, and processing of solid waste.
      (3)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 13718; 14385; 15004; 17226; 22026;
23666; 23694; 29881)
ARTICLE XVII-a.
RESERVED.
SECS. 2-139.1 THRU 2-139.2.   RESERVED.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 32864)
ARTICLE XVIII.
SENIOR AFFAIRS COMMISSION.
SEC. 2-140.   SENIOR AFFAIRS COMMISSION - CREATED; TERMS; MEMBERSHIP; MEETINGS.
   (a)   There is hereby created the senior affairs commission of the city,
which shall be an advisory body of 15 members. Each city council member shall
appoint one member to the commission. The mayor shall appoint the chair, and
the full city council shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   Each member shall be appointed for a two- year term beginning on
October 1 of each odd- numbered year. All members shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
   (c)   Members must be at least 55 years of age and must be chosen, as far as
practicable, in a manner that will represent the entire community. Members
should be persons who are concerned about senior affairs in the community.
Disqualification of an appointee under the minimum age requirement of this
subsection may be waived by the city council after a review of the specific
circumstances.
   (d)   The commission must meet at least once each month and may hold
additional meetings at the call of the chair. (Ord. Nos. 20216; 20665; 21153;
21514; 24194; 25478; 29645)
SEC. 2-141.   SENIOR AFFAIRS COMMISSION - FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   The senior affairs commission shall act as an advisory body to the
city manager and the city council and shall:
      (1)   recommend the role of the city and the commission in ensuring the
provision of services to the elderly;
      (2)   advise the city council as requested on elderly issues;
      (3)   provide access for citizen comment on elderly issues;
      (4)   assist the city in the identification of programs for the elderly
that are needed in the community; and
      (5)   perform other duties assigned by the city council.
   (b)   Staff liaison responsibilities to the commission shall be designated
by the city manager. (Ord. 20216)
ARTICLE XIX.
OFFICE OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT.
SEC. 2-142.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT.
   There is hereby created the office of housing and community empowerment of
the city, the head of which shall be the director of housing and community
empowerment who shall be appointed by the city manager. The office will be
composed of the director of housing and community empowerment and such other
assistants and employees as the city council may provide upon recommendation of
the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 17226; 22026; 27697; 30654; 32864; 33233)
SEC. 2-143.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT.
   The director of housing and community empowerment shall perform the
following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the office of housing and community
empowerment.
      (2)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 17226; 22026; 27697; 30654; 32864;
33233)
SECS. 2-144 THRU 2-146.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. Nos. 15562; 27697)
ARTICLE XX.
CITIZEN HOMELESSNESS COMMISSION.
SEC. 2-147.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this commission is to assure participation from, and
inclusion of, all stakeholders, including those with past or present experience
with homelessness, in order to develop policy recommendations to ensure
alignment of city services with regional services to enhance efficiency,
quality, and effectiveness of the community-wide response to homelessness.
(Ord. 30431)
SEC. 2-148.    CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; MEETINGS.
   (a)   There is hereby created the citizen homelessness commission, which
shall be an advisory body of 15 members. Each city council member shall appoint
one member to the commission. The mayor shall appoint the chair, and the full
city council shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   Members of the commission must meet the following qualifications:
      (1)   two members must have past or present experience as a homeless
person, and the city council may, after a review of the specific circumstances,
waive disqualification under Section
8-1.4 of this code for these members;
      (2)   one member must be a representative from a faith-based
organization; and
      (3)   the remaining members must be chosen from the general public.
   (c)   All members shall be appointed for an initial term to expire on
September 30, 2019. Subsequent appointments will be made in September of each
odd-numbered year for a two-year term beginning on October 1.
   (d)   The commission must meet at least once each month and may hold
additional meetings at the call of the chair. (Ord. 30431)
SEC. 2-149.   DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   The commission, in carrying out its purpose, shall act as an advisory
body to the city manager and the city council and shall:
      (1)   advise the city manager and the city council on issues affecting
homelessness;
      (2)   assist the city in evaluating new and existing programs;
      (3)   coordinate with other local and regional bodies addressing
homelessness; and
      (4)   perform such other duties assigned by the city manager or city
council.
   (b)   The city manager shall provide information and assistance to the
commission in the performance of its duties and functions. (Ord. 30431)
ARTICLE XXI.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
SEC. 2-150.   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION CREATED.
   (a)   There is hereby created the community development commission of the
city, which shall be composed of 15 members. Each city council member shall
appoint one member to the commission. The mayor shall appoint the chair, and
the full city council shall appoint the vice-chair. Appointments must be made
in accordance with the provisions of Title 24 of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
   (b)   Each member shall be appointed for a two- year term beginning on
October 1 of each odd- numbered year. All members shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified. (Ord. Nos. 16923; 17702; 18836; 19604;
20418; 21012; 21153; 21514; 22414; 29645)
SEC. 2-151.   DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   The commission shall hold monthly meetings each month and may hold
additional meetings at the call of the chair. The commission shall act as an
advisory body to the city manager and the city council.
   (b)   The commission shall:
      (1)   hold public meetings at such times and locations as will further
the purpose of obtaining citizens’ suggestions and comments concerning uses of
HUD entitlement grant funds;
      (2)   carry out the objectives of the city’s citizen participation plan
for HUD entitlement grant funds;
      (3)   submit to the city manager and the city council:
         (A)   a recommended list of priorities for the consolidated
application for HUD entitlement grant funds; and
         (B)   specific recommendations as to the use and allocation of HUD
entitlement grant funds for the next year;
      (4)   review and make recommendations with respect to the city’s housing
and nonhousing community development needs;
      (5)   participate in the review and assessment of the past and current
use of HUD entitlement grant funds;
      (6)   submit to the city council an annual report containing an analysis
of the use of HUD entitlement grant funds and a summary of the commission’s
work during the prior year;
      (7)   review the status of unspent community development funds at least
once each quarter of each fiscal year and make recommendations with respect to
the reallocation of unappropriated and unobligated community development funds;
      (8)   hold public hearings and make recommendations concerning the
creation or elimination of projects that affect the HUD entitlement grant fund
budget; and
      (9)   perform other duties assigned by the city council or requested by
the city manager.
   (c)   The final determination of the consolidated application and the annual
budget for HUD entitlement grant funds will be made by the city council.
   (d)   In this section, “HUD entitlement grant funds” means funds from the
following grants and programs:
      (1)   the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG);
      (2)   the HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME);
      (3)   the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA); and
      (4)   the Emergency Shelter Grant (ESG). (Ord. Nos. 16923; 17139; 17702;
18836; 19604; 21012; 22354; 22414)
SEC. 2-152.   STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   The members of the commission shall be subject to the provisions of
Article XII of this chapter to the same extent as officers or employees of the
city. (Ord. Nos. 16923; 21012; 22414)
ARTICLE XXI-a.
COMMISSION ON DISABILITIES.
SEC. 2-152.1.   COMMISSION ON DISABILITIES - CREATED; FUNCTION; TERMS;
MEETINGS.
   (a)    There is hereby created a commission on disabilities, which shall be
an advisory body of 15 members. Each city council member shall have one
appointment to the commission on disabilities. The mayor shall appoint the
chair from among the members, subject to confirmation by the city council, and
the full city council shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   All members shall be appointed for an initial term to expire on June
14, 2023. Thereafter, nominations shall begin in September and each subsequent
odd-numbered year, and members shall serve a two-year term beginning on October
1.
   (c)   All voting members of the commission on disabilities shall be
residents of the city.
   (d)   All voting members of the commission on disabilities shall share a
commitment to the goals of the commission on disabilities and shall either be
persons with disabilities or be committed to the community of disabled persons.
   (e)   Members shall be broadly representative of the disabled community at
large, without dominance by any single disability group.
   (f)   The commission on disabilities shall meet at least six times a year
and may hold additional meetings at the call of the chair. (Ord. 32070)
SEC. 2-152.2.   DEFINITION.
   In this article, DISABILITY means the same as the term is defined in the
Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended. (Ord. 32070)
SEC. 2-152.3.   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The commission on disabilities shall be responsible for advising and
making recommendations to the mayor, city council, city manager, department
directors, and the individual designated by the mayor to head the mayor's
initiative on disabilities on issues pertaining to the full spectrum of needs,
rights, and privileges of people with disabilities.
   (b)   The subjects to be addressed by the commission on disabilities
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Developing programs to provide employment opportunities for people
with disabilities.
      (2)   Developing programs to address accessibility issues.
      (3)   Developing community-based programs to enhance the quality of life
for Dallas residents who have disabilities.
      (4)   Developing programs to address the issues pertaining to alcoholism
and drug abuse.
      (5)   Developing programs to take full advantage of all federal, state
and local funding opportunities.
      (6)   Developing programs to ensure adequate housing for people with
disabilities.
      (7)   Developing programs to ensure accessible communications for people
with disabilities. (Ord. 32070)
SEC. 2-152.4.   TECHNICAL RESOURCE PANEL.
   (a)   There is hereby created a technical resource panel to be comprised of
eight members appointed by the city council to serve as non-voting technical
members of the commission on disabilities.
      (1)   The technical resource panel is not a board or commission subject
to Chapter 8 of this code or Chapter XXIV, Section 13 of the city charter.
      (2)   The city manager may nominate members of the first technical
resource panel, as recommended by the Office of Housing and Community
Empowerment for approval by the full council.
      (3)   Following the initial appointments, future technical resource panel
members may be nominated by the city manager, as recommended by the Office of
Housing and Community Empowerment, through consultation with the commission on
disabilities, for approval by the full council.
   (b)   Each member of the technical resource panel shall be an individual
with at least four years of experience in disability matters and shall share a
commitment to the goals of the commission on disabilities. Additionally,
appointments to the panel must, to the extent possible, be representative of
the ethnic diversity of the city.
   (c)   Members of the technical resource panel are not required to be
residents of the city or qualified voters in the city.
   (d)   Members of the technical resource panel shall serve two-year terms and
are subject to the same conflict of interest and confidentiality restrictions
that are applicable to members of the commission on disabilities. Members of
the technical resource panel are subject to forfeiture of membership on the
same basis as members of the commission on disabilities.
   (e)   Members of the technical resource panel shall attend and fully
participate in all meetings and deliberations of the commission on
disabilities, including closed sessions, but shall not be entitled to vote as
members of the commission on disabilities.
   (f)   The technical resource panel shall use its expertise and experience in
disability matters to assist the commission on disabilities to the fullest
extent possible in the review of all issues coming before the commission on
disabilities.
   (g)   The technical resource panel does not have any oversight
responsibility or oversight authority with respect to the commission on
disabilities.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits the commission on disabilities from
seeking additional outside technical expertise and advice as necessary. (Ord.
Nos. 32070; 33233)
ARTICLE XXII.
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY POLICE OVERSIGHT.
SEC. 2-153.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this office is to provide support and technical assistance to
the community police oversight board. (Ord. 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 2-154.   CREATED; DIRECTOR/ MONITOR OF OFFICE OF COMMUNITY POLICE
OVERSIGHT.
   (a)   There is hereby created a division of the city manager's office to be
known as the office of community police oversight, the head of which shall be
the director/monitor of community police oversight who shall be appointed by
the city manager with input from the chair of the community police oversight
board and who shall be a person professionally competent by experience and
training to manage such office.
   (b)   The office of community police oversight will be composed of the
director/monitor of community police oversight and such other assistants and
employees as the city council may provide by ordinance upon recommendation of
the city manager. (Ord. 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 2-154.1.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR/ MONITOR OF THE OFFICE OF COMMUNITY
POLICE OVERSIGHT.
   The director/monitor of community police oversight shall perform the
following duties:
      (1)   Provide functional support to the community police oversight board.
      (2)   Ensure that the community police oversight board can fulfill its
duties.
      (3)   Make such reports as may be required by the city manager and the
community police oversight board.
      (4)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager,
by ordinance of the city council, or the community police oversight board in
accordance with Article III of Chapter 37 of the Dallas City Code. (Ord. 31192,
eff. 10/1/19)
ARTICLE XXIII.
DEPARTMENT OF DALLAS ANIMAL SERVICES.
SEC. 2-155.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF DALLAS ANIMAL SERVICES.
   There is hereby created the department of Dallas animal services, at the
head of which shall be the director of Dallas animal services who shall be
appointed by the city manager. The department will be composed of the director
of Dallas animal services and other assistants and employees as the city
council may provide upon recommendation of the city manager. (Ord. 30483)
SEC. 2-156.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF DALLAS ANIMAL SERVICES.
   The director of Dallas animal services shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   supervise and administer the department of Dallas animal services;
and
      (2)   perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
the city council. (Ord. 30483)
ARTICLE XXIV.
ANIMAL ADVISORY COMMISSION.
SEC. 2-157.   CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; MEETINGS.
   (a)   There is hereby created the animal advisory commission, which shall be
an advisory body of 15 members. Each city council member shall appoint one
member to the commission. The mayor shall appoint the chair, and the full city
council shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   Each member shall be appointed for a two- year term beginning on
October 1 of each odd- numbered year. All members shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
   (c)   Members of the commission must meet the following qualifications:
      (1)   one member must be a licensed veterinarian;
      (2)   one member must be a city or county official;
      (3)   one member must have duties including the daily operation of an
animal shelter;
      (4)   one member must be a representative from an animal welfare
organization; and
      (5)   eleven members must be chosen from the general public.
   (d)   Disqualification of an appointee under Section
8-1.4(a)(1) of this code may be waived by the city council after review of the
specific circumstances.
   (e)   The commission must meet at least four times a year and may hold
additional meetings at the call of the chair. (Ord. Nos. 18665; 18940; 21153;
21515; 22414; 29403; 29645; 30483)
SEC. 2-158.   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The commission shall act as an advisory body to the city manager and
the city council to assist in complying with the requirements of state law and
city ordinances pertaining to the operation of an animal shelter.
   (b)   The city manager shall provide necessary information and assistance to
the commission in the performance of its duties and responsibilities. (Ord.
Nos. 18665; 22414; 29403)
ARTICLE XXV.
YOUTH COMMISSION.
SEC. 2-159.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this commission is to promote regular and active civic
engagement among the youth of the city by giving them a formal role in local
decision making, offering real world experiences with elected bodies, teaching
them about the role of our city council and the city's boards and commissions,
providing an opportunity to develop leadership skills, offering an avenue to
engage in discussion with adults and other youth, increasing volunteerism, and
enhancing classroom civic education. (Ord. 29920)
SEC. 2-159.1.   CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; MEETINGS.
   (a)   There is hereby created the youth commission, which shall be an
advisory body of 15 members. Each city council member shall appoint one member
to the commission. The mayor shall appoint the chair, and the full city council
shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   All members shall be appointed for an initial term to expire on
September 30, 2017. Subsequent appointments will be made in September of each
odd-numbered year for a two-year term beginning on October 1.
   (c)   Each member of the commission must:
      (1)   either:
         (A)   be enrolled as a full-time student in grades nine through 12 at
a public or private school that accepts students who reside within the city of
Dallas; or
         (B)   be a home-schooled student, as that term is defined in Chapter
29 of the Texas Education Code, entitled to attend public school within the
city of Dallas; and
      (2)   be no younger than 14 years of age and no older than 19 years of
age at the time of appointment; and
      (3)   reside within the district for which the member is appointed.
   (d)   A member is not required to fulfill the qualifications for board
service in Chapter 8 of the Dallas City Code except that the member must:
      (1)   have been a resident of the city for at least six months prior to
the date of appointment; and
      (2)   not be in arrears on any obligations owed to the city.
   (e)   The commission must meet at least once each month and may hold
additional meetings at the call of the chair. (Ord. 29920)
SEC. 2-160.   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The commission shall act as an advisory body to the city manager and
the city council and shall:
      (1)   advise the city council and city manager on issues impacting the
city;
      (2)   assist the city in identifying programs that are needed in the
community; and
      (3)   perform such other duties assigned by the city council or city
manager.
   (b)   The city manager shall provide information and assistance to the
commission in the performance of its duties and responsibilities. (Ord. 29920)
ARTICLE XXVI.
ARTS AND CULTURE ADVISORY COMMISSION.
SEC. 2-161.   ARTS AND CULTURE ADVISORY COMMISSION - CREATED; TERMS;
MEMBERSHIP; MEETINGS.
   (a)   There is hereby created the arts and culture advisory commission of
the city, which shall be an advisory body of 18 members appointed by the city
council. Fifteen of the members shall be appointed respectively by each city
council member, and three of the members shall be appointed by the city council
as a whole. The mayor shall appoint the chair of the commission, and the full
city council shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   Each member shall be appointed for a two- year term beginning on
October 1 of each odd- numbered year. All members shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
   (c)   Members of the commission should be persons who are concerned about
cultural affairs in the city of Dallas and may be persons who have professional
expertise or substantial volunteer involvement in the following areas:
      (1)   architecture, design, or urban planning;
      (2)   visual, performing, or literary arts;
      (3)   history;
      (4)   science;
      (5)   cultural institutions management; or
      (6)   volunteer cultural board experience.
   (d)   The membership of the arts and culture advisory commission may include
at least one of each of the following persons:
      (1)   a registered professional architect or landscape architect;
      (2)   a professional visual artist;
      (3)   a professional performing artist;
      (4)   a scientist;
      (5)   a historian; and
      (6)   an interested resident who does not represent any specific cultural
organization or interest group.
   (e)   The three members of the commission appointed by the city council as a
whole shall also serve on the public art committee of the arts and culture
advisory commission, and, in addition to qualifying for service on the
commission under this section, must meet the qualifications for service on the
public art committee as set forth in the city's cultural policy and program
adopted by city council resolution.
   (f)   The chair of the city council committee with jurisdiction over arts
and culture and one member of the park and recreation board of the city shall
serve as ex-officio, nonvoting members of the arts and culture advisory
commission.
   (g)   The commission must meet at least once each month and may hold
additional meetings at the call of the chair. (Ord. Nos. 20266; 20462; 21153;
21515; 21972; 22259; 29645; 31049)
SEC. 2-162.   ARTS AND CULTURE ADVISORY COMMISSION - DUTIES AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The arts and culture advisory commission shall act as an advisory body
to the city manager and the city council and shall:
      (1)   make recommendations concerning the establishment and
implementation of cultural policies and procedures, including cultural
diversity;
      (2)   make recommendations concerning the design, operation, and use of
city facilities devoted to the arts and other cultural activities;
      (3)   make recommendations to encourage the development of cultural
programs and activities involving emerging cultural organizations and artists,
with special emphasis on the development of ethnic and minority artists and
arts organizations;
      (4)   make recommendations concerning the expenditure of city funds on
cultural programs, facilities, and organizations; and
      (5)   make recommendations to create opportunities for all residents of
the city to have access to the arts and the means of cultural expression; and
      (6)   perform other duties assigned by the city council or requested by
the city manager.
   (b)   The city manager shall provide staff to assist the commission in
performing its duties and responsibilities. (Ord. Nos. 20266; 21515; 21972;
31049)
ARTICLE XXVI-a.
OFFICE OF ARTS AND CULTURE.
SEC. 2-162.1.   CREATED; DIRECTOR OF ARTS AND CULTURE.
   There is hereby created a division of the city manager's office to be known
as the office of arts and culture, the head of which shall be the director of
arts and culture who shall be appointed by the city manager and who shall be a
person professionally competent by experience and training to manage the
office. The office of arts and culture will be composed of the director of arts
and culture and other assistants and employees as the city council may provide
by ordinance upon recommendation of the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 23694; 31333,
eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 2-162.2.   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF ARTS AND CULTURE.
   (a)   The director of arts and culture shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Supervise and administer the office of arts and culture and WRR
radio station.
      (2)   Manage cultural facilities of the city under the director's
supervision as designated by the city manager or by ordinance or resolution of
the city council, including approval of lease or license agreements for use of
such cultural facilities for short terms not exceeding one year.
      (3)   Award cultural funding contracts to cultural organizations and to
individuals as provided in Section
2-162.3 of this code.
      (4)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
by ordinance of the city council.
   (b)   The director of arts and culture and any designated representatives
may represent the city in negotiating and contracting with persons planning to
use any cultural facility under the management of the director of arts and
culture. Short-term leases and license agreements with small or ethnically and
culturally specific nonprofit arts and cultural organizations may be entered
into for a nominal consideration, when the director of arts and culture finds
it to be of benefit to the public. (Ord. Nos. 23694; 31049; 31333, eff. 10/1/
19)
SEC. 2-162.3.   PROCUREMENT OF CULTURAL SERVICES.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (f), contracts with organizations and
individuals for cultural services shall be awarded in accordance with this
section.
   (b)   Cultural services mean artistic and cultural services provided by
individuals or organizations that have been recommended for funding by a review
panel to the director of arts and culture. Eligibility requirements to serve on
each review panel and a review panel process for recommendations must be
approved by city council. Cultural services do not include any services
described in Subsection (f) below.
   (c)   The director of arts and culture may procure services a maximum of
five times per fiscal year for production, festivals, and exhibitions under
$50,000 without panel review or recommendation by the arts and culture advisory
commission as the director deems necessary to implement arts and culture
programs when:
      (1)   timing of support needed is outside of the fiscal year's cultural
support program application for cultural services;
      (2)   the support needed is from a Dallas-based 501(c)(3) cultural
organization or individual artist;
      (3)   the service provided is less than one year in length; and
      (4)   the city manager, or designee, has issued a memorandum of
justification establishing a special need that meets the requirements of
Administrative Directive 4-5, as amended.
   (d)   Contracts for cultural services, requiring an expenditure of $50,000
or less, may be authorized by the city manager by administrative action,
approved as to form by the city attorney, without further city council
approval.
   (e)   If a contract described under this section requires an expenditure
exceeding $50,000, the contract must be authorized by city council.
   (f)   This section does not apply to services that are required to be
competitively bid under state law or subject to other state law requirements
such as requirements to contact historically underutilized businesses or the
special rules for architect and engineering agreements.
   (g)   All other contracts not covered under this section are governed by the
other applicable provisions of this code or other local rules and regulations.
(Ord. Nos. 31049; 31333, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 2-162.4.   CONTRACTS FOR RADIO STATION AIR TIME REQUIRED; OTHER RADIO
STATION CONTRACTS.
   (a)   There shall be a contract made for the use of each period of air time
sold by the radio station, no matter how small, and the sale shall be
represented by written contract. Each contract shall be signed by the station
manager or shall be approved by the station manager if the sale was made by
some subordinate. In the event a contract for sale of air time provides for
other services such as line rentals, commentators, musicians, announcers, and
other costs incidental to the rendition of the program, then such contract
shall distinctly specify each separate item or charge made for such service.
   (b)   Each contract shall provide for cancellation by the city upon
reasonable notice, and shall distinctly specify whether the air time used is
commercial, civic, or non-revenue and shall be signed by the person or
organization so using the air time.
   (c)   The following types of contracts for the benefit of the radio station,
requiring an expenditure of $50,000 or less, may be authorized by the city
manager by administrative action, approved as to form by the city attorney,
without further city council approval:
      (1)   payment of copyright or license fees or royalties to obtain the
rights to broadcast or play specific musical works or compositions;
      (2)   the purchase of rights to broadcast radio programs produced by
persons or entities other than other radio station employees or former radio
station employees less than two years after their employment with the city;
      (3)   the purchase of advertising, through radio, television, print,
billboard, or other media, to promote the radio station, including services
rendered in connection with the production or preparation of artwork, copy, or
music used in such advertising;
      (4)   payment of fees to secure professional talent (other than employees
of the radio station) for the purpose of promoting the radio station;
      (5)   payment of commissions (not to exceed 25 percent of the contract
amount) to persons or advertising agencies (other than employees of the radio
station) who render services in connection with the sale of radio station air
time or the purchase of advertising to promote the radio station; and
      (6)   the purchase of services rendered in connection with market
research and analysis, radio station ratings, and statistical, demographic, or
other related research or analysis.
   (d)   If a contract described in Subsection (c) requires an expenditure
exceeding $50,000, the contract must be authorized by the city council. If a
contract described in Subsection (c) is required by state law to be
competitively bid, the rules stated in Sections
2-32 and
2-33(a) through (c) of this code apply to the contract.
   (e)   All other radio station contracts not covered by this section are
governed by the other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. Nos. 31049;
31333, eff. 10/1/19)
ARTICLE XXVII.
CIVIL SERVICE BOARD; ADJUNCT MEMBERS; ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES.
SEC. 2-163.   SPECIAL QUALIFICATIONS FOR ADJUNCT MEMBERS OF THE CIVIL SERVICE
BOARD.
   (a)   In addition to the qualifications required by the city charter and
Chapter 8 of this code, each adjunct member of the civil service board must
meet the following qualifications:
      (1)   have a total of at least five years experience as a volunteer or
employee with a business, governmental, or nonprofit organization that has a
work staff of at least 15 persons;
      (2)   have a total of at least five years experience as a volunteer or
employee in the administration or personnel functions of a business,
governmental, or nonprofit organization; or
      (3)   have an accumulation of at least five years experience under
Paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection.
   (b)   Nothing in this article prohibits the appointment of a former city
employee as a member or adjunct member of the civil service board.
   (c)   The city council shall, as nearly as may be practicable, appoint
adjunct members of the civil service board that are representative of the
racial, ethnic, and gender makeup of the city’s population. (Ord. 20526)
SEC. 2-164.   ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS;
TERMINATION OF CONTRACT.
   (a)   By January 1 of each even-numbered year beginning with the year 1992,
and whenever a vacancy occurs, the judicial nominating commission shall
recommend persons to be appointed by the city council to serve as
administrative law judges, as provided for in Section 12.1, Chapter XVI of the
city charter. Each appointment will be made through the award of a city
contract, and not less than three nor more than five persons may have contracts
with the city to serve as administrative law judges at the same time.
Administrative law judges shall hear appeals in accordance with Section
34-40 of this code.
   (b)   The judicial nominating commission shall recommend as administrative
law judges persons selected from applicants responding to an open, public
request for proposals for professional services. The judicial nominating
commission shall review the applications and resumes, research applicant
qualifications, and interview the applicants. If a vacancy occurs within 120
days after the appointment of any administrative law judge, for which the
commission conducted interviews, the commission is not required to conduct
additional interviews but may, in its discretion, recommend nominees to fill
the new vacancy from applicants who were interviewed for any administrative law
judge position that was filled within the preceding 120 days. The judicial
nominating commission shall, as nearly as may be practicable, recruit and
recommend as administrative law judges persons who are representative of the
racial, ethnic, and gender makeup of the city’s population.
   (c)   An administrative law judge must:
      (1)   be a licensed attorney who has practiced law in the State of Texas
for at least three years or a person who has at least five years experience
adjudicating hearings of personnel decisions; and
      (2)   not have been an employee or an elected or appointed officer of the
city, other than a full-time or associate municipal judge, within the five
years immediately preceding application.
   (d)   An administrative law judge will be compensated for services based on
a rate established by contract with the city. At least every two years, the
judicial nominating commission shall review the pay structure of the
administrative law judges and recommend to the city council appropriate rate
adjustments or other compensation.
   (e)   A person is ineligible to serve as an administrative law judge if, on
two occasions within any 12-month period after appointment as an administrative
law judge, the person:
      (1)   refuses or is unable to accept an assignment from the civil service
board to conduct an appeal hearing, except when based on a challenge by a party
as to the selection of the administrative law judge; or
      (2)   is unable to conduct an appeal hearing within the time limits
required by Section
34-40 of this code after considering all allowable postponements and
extensions.
   (f)   The judicial nominating commission shall periodically review and
evaluate the performance of each administrative law judge and recommend to the
city council whenever the contract of an administrative law judge should be
terminated or not renewed. The city council may, by a majority vote and upon
the recommendation of the judicial nominating commission, terminate the
contract of an administrative law judge for unsatisfactory performance.
Unsatisfactory performance includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   failure to acquire, retain, or correctly apply knowledge of the
city’s personnel rules, civil service rules and procedures, or other laws and
regulations governing personnel matters heard by an administrative law judge;
      (2)   failure to remain impartial and objective in hearing appeals and
performing other duties as an administrative law judge; or
      (3)   failure to competently and efficiently hear appeals and perform
other duties as an administrative law judge. (Ord. Nos. 20526; 21091; 22612;
22718)
SEC. 2-165.   TRAINING.
   (a)   Every person appointed as a member or adjunct member of the civil
service board or as an administrative law judge must attend a two-day training
course before hearing an appeal under Section
34-40 of this code. The training course will include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   instruction in the city’s personnel rules, civil service process,
and civil service procedures;
      (2)   an orientation session concerning police and fire personnel rules
and procedures;
      (3)   an overview session concerning civilian employees and their
responsibilities at the various levels of administration; and
      (4)   a mock trial board or observation of an actual appeal hearing.
   (b)   In addition to the training course required in Subsection (a) of this
section, an administrative law judge must take a refresher training course not
less than 12 months nor more than 15 months after being appointed.
   (c)   A person who fails to attend the two-day training course within 90
days from the date of appointment as a member or an adjunct member of the civil
service board or as an administrative law judge, or an administrative law judge
who fails to attend the refresher training course within the time required in
Subsection (b) of this section, shall forfeit that position with the city, and
that position becomes vacant. (Ord. Nos. 20526; 22612)
SEC. 2-166.   TRIAL BOARD RESPONSIBILITIES OF CIVIL SERVICE BOARD MEMBERS;
ATTENDANCE.
   (a)   The chair of the civil service board shall establish a rotation
procedure for selecting civil service board members and adjunct members to
serve on trial boards, as provided for in Section
34-40 of this code. Except where conflicts of interest exist or unexpected
circumstances arise, the chair shall enforce a strict rotation for service on a
trial board. A member shall not request service on a particular trial board and
may not serve on a requested trial board. Such a request is a violation of this
section and is cause for removal of the member from the civil service board by
the city council.
   (b)   If a member or an adjunct member of the civil service board is unable
to participate on a trial board when the member’s name comes up in rotation any
three times within a 12-month period, that member forfeits membership on the
board, and that place becomes vacant. The civil service board secretary shall
keep accurate records of all rotation procedures and members’ service. (Ord.
20526)
ARTICLE XXVIII.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY.
SEC. 2-167.   PURPOSE AND CREATION; ADOPTION OF STATE LAW; AND ADMINISTRATION
OF STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY.
   (a)   Purpose and creation. To protect public health and promote public
safety from loss of life and property caused by stormwater overflows,
stagnation, and pollution, a stormwater drainage utility is created, which
shall be a public utility.
   (b)   Adoption of state law. The rules of Subchapter C, Chapter 552 of the
Texas Local Government Code, as amended, which is adopted and incorporated into
this article by reference, and any other provisions of this code relating to
stormwater drainage shall govern the operation of the utility. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to restrict the city council's ability to make other
rules or policies governing the operation of the utility.
   (c)   Administration. The city manager shall designate a department to
manage the stormwater drainage utility. The director of the designated
department must be a person professionally competent
by experience and training to manage stormwater drainage operations. The
director of the designated department shall perform such duties as required by:
      (1)   Subchapter C, Chapter 552 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended;
      (2)   the city manager; or
      (3)   city council action. (Ord. Nos. 21059; 30215)
SEC. 2-168.   DEFINITIONS; STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY RATES; EXEMPTIONS;
INCENTIVES FOR RESIDENTIAL-BENEFITTED PROPERTIES; BILLING AND COLLECTION
PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   BENEFITTED PROPERTY has the meaning assigned in Section 552.044,
Chapter 552, Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
      (2)   CITY TAX ROLLS means the current tax records of the appraisal
district in which a particular property is located.
      (3)   CUSTOMER OF RECORD has the meaning assigned in Section
49-1 of this code, as amended, and also includes the term customer, as assigned
in Section
49-1 of this code, as amended.
      (4)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to manage the stormwater drainage utility or the director's
designee.
      (5)   DRAINAGE SYSTEM has the meaning assigned in Subchapter C, Chapter
552 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
      (6)   IMPERVIOUS AREA means any surface that prevents or substantially
impedes the natural infiltration of stormwater into the ground, and includes,
but is not limited to, roads, parking areas, buildings, patios, sheds,
driveways, sidewalks, and surfaces made of asphalt, concrete, and roofing
materials.
      (7)    RESIDENTIAL-BENEFITTED PROPERTY means a benefitted property that
contains one of the following structures: single family (including townhouse),
duplex, or multifamily with four or fewer dwelling units, as those terms are
defined in the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (8)   STORMWATER means rainfall runoff, snow or ice melt runoff, or
surface runoff and drainage.
   (b)   Stormwater drainage utility rates.
      (1)   The stormwater drainage charge for residential-benefitted property
per month is as follows:
 
IMPERVIOUS AREA  MONTHLY RATE
(in square feet)
up to 2,000      $5.39
2,001 - 3,500    $8.59
3,501 - 5,500    $12.84
more than 5,500  $21.01
 
      (2)   The stormwater drainage charge for all other benefitted properties
not defined as residential-benefitted property is an amount equal to $2.90 per
month for each 1,000 square feet, or parts thereof, of impervious area of the
benefitted property, with a minimum charge of $8.29 per month for non-
residential-benefitted property.
      (3)   If information regarding the impervious area square footage of a
particular lot or tract of benefitted property is unavailable or inadequate,
the director may make a reasonable estimate of impervious area square footage
and levy the drainage charge on that basis.
   (c)   Exemptions. All of the real property that requires an exemption under
Subchapter C, Chapter 552 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, as
well as the real property owned by the following are exempt from the charges
prescribed in this section:
      (1)   the city if used for municipal purposes;
      (2)   the State of Texas;
      (3)   a public or private institution of higher education; and
      (4)   property used for cemetery purposes if the cemetery is closed to
new interments and does not accept new burials.
   (d)   Billing and collection procedures. Stormwater drainage charges will be
billed and collected in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   The water utilities department shall bill the customer of record in
the regular water and wastewater service bill or, if no water or wastewater
service account exists, the true owner of record as shown in the current city
tax rolls.
      (2)   In cases involving occupancy of a lot or tract by two or more
tenants who are customers of record, the water utilities department may either
prorate the charges on an equitable basis between all the customers of record
or may instead bill the property owner for stormwater drainage service under a
separate account. In addition, if a lot or tract of land receives water or
wastewater service under two or more service accounts and the service accounts
are all in the name of the same customer of record, the water utilities
department may bill the entire drainage charge due through one service account.
      (3)   If more than one person is named in the current city tax rolls as
the true owner of record of benefitted property, each person is jointly and
severally liable for stormwater drainage charges on the property. The water
utilities department may bill any or all of the joint owners through one
service account.
   (e)   The water utilities department shall administer collection procedures
and service accounts under this section.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of
Sections
49-3,
49-7,
49-8,
49-12,
49-15, and
49-16 of this code, as amended, will govern in all matters regarding the
application for stormwater drainage service, payment and collection of
stormwater drainage charges, the liability of persons for charges, and the
remedies of the city in the event of nonpayment. (Ord. Nos. 21060; 21429;
21823; 22207; 22563; 22665; 24411; 25384; 25754; 27353; 27695; 30215; 30653;
30993; 31332; 31657; 32003; 32310; 32556; 32863; 33232)
SEC. 2-169.   SERVICE AREA.
   The service area of the stormwater drainage utility shall be defined by the
corporate boundaries of the city, as those boundaries are altered from time to
time in accordance with state law and the charter and ordinances of the city.
(Ord. Nos. 21060; 30215)
ARTICLE XXIX.
VETERAN AFFAIRS COMMISSION.
SEC. 2-170.   VETERAN AFFAIRS COMMISSION - CREATED; TERMS; MEMBERSHIP;
MEETINGS.
   (a)   There is hereby created the veteran affairs commission of the city,
which shall be an advisory body of 15 members. Each city council member shall
have one appointment to the veteran affairs commission. The mayor shall appoint
the chair from among the members, subject to confirmation by the city council,
and the full city council shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   All members shall be appointed for an initial term to expire on
September 30, 2021. Thereafter, nominations shall begin in August 2021 and each
subsequent odd-numbered year, and members appointed shall serve a two-year term
beginning on October 1.
   (c)   The veteran affairs commission will represent the city's military
veteran community. The veteran affairs commission must have a balanced
membership reflecting an outstanding interest in or knowledge of veterans'
affairs, including having knowledge about veterans' concerns, or being
affiliated with a service provider to veterans, and at least four members must
be currently serving or have previously served in the United States military
(including the Reserves or National Guard).
   (d)   The veteran affairs commission shall hold monthly meetings or as often
as may be necessary. The chair, with assistance of staff, shall schedule and
determine the agenda for such meetings. (Ord. 31746)
SEC. 2-171.   VETERAN AFFAIRS COMMISSION - FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   The veteran affairs commission shall act as an advisory body to the
city manager and the city council and shall:
      (1)   evaluate and recommend programs, policies, and practices designed
to alleviate veterans' difficulties in meeting basic needs, obtaining housing,
employment, and comprehensive mental health assistance;
      (2)   act as a central clearinghouse for information relating to the
status of veterans in the Dallas community;
      (3)   accumulate information about the needs of veterans in the Dallas
community, including available services, and make recommendations to the city
council regarding these needs;
      (4)   recommend ways to:
         (A)   educate the community on:
            (i)   the status of veterans' rights and needs; and
            (ii)   veterans' contributions to our community; and
         (B)   promote awareness among the public and private sector of
veterans' full potential and of the importance of veterans' contributions to
the development of the community; and
      (5)   identify and review the entire range of services available to
veterans, and recommend ways to:
         (A)   strengthen existing services and pursue new services for
veterans;
         (B)   promote collaboration between service providers; and
         (C)   expand resources available to veterans.
   (b)   The city manager shall provide staff to assist the commission in
performing its duties and responsibilities. (Ord. 31746)
ARTICLE XXX.
COLLEGE ADVISORY COMMISSION.
SEC. 2-172.    PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this commission is to promote regular and active civic
engagement among the college aged residents of the city by giving them a formal
role in local decision making, offering real world experiences with elected
bodies, providing opportunities to partner with our city council and the city's
boards and commissions, offering an avenue to engage in discussion with other
college students from across the city, and increasing volunteerism and voter
turnout. (Ord. 32484)
SEC. 2-173.    CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; MEETINGS.
   (a)   There is hereby created the college advisory commission, which shall
be an advisory body of 17 members. Each four-year university and college that
resides within Dallas County may select one member to the commission. The full
city council shall approve of the selections. The mayor shall appoint the
chair, and the full city council shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (b)   The universities and colleges that reside within the Dallas County
are:
      (1)   Columbia College Mesquite.
      (2)   Criswell College.
      (3)   Dallas College.
      (4)   Dallas Baptist University.
      (5)   Dallas Christian College.
      (6)   Dallas International University.
      (7)   DeVry University.
      (8)   Parker University.
      (9)   Paul Quinn College.
      (10)   Southern Methodist University.
      (11)   Texas A&M University-Commerce at Dallas.
      (12)   The Art Institute of Dallas.
      (13)   The University of North Texas at Dallas.
      (14)   The University of Texas at Dallas.
      (15)   University of Dallas.
      (16)   Wade College.
   (b)   All members shall be appointed for an initial term to expire on
September 30, 2024. Subsequent appointments will be made in September of each
year for a one-year term beginning on October 1.
   (c)   Each member of the commission must:
      (1)   Be enrolled as a full-time student in a four-year university or
college within Dallas County.
      (2)   Be at least 18 years of age and no older than 24 years of age at
the time of appointment.
   (d)   A member is not required to fulfill the qualifications for board
service in
Chapter 8 of the Dallas City Code except that the member must:
      (1)   have been a resident of the city for at least six months prior to
the date of the appointment; and
      (2)   not be in arrears on any obligations owed to the city.
   (e)   The commission must meet at least once each month and may hold
additional meetings at the call of the chair. (Ord. 32484)
SEC. 2-174.    DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The commission shall act as an advisory body to the city manager and
the city council and shall:
      (1)   advise the city council and city manager on issues impacting the
city; and
      (2)   assist the city in identifying programs that are needed in the
community; and
      (3)   perform such other duties assigned by the city council or city
manager.
   (b)   The city manager shall provide information and assistance to the
commission in the performance of its duties and responsibilities. (Ord. 32484)
ARTICLE XXXI.
RESERVED.
SECS. 2-175 THRU 2-177.   RESERVED.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 33233)
CHAPTER 3
ADVERTISING
Sec.
3-1.   Advertising by certain acts prohibited.
Sec.
3-2.   Use of vehicle for advertising.
SEC. 3-1.   ADVERTISING BY CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, for the purpose of advertising on
public property, the person:
      (1)   carries or holds, by hand or otherwise, any billboard, showcard,
placard, advertisement, or sign of any description;
      (2)   wears any costume, clothing, attire, or accessory intended to
attract the attention of the public;
      (3)   pastes, sticks, scatters, throws, or places any advertisement,
handbill, placard, or other printed, pictured, or written matter or thing upon
any house, wall, building, fence, railing, sidewalk, street, utility pole, or
public property; or
      (4)   holds by hand, carries, waves, or otherwise displays any banner,
showcard, placard, or other advertising media from any overpass, bridge, median
strip, or parkway of any public street or other public right-of-way so as to
attract the attention of occupants or drivers of motor vehicles on the street
or right-of-way, and the doing of any act listed in this paragraph is prima
facie evidence that the act is for the purpose of attracting the attention of
occupants and drivers of motor vehicles on the public streets and rights-of-
way.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly causes or permits
an act described in Subsection (a) to be done by any person for his or her
benefit.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the act was
authorized under Section
51A-7.207 of this code.
   (d)   It is an exception to Subsection (a)(3) of this section that the
advertisement or sign was a temporary political campaign sign placed on public
property in compliance with
Article III,
Chapter 15A of this code. (Code 1941, Art. 87-6; Code 1941, Art. 140-7; Ord.
Nos. 5304; 10372; 22061; 28221)
SEC. 3-2.   USE OF VEHICLE FOR ADVERTISING.
   No person shall operate or park a vehicle on a street nor shall the owner of
a vehicle permit the vehicle to be operated or parked on a street for the
primary purpose of advertising. (Ord. 14588)
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
CHAPTER 5
AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORTS
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
5-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
5-2.   Department of aviation created.
Sec.
5-3.   Director of aviation - Duties generally.
Sec.
5-4.   Promulgation of rules and regulations.
Sec.
5-5.   Authority over public at airports.
Sec.
5-6.   Authority to suspend operations.
Sec.
5-7.   Authority to remove violators from airport premises.
Sec.
5-8.   Compliance with air commerce regulations generally.
Sec.
5-9.   Interest in sales, etc.
Sec.
5-10.   Accounting for funds received.
Sec.
5-11.   Soliciting business or selling merchandise on airport property.
Sec.
5-12.   Aviation schools generally.
Sec.
5-13.   Aviation fuel sales; license fees and rates.
Sec.
5-14.   Fees charged for commercial aircraft.
Sec.
5-15.   Landing fees for general aviation aircraft at Dallas Love Field.
Sec.
5-16.   International arrival fees.
Sec.
5-17.   Authorization for special events.
Sec.
5-18.   Trespassing upon landing, take-off, and taxiing areas.
Sec.
5-19.   Sale of products at airports; license or permit.
Sec.
5-20.   Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
TRANSPORTATION SERVICES.
Sec.
5-21.   Definitions.
Sec.
5-22.   General authority for regulation and enforcement.
Sec.
5-23.   Offenses.
Sec.
5-24.   Defenses.
Sec.
5-25.   Registration of transportation services.
Sec.
5-26.   Fees.
Sec.
5-27.   Enforcement.
ARTICLE III.
CUSTOMER FACILITY CHARGE.
Sec.
5-28.   Definitions.
Sec.
5-29.   Collection and use of customer facility charge funds.
ARTICLE IV.
TERMINAL AND FACILITY.
Sec.
5-30.   Use of passenger interviews, opinion surveys, petitions, etc. at Dallas
Love Field.
Sec.
5-31.   Bringing of pets into the terminal.
Sec.
5-31.1.   Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
OPERATIONS AND SECURITY.
Sec.
5-32.   Trespassing on AOA and movement areas.
Sec.
5-33.   Love Field airport security program.
Sec.
5-34.   Maintenance run-ups.
ARTICLE VI.
ENFORCEMENT.
Sec.
5-35.   Penalty.
Secs.
5-36. thru 5-64   Flying at low altitude; permits for landing places.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
(Ord. 26492, title)
SEC. 5-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise,
      (1)   AIR OPERATIONS AREA (AOA) means all areas contained within the
airport perimeter fence at Love Field and Executive Airport, including the
movement area, ramp areas, hangars, and other facilities.
      (2)   AIRCRAFT means a device that is used or intended to be used for
flight in the air.
      (3)   AIRPORT means Dallas Love Field, Dallas Executive Airport, and the
Dallas Vertiport.
      (4)   AIRPORT OFFICIAL means an employee of the department of aviation
authorized by the director to enforce this chapter.
      (5)   AIRPORT USE AND LEASE AGREEMENT means an agreement dated on or
after October 1, 2008 by and between the city and an owner or operator of a
commercial aircraft that is allowed the use or lease of a gate at an airport
terminal building.
      (6)   AVIATION FUEL means fuel used in aircraft.
      (7)   COMMERCIAL AIRCRAFT means any aircraft operated for passenger,
cargo, or other for-hire purposes on scheduled or non-scheduled flights.
      (8)   COMMERCIAL PASSENGER SERVICE AIRCRAFT means any aircraft operated
for scheduled passenger service to or from Dallas Love Field.
      (9)   DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION means the city department having the
authority over the operations, maintenance, or any use of the city's airports
or other property specifically designated by the city manager.
      (10)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department of aviation,
including any subordinate specifically authorized to act on his behalf.
      (11)   FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA) means the agency of the
United States Department of Transportation, which regulates airports and
aircraft operations as well as airspace issues.
      (12)   FIXED-BASE OPERATOR (FBO) means a person who provides full-service
aircraft maintenance, aircraft rental, passenger charger flight service, or
fuel operations for compensation.
      (13)   GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT means an aircraft that is not a
commercial aircraft on scheduled or non-scheduled flights.
      (14)   INTERNATIONAL ARRIVAL means landing at Dallas Love Field after
taking off from a location outside of the United States or a United States
territory and using United States Customs and Border Protection services at
Dallas Love Field.
      (15)   MOVEMENT AREA means runways, taxiways, and other areas of an
airport that aircraft use for taxiing, takeoff, and landing, exclusive of
loading ramps and parking areas, and that are used under the control of an
airport traffic control tower.
      (16)   PERSON means any individual, partnership, corporation, or
government entity.
      (17)   RESTRICTED AREA means any area in which the general public is not
allowed as determined by the director in writing or by verbal directive during
an emergency.
      (18)   SELF-FUELING OPERATOR means a person dispensing aviation fuel to
aircraft that he owns, leases from others, or manages for others under a
contract.
      (19)   TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION (TSA) means the agency of
the United States, within the Department of Homeland Security, that regulates
airport and aircraft security. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 24859; 31690)
SEC. 5-2.   DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION CREATED.
   (a)   There is hereby created the department of aviation of the city of
Dallas, the head of which shall be the director of aviation, who shall be
appointed by the city manager. He shall be a person professionally competent by
experience and training to manage the department.
   (b)   In addition to the director, the organization of the department of
aviation shall be comprised of assistant directors and employees in positions
formally authorized by appropriate action of the city council. Any person
appointed to the position of assistant director shall have the powers and
duties specifically assigned to him and also shall have authority to act in the
capacity of director. The positions heretofore established, and the
appointments thereto officially made, in order to provide personnel for the
performance of the municipal functions required by this chapter, shall become
positions and appointments in the department of aviation without any further
official action. The civil service rules and regulations of the city shall
apply to employees of the department of aviation. (Code 1941, Art. 13-1; Ord.
Nos. 8212; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-3.   DIRECTOR OF AVIATION - DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (a)   The director shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office,
becoming familiar with the operation of airports. He shall particularly
familiarize himself with the fees, rates, and charges to be set by the city
council for the reception and care of aircraft and shall immediately recommend
the same to the city manager, so that the proper fees, rates, and charges may
be established for the landing and servicing of aircraft, and shall make
accurate reports to the city controller and the city manager of all monies
handled and charges made by the city for the care and reception of aircraft.
Such fees, rates, and charges include any required to support the general
operation of the airport as approved by the city council.
   (b)   The director shall be responsible for the care of all city property
placed under his supervision, whether within the department of aviation or
otherwise. From time to time, he shall establish suitable rules to be observed
by all entities and facilities operating upon airport property to ensure safe,
reliable, and orderly operations.
   (c)   The director shall exclusively manage, and may execute short term,
month-to-month leases on, all functions, properties, and facilities situated on
or having a relationship to any airport, whether such properties and facilities
are directly related to aviation activities or not, except that the exclusive
management of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport is and shall continue
to be the responsibility of the board of directors of the Dallas-Fort Worth
International Airport pursuant to its powers and duties as defined by the
contract and agreement between the cities of Dallas and Fort Worth, Texas.
   (d)   The director shall be responsible for establishing policy, procedures,
and rules consistent with the safe and efficient operation, management, and
maintenance of all airport facilities and equipment, and for the enforcement of
all ordinances, provisions, and rules governing airport operations. (Code 1941,
Art. 13-2; Ord. Nos. 8212; 14384; 15279; 20858; 30240; 31690)
SEC. 5-4.   PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The director is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and to supervise and
direct the use, operation, and maintenance of all properties situated on or
having relationship to any airport, whether such properties are directly
related to aviation activities or not, and in a manner that will provide the
most efficient, safe, and economical use of the properties in serving the
public interest; except that the supervision, operation, and maintenance of the
Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport is and shall continue to be the
responsibility of the board of directors of the Dallas-Fort Worth International
Airport pursuant to its powers and duties as defined by the contract and
agreement between the cities of Dallas and Fort Worth, Texas. (Ord. Nos. 14384;
19300; 26492; 31690)
SEC. 5-5.   AUTHORITY OVER PUBLIC AT AIRPORTS.
   The director, and his authorized assistants, shall at all times have
authority to take action as may be necessary in the handling, conduct, and
management of the public in attendance at any airport. (Ord. 8213; 31690)
SEC. 5-6.   AUTHORITY TO SUSPEND OPERATIONS.
   The director shall have the authority to suspend operations on or from the
airport when in his opinion conditions of the landing area or local
meteorological conditions might make such operations unsafe. (Ord. 8213; 31690)
SEC. 5-7.   AUTHORITY TO REMOVE VIOLATORS FROM AIRPORT PREMISES.
   Any person operating or handling any aircraft in violation of this chapter
or refusing to comply therewith may be promptly removed or ejected from any
airport by or under the authority of the director, and upon the order of the
city council, may be deprived of the further use of any airport and its
facilities for such length of time as may be required to insure the
safeguarding of the same and the public and its interests therein. (Ord. 8213;
31690)
SEC. 5-8.   COMPLIANCE WITH AIR COMMERCE REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   No person may navigate any aircraft over, land upon, take off from, or
service, maintain or repair any aircraft, or conduct any aircraft operations on
or from an airport otherwise than in compliance with the federal aviation
regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration or any other authority of
the federal government. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-9.   INTEREST IN SALES, ETC.
   The director shall never be pecuniarily interested, directly or indirectly,
in the sale of any aircraft, equipment, or accessories, or in any concessions
of any kind serving the airports. Any violation of this provision may be
grounds for his dismissal. (Code 1941, Art. 13-4; Ord. Nos. 8212; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-10.   ACCOUNTING FOR FUNDS RECEIVED.
   The city controller shall prepare forms to be signed by the director for all
moneys received and all charges made by him, which moneys carried on such forms
shall be deposited in the official city depository to the credit of the
particular airport fund involved. (Code 1941, Art. 13-5; Ord. Nos. 8212; 15279;
20073; 31690)
SEC. 5-11.   SOLICITING BUSINESS OR SELLING MERCHANDISE ON AIRPORT PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit customers or patronage for
himself or on behalf of any person or to sell any merchandise of any type or
distribute advertising matter upon the premises of any airport, without
authority of the director or the city council. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-12.   AVIATION SCHOOLS GENERALLY.
   No person shall use any airport as a place to conduct an aviation school,
air college, or flying school unless it is officially recognized by the U.S.
Department of Transportation, acting through the Federal Aviation
Administration, and has first obtained a lease or permit from the city, or a
sublease or permit from one of the city's tenants on the airport. The director
shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations deemed appropriate
for each airport at which such training is conducted. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384;
31690)
SEC. 5-13.   AVIATION FUEL SALES; LICENSE FEES AND RATES.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (c), only fixed-base operators or
self-fueling operators located at Dallas Love Field or Dallas Executive Airport
who have received prior written permission from the director and paid the
annual fee required under Paragraph (b)(1) may sell or dispense aviation fuel
at those airports.
   (b)   A fixed-base operator or self-fueling operator selling or dispensing
aviation fuel at Dallas Love Field or Dallas Executive Airport shall:
      (1)   pay to the city an annual fee of $1,000, made in advance through
the director;
      (2)   unless the report is filed by the operator's supplier, file with
the director, before the 10th day of each month, a report of aviation fuel sold
or dispensed during the preceding month; and
      (3)   unless payment is made by the operator's supplier, remit with the
monthly sales report $0.07 for each gallon of aviation fuel sold or dispensed
during the preceding month.
   (c)   Section
5-13(b)(3) does not apply to a person selling aviation fuel to the owner or
operator of an aircraft on which a landing fee is assessed at Dallas Love Field
or Dallas Executive Airport. (Ord. 8213; 31690)
SEC. 5-14.   FEES CHARGED FOR COMMERCIAL AIRCRAFT.
   (a)   Fees in the amounts determined pursuant to this section must be paid
by owners or operators of all commercial aircraft landing at any airport's
facilities for the purpose of taking off or landing aircraft.
   (b)   An owner or operator of commercial aircraft that has executed an
airport use and lease agreement having an effective date of October 1, 2008 or
later shall pay fees to the city in accordance with that agreement.
   (c)   An owner or operator of commercial aircraft that has not executed an
airport use and lease agreement shall pay to the city the following fees per
landing by a commercial aircraft, including scheduled and miscellaneous non-
scheduled landings, whether revenue or non-revenue (except for test,
inspection, or ferry flights for aircraft maintenance only). The fee for each
1,000 pounds of certified gross landing weight (determined according to the
manufacturer's data) is 125 percent of the fee paid by an owner or operator of
commercial aircraft that has executed an airport use and lease agreement having
an effective date of October 1, 2008 or later.
   (d)   Within 10 days after the last day of each month, an owner or operator
of commercial aircraft shall file with the director the following information:
      (1)   the number of landings for the month by type of aircraft; and
      (2)   the manufacturer's certificated gross landing weight for each type
of aircraft.
   (e)   Fees required by this section are due and payable (without invoice
from the city) within 10 days after the last day of each month and must be
transmitted to the director together with the information required under
Subsection (d). (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-15.   LANDING FEES FOR GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT AT DALLAS LOVE FIELD.
   (a)   Fees in this section must be paid by owners or operators of all
general aviation aircraft landing at Dallas Love Field or using Dallas Love
Field's facilities for landing aircraft.
   (b)   An owner or operator of a general aviation aircraft that has executed
an airport use and lease agreement shall pay fees, including landing fees, to
the city in accordance with that agreement.
   (c)   For each scheduled or non-scheduled landing, an owner or operator of a
general aviation aircraft who has not executed an airport use and lease
agreement shall pay to the city a fee per 1,000 pounds of certified gross
landing weight. The director shall determine the fee using an 80/20 formula,
with 80 percent of the fee comprised of Dallas Love Field's operation and
maintenance costs attributable to general aviation aircraft landings and 20
percent of the fee attributable to the general aviation aircraft's landed
weight. The director shall, on an annual basis, review the fee and make a
recommendation to the city council if the director determines the fee formula
should be amended.
   (d)   An owner or operator of a general aviation aircraft shall submit the
fees required by this section to the director of aviation in a timely manner.
(Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 24859; 31690)
SEC. 5-16.   INTERNATIONAL ARRIVAL FEES.
   (a)   An owner or operator of an aircraft, other than a commercial passenger
service aircraft, that makes an international arrival shall pay to the city the
following fees per international arrival (based on the type of aircraft and the
certificated maximum gross take-off weight of the aircraft, as determined
according to the manufacturer's data):
 
TYPE OF AIRCRAFT                                   FEE
Transport category (more than 100,000 pounds)      $1,050
Large turbine (more than 40,000 to 100,000 pounds) $700
Medium turbine (12,500 to 40,000 pounds)           $560
Light turbine (less than 12,500 pounds)            $350
Twin engine reciprocal propeller                   $140
Single engine reciprocal propeller                 $105
 
   (b)   Fees required by this section are due and payable to the city within
10 days after the date of the invoice from the city detailing the fees owed.
(Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 24859; 31690)
SEC. 5-17.   AUTHORIZATION FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   Upon approval of a special event or use permit, the director shall authorize
events for the purpose of exhibition, educational purposes, or for
photographer's work at the airport. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-18.   TRESPASSING UPON LANDING, TAKE-OFF, AND TAXIING AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the landing, take-off, taxiing
areas, or any other restricted areas at any airport unless the person has a
lawful right or a legitimate reason, as determined by the director, to enter
such areas. Restricted areas are specifically reserved for the use of the
actual operators of licensed aircraft, the aircraft crews, incoming and
outgoing passengers in aircraft, employees of the city whose duty it is to
perform services in connection with the maintenance and operation of the
airport, and other persons as may be authorized to enter thereon by reason of
their official duties in connection with the maintenance, inspection, and
operation of aircraft and the airport. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-19.   SALE OF PRODUCTS AT AIRPORTS; LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   No person shall enter any airport for the purpose of offering for sale or
selling any goods, wares, or merchandise unless he has first obtained the
appropriate license or permit from the director. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 24859;
31690)
SEC. 5-20.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 31690)
ARTICLE II.
TRANSPORTATION SERVICES.
SEC. 5-21.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article, unless the context requires otherwise,
      (1)   AVI TAG means a nontransferable electronic vehicle identification
tag issued by the North Texas Tollway Authority that is registered with the
department of transportation and public works’ - Transportation Regulation
Division and may be used to charge trip fees for transportation services at the
airport.
      (2)   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION means a certificate authorizing a
company to provide transportation services at the airport.
      (3)   CHARTERED BUS means a bus service for the transport of persons
belonging to a specified group at the airport that is:
         (A)   offered only upon a prearranged basis, the prearrangement being
made at least one hour in advance of the time the transportation is to begin;
and
         (B)   operated from locations within the city to locations either
inside or outside of the city.
      (4)   CONCESSION CONTRACT means a contractual agreement between the city
and another entity for car rental and/or parking services at the airport, under
which the city receives a minimum monthly payment or percentage of the gross
revenues received by the contractor for the services.
      (5)   COURTESY VEHICLE means any vehicle used to offer or provide
courtesy vehicle services.
      (6)   COURTESY VEHICLE SERVICE means free transportation to and from the
airport for customers by or for a business as an accessory to the main
activities of the business.
      (7)   DECAL means a distinct adhesive sticker issued under this article
authorizing the operation of a courtesy vehicle and chartered bus.
      (8)   DIRECTOR means the director of transportation and public works,
including any subordinate specifically authorized to act on his behalf.
      (9)   DRIVER means an individual who drives or otherwise controls the
physical movements of a transportation service vehicle.
      (10)   HOLDER means a person who has been granted a certificate of
registration to operate a transportation service at the airport, and includes
any person with an ownership interest in the transportation service.
      (11)   LAWFUL ORDER means a verbal or written directive issued by the
director, or his appointee, in the performance of his official duties relative
to the enforcement of this article and any rules or regulations promulgated
under this article.
      (12)   OPERATE means:
         (A)   to be in the care, custody, or control of a transportation
vehicle at the airport; or
         (B)   to own or be in control of a transportation service provided at
the airport.
      (13)   OPERATING AUTHORITY means a person who is granted operating
authority under Chapter 47A to provide transportation-for-hire services.
      (14)   OPERATOR means:
         (A)   the owner or driver of a transportation vehicle; or
         (B)   the holder of operating authority to perform transportation
services at the airport.
      (15)   OWNER means a person:
         (A)   who is the legal owner of a motor vehicle;
         (B)   to whom a motor vehicle is registered by the state; or
         (C)   with whom a motor vehicle is in the care, custody, or control.
      (16)   TRANSPORTATION-FOR-HIRE SERVICE means the business of offering or
providing transportation of persons for compensation under
Chapter 47A.
      (17)   TRANSPORTATION-FOR-HIRE VEHICLE means any vehicle used to offer or
provide transportation-for-hire services.
      (18)   TRANSPORTATION SERVICE means a business that operates a courtesy
vehicle, transportation-for-hire vehicle, or chartered bus at the airport for
the purpose of dropping off or picking up passengers on airport property.
      (19)   TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE means a courtesy vehicle, transportation-
for-hire vehicle, or chartered bus that is used for performing transportation
service at the airport.
      (20)   TRIP means each time a transportation vehicle accesses the curb
space where passengers are picked up or dropped off at the airport.
      (21)   TRIP FEE means the monetary amount charged per trip to the owner
or operator of a transportation vehicle in accordance with Section
5-26. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690; 32864)
SEC. 5-22.   GENERAL AUTHORITY FOR REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The director, through the Transportation Regulation Division, shall
implement and enforce this article and may promulgate and enforce written rules
and regulations consistent with this article governing the operation of
transportation services at the airport as necessary to provide for the orderly,
efficient, and convenient flow of traffic, to protect the public health and
safety, and to manage the transportation system at the airport.
   (b)   The director, through the Transportation Regulation Division, may
issue lawful orders and set and modify rules as necessary and consistent with
this article. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 24859; 31690)
SEC. 5-23.   OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he performs transportation services,
operates a transportation vehicle, or as a holder, allows the operation of a
transportation-for-hire vehicle or chartered bus at the airport without being
authorized under:
      (1)   a current, valid certificate of registration issued under Section
5-25;
      (2)    a current, valid operating authority permit issued under
Chapter 47A; or
      (3)   a current, valid transportation network company registration with
the Texas Department Licensing and Regulation.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he operates a transportation-for-hire
vehicle or charted bus at the airport without:
      (1)   holding a current valid operating authority permit under
Chapter 47A; or
      (2)   being named as the driver in a valid, open transportation network
company's digital network as defined in the Texas Occupations Code, Chapter
2402, Subchapter A, as amended.
   (c)    A person commits an offense if he performs transportation services,
operates a transportation vehicle, or as a holder, allows the operation of, a
transportation vehicle without holding a current, valid AVI tag required under
this article. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-24.   DEFENSES.
   It is a defense to prosecution under this article that a motor vehicle was
owned, operated, or leased by:
      (1)   a nonprofit organization and being used to carry only passengers
associated with that organization, if no compensation is received from any
other person for carrying the passengers;
      (2)   a fixed-based operator and being used to transport employees or
customers at the airport; or
      (3)   the federal or state government or a political subdivision of the
state;
      (4)   a school, university, organ donor company, medical service
provider, or ambulance service; or
      (5)    a vehicle operating as a Dallas Area Rapid Transit ("DART")
vehicle. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-25.   REGISTRATION OF TRANSPORTATION SERVICES.
   (a)   Registration.
      (1)   To obtain a transportation service certificate of registration, a
person must submit a registration application to the Transportation Regulation
Division on a form provided for that purpose. The applicant must be the person
who will own or operate the proposed transportation service.
      (2)   The registration application must include or be accompanied by:
         (A)   the name, address, and verified signature of the applicant;
         (B)   a description of each motor vehicle the applicant proposes to
use in the operation of the transportation service, including the make, model,
vehicle identification number, and state license plate number of the motor
vehicle;
         (C)   the full name and driver's license number of every individual
expected to drive or operate a transportation vehicle at the airport under the
registration;
         (D)   proof of each driver's authority to operate the type of motor
vehicle designated by the applicant to be operated in the transportation
service;
         (E)   documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating a
willingness to provide liability insurance on each courtesy vehicle or
transportation vehicle to be operated at the airport;
         (F)   proof showing the purchase or authorized use of a valid AVI tag
for each transportation vehicle to be operated at the airport;
         (G)   an annual decal and certificate of registration fees in the
amount specified in Section
5-26 of this article for each transportation vehicle to be operated at the
airport that does not have a current, valid vehicle permit issued under
Chapter 47A of this code; and
         (H)   any other information requested by the director that is
reasonably necessary to determine the qualifications of the applicant to
perform transportation service at the airport.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a registration application, the Transportation
Regulation Division shall issue a certificate of registration to the applicant,
unless it is determined that the applicant:
         (A)   failed to submit a complete registration application;
         (B)   made a false statement as to a material matter on, or in
connection with, the registration application;
         (C)   failed to pay any fee required by this article relating to the
operation of transportation services at the airport.
      (4)   If the director approves the registration application, the
applicant will receive a transportation service certificate of registration and
a decal, if applicable, for each vehicle authorized to be operated by the
transportation service.
      (5)   If the Transportation Regulation Division denies a renewal of a
transportation service certificate of registration, the applicant, holder, or
transportation vehicle operator, shall immediately cease any transportation
service at the airport and shall promptly surrender and remove any registration
decal from any motor vehicle used to perform transportation services at the
airport.
      (6)   If the director determines that an application or renewal should be
denied, the Transportation Regulation Division shall notify the applicant in
writing that the application is denied and include in the notice the reason for
the denial and a statement informing the applicant of their right to appeal.
   (b)   Expiration of registration. Certificate of registration and decals
expire at 11:59 p.m. on December 31 of each year and must be renewed in
accordance with the application procedures set forth in this section.
   (c)   Suspension and revocation of registration.
      (1)   The Transportation Regulation Division may suspend a certificate of
registration of a transportation service for a period not to exceed 60 days for
failure to comply with requirements in this article. The Transportation
Regulation Division may apply the suspension to all of the holder's
transportation vehicle operations at the airport or limit the suspension to the
particular transportation vehicle operator who is responsible for creating the
grounds for the suspension. At the end of the suspension period, the holder or
the transportation vehicle operator, whichever applies, may resume providing
transportation service at the airport, after providing verification to the
Transportation Regulation Division that any deficiency for which the suspension
was given has been corrected. Failure to correct a deficiency within the time
established may result in revocation of the holder's certificate of
registration.
      (2)   The director may suspend or revoke a certificate of registration if
the director determines that:
         (A)   the holder made a false statement as to a material matter on, or
in connection with, the registration application; or
         (B)   the holder, or any operator of a transportation vehicle
authorized under the holder's certificate of registration:
            (i)   failed to pay any fee required by this article at the time or
in the manner required by this article or approved by the director;
            (ii)   used an AVI tag, courtesy vehicle decal, or transportation-
for-hire vehicle decal in an unauthorized manner; or
            (iii)   failed to comply with any provision of this article or any
rule, regulation, or lawful order promulgated or issued by the Transportation
Regulation Division under this article.
      (3)   The Transportation Regulation Division shall notify the holder in
writing of any suspension or revocation under this subsection. Written notice
must also be given to any particular transportation vehicle operator whose
authority to operate at the airport under a holder's certificate of
registration is suspended or revoked under this section. The Transportation
Regulation Division shall include in the notice, the reason for the suspension
or revocation, the scope of the suspension, the date the director orders the
suspension or revocation to begin, the duration of any suspension, and a
statement informing the holder and any transportation vehicle operator, of
their right to appeal. The period of suspension or revocation begins on the
date specified by the Transportation Regulation Division, or, in the case of an
appeal, on the date ordered by the permit and license appeal board.
      (4)   If the Transportation Regulation Division suspends or revokes the
authority of a transportation vehicle operator to operate at the airport under
a holder's certificate of registration, the applicant, holder, or
transportation vehicle operator shall immediately cease any transportation
service at the airport and shall promptly surrender and remove any registration
decal from any motor vehicle used to perform transportation service at the
airport.
      (5)   A holder whose certificate of registration has been revoked is not
eligible to reapply for another transportation service decal before the
expiration of 24 months after the date of revocation.
   (d)   Appeals of a denial, suspension, or revocation. Any person whose
application for issuance or renewal of a transportation service certificate of
registration is denied, or any transportation vehicle operator whose authority
to operate at the airport under a holder's certificate of registration has been
suspended or revoked may file an appeal with the permit and license appeal
board in accordance with Section
2-96. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 24859; 31690)
SEC. 5-26.   FEES.
   (a)   A person performing transportation service at the airport shall pay
the following fees to the Transportation Regulation Division:
      (1)   Certificate of registration fee. Courtesy vehicles; chartered
buses; vehicles not registered under Texas Department of Licensing and
Regulation, Texas Department of Transportation, United States Department of
Transportation; and transportation-for-hire vehicles operating at the airport
that do not have a current, valid City of Dallas vehicle permit issued under
Chapter 47A of this code are charged an annual $30 certificate of registration
fee.
      (2)   Decal fee. An annual decal fee of $15 is charged for each
transportation vehicle operated at the airport that does not have a current,
valid City of Dallas vehicle permit issued under
Chapter 47A. The fee to replace a decal that has been lost, stolen, or
mutilated is $25.
      (3)   Trip fee. Each courtesy vehicle and chartered bus not operating
under an airport concession contract and each transportation service and each
transportation-for-hire vehicle is charged a $2.00 per entry and per exit trip
fee. This fee does not apply to courtesy vehicles or chartered buses operating
under an airport concession contract.
   (b)   The director shall establish rules and regulations governing the time
and manner in which the fees required by this section must be paid. (Ord. Nos.
8213; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-27.   ENFORCEMENT.
   A vehicle may be towed and impounded if determined by the director, the
Transportation Regulation Division, or a peace officer to be operating as a
transportation vehicle without:
      (1)   the certificate of registration or operating authority required by
this chapter or
Chapter 47A; or
      (2)   a vehicle decal permit or AVI-tag required by this chapter. (Ord.
Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690)
ARTICLE III.
CUSTOMER FACILITY CHARGE.
SEC. 5-28.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article,
      (1)   AIRPORT CUSTOMER means a person who arrives at the airport and who
enters into an agreement:
         (A)    directly with an airport rental car company; or
         (B)    with a third party, if that agreement with the third party was
facilitated, arranged, or otherwise coordinated by an airport rental car
company.
      A person qualifies as an airport customer regardless of whether the
person receives the car at the airport, a future ConRAC location, or an off-
airport location.
      (2)   AIRPORT RENTAL CAR COMPANY means both an off-airport rental car
company and an on-airport rental car company.
      (3)   ConRAC means a consolidated rental car facility.
      (4)   CUSTOMER FACILITY CHARGE or CFC means a user fee imposed on an
airport customer by an airport rental car company on a per transaction basis.
The CFC does not constitute income, revenue, or assets of the airport rental
car company, and is always property of the city.
      (5)   OFF-AIRPORT RENTAL CAR COMPANY means a person who provides car
rental services, including, but not limited to, peer-to-peer car rental
services, and picks up, arranges, coordinates, or is an intermediary for the
pick-up of the customer from the airport. An off-airport rental car company
does not include an on-airport rental car company.
      (6)   ON-AIRPORT RENTAL CAR COMPANY means a person who is a party to a
concession contract with the city to provide car rental services.
      (7)   TRANSACTION DAY means a 24-hour period, or fraction thereof, that
is subject to an agreement to which an airport customer is a party. (Ord. Nos.
8213; 14384; 24859; 31690)
SEC. 5-29.   COLLECTION AND USE OF CUSTOMER FACILITY CHARGE FUNDS.
   (a)   The director is authorized to administer the collection of CFC funds
consistent with this article. The director may deem an airport rental car
company that fails to comply with this section in default, and recommend
termination to the city council, of any agreement related to car rental
services that the airport rental car company has with the city, regardless of
whether the agreement incorporates this section.
   (b)   The CFC amount to be charged an airport customer is $3.00 per
transaction day.
   (c)   An airport rental car company must:
      (1)   charge and collect from its customer the total amount of the CFC
due under the airport rental car company contract at the time the final number
of transaction days are determined and list the CFC separately on the invoice
as a customer facility charge;
      (2)   remit the total amount of the CFC along with supporting
documentation in a format approved by the director according to the following
deadlines:
         (A)   for an off-airport rental car company, the CFC must be remitted
directly to the city on or before the 15th day of every calendar month
following the month in which the CFC was invoiced to the airport customer;
         (B)   for an on-airport rental car company, the CFC must be remitted
pursuant to the terms of its concession contract with the city; and
      (3)   maintain adequate records that account for the CFC charged to its
customers and collected for and remitted to the city, in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, and make the records available to the
city on a monthly basis, or upon request of the director.
   (d)   The city may use the CFC to pay costs associated with studying,
planning, designing, and managing ConRAC projects, and purchasing and improving
property related to the development of a ConRAC and other rental car facilities
for airport rental car companies. The CFC may also be used to analyze the
operational, physical, and financial feasibility of developing ConRAC and other
rental car facilities for airport rental car companies as well as for leasing
property, paying construction costs, and common use of transportation systems.
(Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 24859; 31690)
ARTICLE IV.
TERMINAL AND FACILITY.
SEC. 5-30.   USE OF PASSENGER INTERVIEWS, OPINION SURVEYS, PETITIONS, ETC. AT
DALLAS LOVE FIELD.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct passenger interviews,
opinion surveys, or circulate any petition or questionnaire to any member of
the air traveling public at or upon any restricted airport property, including,
but not limited to, the Dallas Love Field terminal building; provided.
   (b)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   a person acting under the authorization of the city, state, or
federal government; or
      (2)   a media person gathering news for general dissemination to the
public by newspapers or magazines of general circulation or by radio or
television stations operating under a permit from the United States government
(Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-31.   BRINGING OF PETS INTO THE TERMINAL.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to bring into any building, or
onto any airport property, any pet or animal, unless, for the entire time on
the property, the pet or animal is:
      (1)   in a pet container;
      (2)   on a leash that is six feet long or shorter; or
      (3)   otherwise under the complete control of the owner or caretaker.
   (b)   The director shall cause signs giving appropriate notice of pet and
animal restrictions to be installed at prominent places at Dallas Love Field
and Dallas Executive Airport. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14318; 14857; 19425; 19677;
24859; 26264; 27436; 31690)
SEC. 5-31.1.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 31690)
ARTICLE V.
OPERATIONS AND SECURITY.
SEC. 5-32.   TRESPASSING ON AOA AND MOVEMENT AREAS.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to enter the AOA of any airport unless a
person has a lawful right or is authorized by the director to enter the area.
These areas are specifically reserved for the use of the actual operators of
licensed aircraft, the aircraft crews, incoming and outgoing passengers moving
to and from aircraft, employees of the city whose duty it is to perform
service, maintenance, and the actual operation of the airport, and such other
persons as may be authorized to enter thereon because of their official duties
in connection with the maintenance, inspection, and operation of aircraft and
the airport.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to enter the movement area of any
airport unless a person is authorized by the director and complies with all
rules and regulations for access in accordance with FAA and local airport
requirements. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 14384; 31690)
SEC. 5-33.   LOVE FIELD AIRPORT SECURITY PROGRAM.
   (a)   A tenant or any person who has been issued identification media by the
department of aviation authorizing access to the security identification
display, air operations area, or sterile area shall comply with the airport
security program.
   (b)   If a penalty is assessed against the city by the Federal Aviation
Administration or Transportation Security Administration because a tenant or
person who has been issued airport identification media has failed to comply
with the airport security program, the director shall assess the same penalty
against that tenant or person. A tenant or person shall pay the full amount of
a penalty under this subsection to the director not later than the 10th day
after the director submits written demand for payment.
   (c)   The operations and security division of the department of aviation has
primary responsibility for enforcement of the airport security program (Ord.
Nos. 8213; 9975; 14384; 15629; 24859; 25124; 27436; 31690)
SEC. 5-34.   MAINTENANCE RUN-UPS.
   No person shall start and run up an aircraft, except in a place designated
for such purposes by the director or one of the director's assistants. Aircraft
starts and run-ups may not be conducted at Dallas Love Field or Dallas
Executive Airport between 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 6:00 am. At no time may any
person run up an engine or engines from a position that hangars, shops, or
other buildings, or any person in the observation area, are in the path of the
propeller or jet blast. (Ord. Nos. 8213; 9975; 14384; 31690)
ARTICLE VI.
ENFORCEMENT.
SEC. 5-35.   PENALTY.
   A person violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed,
continued, or permitted. Each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500. (Ord. 28110; 31690)
SECS. 5-36. THROUGH 5-64.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 31690)
CHAPTER 5A
AIR POLLUTION
Sec.
5A-1.   Short title.
Sec.
5A-2.   Declaration of policy.
Sec.
5A-3.   Chapter definitions.
Sec.
5A-4.   General authority and duty of director.
Sec.
5A-5.   Air pollution information required.
Sec.
5A-5.1.   Reserved.
Sec.
5A-6.   Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission rules.
Sec.
5A-7.   City air pollution standards.
Sec.
5A-8.   Registration fees.
Sec.
5A-9.   Compliance order and emergency action.
Sec.
5A-10.   Monitoring requirements.
Sec.
5A-11.   Inspection of records.
Sec.
5A-12.   Notice.
Sec.
5A-13.   Nuisance.
Sec.
5A-14.   Offenses.
Sec.
5A-15.   Motor vehicle idling.
SEC. 5A-1.   SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the Dallas Clean Air Ordinance. (Ord. 15079)
SEC. 5A-2.   DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city of Dallas to safeguard the air resources of the
city from air pollution and to promote the protection of the health, safety,
general welfare, and physical property of the people within the city by
regulating emission of air contaminants and by controlling or abating air
pollution. The provisions of this chapter are to be construed, according to the
fair import of their terms, to effect this policy. (Ord. 15079)
SEC. 5A-3.   CHAPTER DEFINITIONS.
   The definition of a term in this section applies to each grammatical
variation of the term. In this chapter, unless the context requires a different
definition:
      (1)   AIR CONTAMINANT means dust, fumes, gas, mist, odor, particulate
matter, toxic materials, smoke, or vapor, individually or in combination, that
is produced by a process other than natural.
      (2)   AIR POLLUTION means the presence in the atmosphere of one or more
air contaminants in such concentration and of such duration:
         (A)   as to have or tend to have an injurious or adverse effect on
human health or safety, animal or vegetable life, or property; or
         (B)   as to interfere with the normal use or enjoyment of animals,
vegetation, or other property.
      (3)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter and includes
representatives, agents, or city employees designated by the director to assist
in the enforcement and administration of this chapter.
      (4)   FACILITY means any stationary source of air contaminants and
includes the following classes.
         (A)   Class "1" facility means a stationary source of air contaminants
whose actual emissions at design capacity are greater than or equal to 100 tons
per year of any pollutant.
         (B)   Class "2" facility means a stationary source of air contaminants
whose uncontrolled emissions at design capacity would be greater than or equal
to 100 tons per year for any pollutant, but whose actual emissions are less
than 100 tons per year.
         (C)   Class "3" facility means a stationary source of air contaminants
whose uncontrolled emissions at design capacity are less than 100 tons per
year, but greater than or equal to five tons per year.
         (D)   Class "4" facility means a facility whose uncontrolled emissions
at design capacity are less than five tons per year but whose emissions are
significant, or have the potential to be significant, or have a potential to be
a nuisance.
         (E)   Class "5" facility means a dry cleaner that uses
trichloroethylene, perchloroethylene, or naphtha when conducting cleaning
operations on clothing or other fabrics.
      (5)   PERSON means an individual; corporation; government or governmental
subdivision; or agency, trust, partnership, or two or more persons having a
joint or common economic interest. (Ord. Nos. 15079; 17226; 17344; 19647;
20076; 20612; 21144; 29879, eff. 10/1/15)
SEC. 5A-4.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF DIRECTOR.
   The director is the principal air pollution control officer of the city. The
director shall implement and enforce this chapter and may establish such rules,
not inconsistent with this chapter, as he determines are necessary to discharge
his duty under, or to effect the policy of, this chapter. The director shall
evaluate the effect of proposed zoning changes on air pollution and shall
endeavor to coordinate his activities with those of the city planning and
zoning agencies in order to achieve optimum management of the air resources of
the city. The director is encouraged to cooperate, in a manner consistent with
the policy of this chapter, with other governmental agencies concerned with air
pollution. The director is encouraged to publicize information on air pollution
data, administrative hearings, progress in abatement programs and decisions
affecting pollution control, and to inform and cooperate with citizen groups
and industry associations concerned with air pollution. The director shall
recommend to the city manager enforcement measures and policies to achieve and
maintain air quality in the city of Dallas. (Ord. 15079)
SEC. 5A-5.   AIR POLLUTION INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   Any person operating or maintaining an existing facility which emits
or has the potential to emit air contaminants shall register with the director.
   (b)   New or modified facilities.
      (1)   Any person proposing to construct a new facility or modify an
existing facility, as defined in the Texas Clean Air Act, so as to require a
Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) permit shall register
with the director within 30 days of submittal of the TNRCC permit application.
      (2)   Any person proposing to construct a new facility that is exempt
from TNRCC permit requirements shall register with the director within 30 days
of beginning operation.
   (c)   The director may require, from time to time, a person whose activity
causes or may cause emission of an air contaminant to submit to the director
such additional information as the director considers necessary to evaluate the
air pollution nature or potential of the activity.
   (d)   Except for official purposes, the director may not disclose
information submitted under this chapter relating to secret processes or
methods of manufacture or production, which information is identified as
confidential when submitted, without the written consent of the person who
submits the information. (Ord. Nos. 15079; 19647; 22442)
SEC. 5A-5.1.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 29879, eff. 10/1/15)
SEC. 5A-6.   TEXAS NATURAL RESOURCE CONSERVATION COMMISSION RULES.
   The city hereby adopts by reference the following rules of the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission, in their current form and as they may
hereafter be amended (a copy of which is on file in the office of the
director), including the tables, graphs, figures, appendices, and other matter
promulgated as part of the state commission’s rules, all of which are
incorporated by reference as though written fully word for word in this
chapter.
   (1)   30 TAC, Chapter 101, General Rules.
   (2)   30 TAC, Chapter 104, Bond Certification Criteria for Air Pollution
Control Facilities.
   (3)   30 TAC, Chapter 106, Exemptions from Permitting.
   (4)   30 TAC, Chapter 111, (Regulation I) Control of Air Pollution from
Visible Emissions and Particulate Matter.
   (5)   30 TAC, Chapter 112, (Regulation II) Control of Air Pollution from
Sulphur Compounds.
   (6)   30 TAC, Chapter 113, (Regulation III) Control of Air Pollution from
Toxic Materials.
   (7)   30 TAC, Chapter 114, (Regulation IV) Control of Air Pollution from
Motor Vehicles.
   (8)   30 TAC, Chapter 115, (Regulation V) Control of Air Pollution from
Volatile Organic Compounds.
   (9)   30 TAC, Chapter 116, (Regulation VI) Control of Air Pollution by
Permits for New Construction or Modification.
   (10)   30 TAC, Chapter 117, (Regulation VII) Control of Air Pollution from
Nitrogen Compounds.
   (11)   30 TAC, Chapter 118, (Regulation VIII) Control of Air Pollution
Episodes.
   (12)   30 TAC, Chapter 119, (Regulation IX) Control of Air Pollution from
Carbon Monoxide.
   (13)   30 TAC, Chapter 122, (Regulation XII) Federal Operating Permits.
(Ord. Nos. 15079; 17344; 18902; 21144; 22442; 22894; 23264; 23723; 24027)
SEC. 5A-7.   CITY AIR POLLUTION STANDARDS.
   (a)   No person may cause, suffer, allow, or permit the emission of lead or
its compounds (measured as elemental lead) so as to cause or contribute to an
exceedence of the ambient air quality standard for lead. The ambient air
quality standard for lead and its compounds, measured as elemental lead by a
reference method based on appendix G of 40 CFR 50, or by an equivalent method,
is 1.5 micrograms per cubic meter, maximum arithmetic mean averaged over 30
calendar days. The data used to obtain the arithmetic mean averaged over 30
calendar days shall consist of individual 24-hour concentrations obtained on a
regular sampling schedule and shall contain a minimum of 15 validated samples.
   (b)   No person or persons may cause, suffer, allow, or permit emissions of
lead from any source or sources on a property or from multiple sources operated
on contiguous properties to exceed any of the following net ground level
concentrations:
      (1)   8.3 micrograms of lead per cubic meter of air averaged over one
hour; or
      (2)   6.5 micrograms of lead per cubic meter of air averaged over three
hours; or
      (3)   5.2 micrograms of lead per cubic meter of air averaged over five
hours.
   (c)   Odors (emission standard). A stationary source may not emit beyond its
property line an odor, the strength of which equals or exceeds two odor units,
as measured by the director on a Barnaby-Cheney Scentometer or equivalent odor-
testing device.
   (d)   The director shall prescribe by rule such additional regulations as he
determines are necessary to implement this section and may provide by rule for
temporary suspension of the application of the air pollution standards
prescribed by this section to a source that is operating under unusual
conditions or circumstances that prevent compliance. (Ord. Nos. 15079; 18223;
18902)
SEC. 5A-8.   REGISTRATION FEES.
   (a)   Any person operating or maintaining a facility registered with the
director under Section
5A-5(a) or (b) shall pay a nonrefundable registration fee for each calendar
year. The fee is based upon the applicable facility class, or upon the facility
source status. The fee for each calendar year must be paid by December 31 of
the previous calendar year.
   (b)   The fee for each class of facility is as follows:
 
Class “1” facil$1,442
Class “2” facil$1,093
Class “3” facil$988
Class “4” facil$988
Class “5” facil$86
 
   (c)   The annual registration fee for a new facility will be prorated from
the date on which operations begin to the end of the calendar year.
   (d)   If the annual registration fee is not received by the date due, the
registration for the facility lapses, and a reinstatement fee of $50 must be
paid in addition to the registration fee before the registration will be
renewed.
   (e)   A person commits a separate offense each day that he fails to either
register a facility or pay the appropriate registration fee for a facility by
the date due. (Ord. Nos. 19647; 20612; 26598; 27353; 28019; 29477; 29879;
32310)
SEC. 5A-9.   COMPLIANCE ORDER AND EMERGENCY ACTION.
   (a)   If the director determines that a source is in violation of the
emission standard prescribed by Section
5A-7(a), (b) or (c), the director by written order may require a person who
owns, controls, or manages the source to take such action as the director
determines is necessary to promote or effect compliance with the emission
standard.
   (b)   If the director determines that an imminent and serious threat to the
public health or safety exists because of violation of Section
5A-7, the director may take or cause to be taken such immediate action as is
necessary under the circumstances to abate the threat.
   (c)   Exercise of authority granted by this section is not a prerequisite to
prosecution of an offense under Section
5A-14. (Ord. Nos. 15079; 18902)
SEC. 5A-10.   MONITORING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The director by rule may prescribe reasonable requirements for
monitoring or measuring emission of air contaminants by a person who owns,
controls, or operates a source that emits an air contaminant identified in
Section
5A-7.
   (b)   The director by rule may prescribe reasonable requirements for
maintaining records on monitoring or measuring emissions by a person who is
required to monitor or measure emission of air contaminants under Subsection
(a) of this section. (Ord. 15079)
SEC. 5A-11.   INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   The director may examine during regular business hours such records as are
required by state or city law or rule to be maintained in connection with the
operation of air pollution or emission control equipment or facilities or in
connection with the emission of air contaminants. (Ord. 15079)
SEC. 5A-12.   NOTICE.
   Notice required or authorized under this chapter must be served on the
person to be notified either personally or by mailing to the person at the
address last known to the director. The effective date of notice required or
authorized under this chapter is the date that the notice is personally served
or that the notice is postmarked, as the case may be. (Ord. 15079)
SEC. 5A-13.   NUISANCE.
   A violation of a standard prescribed by Section
5A-7 constitutes a nuisance. The city attorney may file suit to obtain such
orders or process as are necessary to abate the nuisance. (Ord. 15079)
SEC. 5A-14.   OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   refuses to submit information requested by the director under
Section
5A-5(a); or
      (2)   violates a rule of the Texas Natural Resource Conservation
Commission identified in Section
5A-6; or
      (3)   owns, controls, or manages a source that violates the emission
standard prescribed by Section
5A-7(a), (b) or (c); or
      (4)   interferes with the director in the exercise of his authority under
Section
5A-9(b); or
      (5)   violates a rule established under Section
5A-10; or
      (6)   refuses to allow or interferes with an inspection authorized under
Section
5A-11; or
      (7)   violates a variance or order granted or issued by the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission under the Texas Clean Air Act.
   (b)   A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an
offense under this section unless the provision defining the offense expressly
requires a culpable mental state.
   (c)   An offense committed under this section is punishable by a fine of not
more than $2,000.
   (d)   A separate offense is committed each day in which an offense under
this section occurs.
   (e)   If an enforcing officer designated by the director has probable cause
to believe that a person has committed an offense under this section, the
enforcing officer may issue the person a written citation requiring him to
appear in municipal court to answer the charge against him. If, upon request by
the enforcing officer, the person believed by the officer to have committed the
offense refuses to promise to appear in court by signing the citation, the
enforcing officer may cause the person to be arrested. The citation must
include the name of the person cited for the offense, identification and date
of offense alleged, and date of citation. The officer issuing a citation shall
sign it.
   (f)   Prosecution for an offense under this section does not prevent the use
of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person charged
with or the conduct involved in the offense. (Ord. Nos. 15079; 18001; 18902;
19963; 20076; 22442; 29879, eff. 10/1/15)
SEC. 5A-15.   MOTOR VEHICLE IDLING.
      (a)   Definitions. In this section:
         (1)   COMMERCIAL PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION means a mode of
transportation provided by a bus or motor coach designed to accommodate more
than 10 passengers (including the operator) for compensation and that is
powered by a primary propulsion engine, but specifically excluding the modes of
railroad, light rail, or taxicabs.
         (2)   IDLE means the operation of an engine in the operating mode
where:
         (A)   the engine is not engaged in gear;
         (B)   the engine operates at a speed at the revolutions per minute
specified by the engine or vehicle manufacturer for when the accelerator is
fully released; and
         (C)   there is no load on the engine.
      (3)   MECHANICAL OPERATIONS means the use of electrical tools or
equipment in construction, maintenance, or repair of facilities.
      (4)   PASSENGER TRANSIT OPERATIONS means a regional mode of public
transportation that is funded through a portion of sales tax for the region
being served.
      (5)   PRIMARY PROPULSION ENGINE means a gasoline or diesel-fueled
internal combustion engine that:
         (A)   is attached to a motor vehicle; and
         (B)   provides the power to propel the motor vehicle into motion and
maintain motion.
   (b)   Idling prohibited. A person commits an offense if he causes, suffers,
allows, or permits the primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle to idle for
more than five consecutive minutes when the motor vehicle is not in motion.
   (c)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
      (1)   the motor vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of 14,000
pounds or less;
      (2)   the motor vehicle was forced to remain motionless because of
traffic conditions over which the operator had no control;
      (3)   the motor vehicle was being used:
         (A)   by the United States military, national guard, or reserve
forces; or
         (B)   as an emergency or law enforcement motor vehicle;
      (4)   the primary propulsion engine of the motor vehicle was providing a
power source necessary for a mechanical operation of the vehicle, other than:
         (A)   propulsion; or
         (B)   passenger compartment heating or air conditioning;
      (5)   the primary propulsion engine of the motor vehicle was being
operated for maintenance or diagnostic purposes;
      (6)   the primary propulsion engine of the motor vehicle was being
operated solely to defrost a windshield;
      (7)   the primary propulsion engine of the motor vehicle was being used
to supply heat or air conditioning necessary for passenger comfort or safety,
if the vehicle:
         (A)   was a school bus or was intended for commercial passenger
transportation or passenger transit operations; and
         (B)   did not idle more than 30 consecutive minutes;
      (8)   the primary propulsion engine of the motor vehicle was being used
to provide air conditioning or heating necessary for employee health or safety
while the employee was using the vehicle to perform an essential job function
related to roadway construction or maintenance;
      (9)   the primary propulsion engine of the motor vehicle was being used
as airport ground support equipment;
      (10)   the person charged with the offense was the owner of a motor
vehicle that had been rented or leased to the person operating the vehicle at
the time of the offense, if the vehicle operator was not employed by the
vehicle owner;
      (11)   the idling of the motor vehicle was necessary to power a heater or
air conditioner while a driver was using the vehicle’s sleeper berth for a
government-mandated rest period and was not within two miles of a facility
offering external heating and air conditioning connections at a time when those
connections were available;
      (12)   the primary propulsion engine of the motor vehicle was being used
to provide air conditioning or heating necessary for employee health or safety
in an armored vehicle while the employee remained inside the vehicle to guard
the contents or while the vehicle was being loaded or unloaded; or
      (13)   the motor vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating greater than
14,000 pounds and is equipped with a 2008 or subsequent model year heavy- duty
diesel engine or liquefied or compressed natural gas engine that has been
certified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or another state
environmental agency to emit no more than 30 grams of nitrogen oxides emissions
per hour when idling.
   (d)   Penalties.
      (1)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500. Each instance of a violation of this section is a separate offense.
      (2)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this section is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
      (3)   Prosecution for an offense under this section does not preclude the
use of other enforcement remedies or procedures that may be available to the
city. (Ord. Nos. 26766; 27264; 28456; 28833)
CHAPTER 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sec.
6-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
6-2.   Enforcement.
Sec.
6-3.   Zoning laws to be complied with.
Sec.
6-4.   Dealers located near churches, schools, day-care centers, child-care
facilities, and hospitals; variances.
Sec.
6-5.   Public school activities.
Sec.
6-6.   Reserved.
Sec.
6-6.1.   Open containers and consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited in
certain public places.
Sec.
6-7.   Reserved.
Sec.
6-8.   Reserved.
Sec.
6-9.   State law to control.
Sec.
6-10.   Local fees.
Sec.
6-11.   Sale of beer prohibited in residential zoning districts.
Sec.
6-12.   Reserved.
Sec.
6-13.   Seizure of alcoholic beverages.
Sec.
6-14.   Late hours sales of alcoholic beverages in counties having a population
of less than 500,000.
SEC. 6-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE means an alcoholic beverage as defined in the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
      (2)   DALLAS CENTRAL AREA means the area contained within the following
boundaries:
         Beginning at the intersection of the Trinity River and I-35;
         Northerly along the Trinity River to Inwood Road;
         Northeasterly on Inwood Road to Maple Avenue;
         Southeasterly on Maple Avenue to Motor Street;
         Southwesterly on Motor Street to Harry Hines Boulevard;
         Southerly on Harry Hines Boulevard to intersect the Union Pacific/DART
Rail Line;
         Northerly and easterly along the Union Pacific/DART Rail Line to
intersect Lemmon Avenue;
         Southeasterly on Lemmon Avenue to intersect North Central Expressway;
         Northerly on North Central Expressway to intersect Haskell Avenue;
         Southeasterly on Haskell Avenue to intersect the Santa Fe/DART Rail
Line;
         Southwesterly along the Santa Fe/DART Rail Line to intersect the Union
Pacific/DART Rail Line;
         Southeasterly along the Union Pacific/DART Rail Line to intersect I-
30;
         Southwesterly on I-30 to intersect the Santa Fe/DART Rail Line;
         Southwesterly along the Santa Fe/DART Rail Line to intersect the
Trinity River;
         Northwesterly along the Trinity River to intersect I-35 at the point
of beginning.
      (3)   OPEN CONTAINER means a container that is no longer sealed.
      (4)   PRIVATE SCHOOL means a private school, including a parochial
school, that:
         (A)   offers a course of instruction for students in one or more
grades from kindergarten through grade 12; and
         (B)   has more than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at a
single location. (Code 1941, Art. 69-6; Ord. Nos. 21735; 21828; 25174)
SEC. 6-2.   ENFORCEMENT.
   A person violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed,
continued, or permitted. Each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500. (Code 1941, Art. 69-11; Ord. 21735)
SEC. 6-3.   ZONING LAWS TO BE COMPLIED WITH.
   No person may sell alcoholic beverages and no license or permit to sell
alcoholic beverages will be certified by the city of Dallas unless sale of
alcoholic beverages at the location at which such activity is sought to be
established and maintained is permitted under the Dallas Development Code, as
amended, this chapter, and all other applicable ordinances, rules, and
regulations of the city. Certification under this section does not make a
nonconforming use conforming. (Code 1941, Art. 69-7; Ord. 21735)
SEC. 6-4.   DEALERS LOCATED NEAR CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, DAY-CARE CENTERS, CHILD-
CARE FACILITIES, AND HOSPITALS; VARIANCES.
   (a)   No person may sell alcoholic beverages if the place of business is
within:
      (1)   300 feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital,
except that this paragraph does not apply to the holder of:
         (A)   a license or permit who also holds a food and beverage
certificate covering a premises that is located within 300 feet of a private
school; or
         (B)   a license or permit covering a premises where minors are
prohibited from entering under Section 109.53 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code and that is located within 300 feet of a private school;
      (2)   1,000 feet of a public school if the city council by resolution
adopts a request from the board of trustees of a school district under Section
38.007 of the Texas Education Code, except that this paragraph does not apply
to the holder of:
         (A)   a retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than
50 percent of the gross receipts for the premises is from the sale or service
of alcoholic beverages;
         (B)   a retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than
50 percent of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items
subject to motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages;
or
         (C)   a wholesaler’s, distributor’s, brewer’s, distiller’s and
rectifier’s, winery, wine bottler’s, or manufacturer’s permit or license, or
any other license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words
are ordinarily used and understood in Chapter 102 of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code;
      (3)   1,000 feet of a private school if the city council by resolution
adopts a request from the governing body of the private school, except that
this paragraph does not apply to the holder of:
         (A)   a retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than
50 percent of the gross receipts for the premises is from the sale or service
of alcoholic beverages;
         (B)   a retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than
50 percent of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items
subject to motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages;
         (C)   a wholesaler’s, distributor’s, brewer’s, distiller’s and
rectifier’s, winery, wine bottler’s, or manufacturer’s permit or license, or
any other license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words
are ordinarily used and understood in Chapter 102 of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code;
         (D)   a license or permit issued under Chapter 27, 31, or 72 of the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code who is operating on the premises of a private
school; or
         (E)   a license or permit covering a premises where minors are
prohibited from entering under Section 109.53 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code and that is located within 1,000 feet of a private school; or
      (4)   300 feet of a day-care center or a child-care facility, as those
terms are defined by Section 42.002 of the Texas Human Resources Code, if the
person is the holder of a permit or license under Chapter 25, 28, 32, 69, or 74
of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code who does not hold a food and beverage
certificate, except that this paragraph does not apply:
         (A)   if the permit or license holder and the day-care center or
child-care facility are located:
            (i)   on different stories of a multistory building; or
            (ii)   in separate buildings and either the permit or license
holder or the day-care center or child-care facility is located on the second
story or higher of a multistory building; or
         (B)   to a foster group home, foster family home, family home, agency
group home, or agency home, as those terms are defined by Section 42.002 of the
Texas Human Resources Code.
   (b)   The measurement of the distance between the place of business where
alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or public hospital will be along the
property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a
direct line across intersections.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the measurement of
the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold
and a public or private school, a day-care center, or a child-care facility
will be in a direct line from the property line of the public or private
school, day-care center, or child-care facility to the property line of the
place of business, and in a direct line across intersections. If the permit or
license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building,
the measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic
beverages are sold and a public or private school, a day-care center, or a
child-care facility will be in a direct line from the property line of the
public or private school, day-care center, or child-care facility to the
property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections,
and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on
which the permit or license holder is located. As to any dealer who held a
license or permit from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission on September 1,
1983, the measurement of the distance between the place of business of the
dealer and a public or private school, day-care center, or child-care facility
will be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to
front door, and in a direct line across intersections.
   (d)   If at the time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is
granted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, the premises satisfies the
requirements regarding distance from churches, public hospitals, public or
private schools, day-care centers, or child-care facilities set forth in this
section, the premises will be deemed to satisfy the distance requirements of
this section for all subsequent renewals of the license or permit. This
subsection does not apply to the satisfaction of the distance requirement
prescribed by Subsection (a)(2) of this section for a public school if the
permit or license has been suspended for a violation, occurring after September
1, 1995, of any of the following provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code:
      (1)   Section 11.61(b)(1), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (13), (14), or
(20); or
      (2)   Section 61.71(a)(5), (6), (7), (8), (11), (12), (14), (17), (18),
(22), or (24).
   (e)   On the sale or transfer of the business in which a new original
license or permit is required, the business will be deemed to satisfy the
distance requirements as if the issuance of the new original permit or license
were a renewal of a previously held permit or license. This subsection does not
apply to the satisfaction of the distance requirement prescribed by Subsection
(a)(2) of this section for a public school, except that on the death of a
permit or license holder or a person having an interest in a permit or license,
this subsection does apply to the holder’s surviving spouse or child of the
holder or person if the spouse or child qualifies as a successor in interest to
the permit or license.
   (f)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   the area bounded by the south side of Woodall Rodgers Freeway, the
east side of Stemmons Freeway (I-35E), the north side of R.L. Thornton Freeway
(I-30), and the west side of Central Expressway (U.S. 75);
      (2)   Planned Development District No. 269 (the Deep Ellum/Near East Side
District); or
      (3)   the area bounded by Lemmon Avenue East, McKinney Avenue, Blackburn
Street, and Cole Avenue (West Village).
   (g)   Variances. Pursuant to Section 109.33(e) of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code, a variance to the distance requirements prescribed by Subsection
(a) may be requested and granted in accordance with the following procedures.
      (1)   Application. An applicant for a variance shall submit the following
information to the director of the department of development services:
         (A)   The name of the owner of the property where the alcohol business
will be located.
         (B)   The name and address of the applicant for the alcohol permit.
         (C)   The type of alcohol permit for which application is being made.
         (D)   The name and address of the protected use that creates the need
for the variance. For purposes of this section, "protected use" means a church,
public or private school, public hospital, day-care center, or child-care
facility as defined in this chapter.
         (E)   A survey showing the location and distances of the business
where alcohol will be sold, the front door of the business where alcohol will
be sold, the location of the protected use, and the front door of the protected
use.
         (F)   A statement of why the variance meets the standard of
Subparagraph (5)(D).
         (G)   Any other information the director of the department of
development services deems necessary.
      (2)   Fee. A nonrefundable fee of $1,200 must be paid to the director of
development services when the application for a variance is filed.
      (3)   Notification signs.
         (A)   Signs required to be obtained from the city. An applicant is
responsible for obtaining the required number of notification signs and posting
them on the property that is the subject of the application. Notification signs
must be obtained from the director of the department of development services or
the building official. An application will not be processed until the fee of
$10 per sign has been paid.
         (B)   Number of signs required. A minimum of one notification sign is
required for every 500 feet or less of street frontage, with one additional
notification sign required for each additional 500 feet or less of street
frontage. For tracts without street frontage, a minimum of one notification
sign is required for every five acres or less, with one additional notification
sign required for each additional five acres or less. A maximum of five
notification signs are required.
         (C)   Posting of signs. The applicant shall post the required number
of notification signs on the alcoholic beverage premises, as defined in Section
11.49 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, within 14 days after an application
is filed. The signs must be legible and remain posted until a final decision is
made on the application. For tracts with street frontage, signs must be evenly
spaced over the length of every street frontage, posted at a prominent location
adjacent to a public street, and be easily visible from the street. For tracts
without street frontage, signs must be evenly posted in prominent locations
most visible to the public.
         (D)   Failure to comply. If the city council determines that the
applicant has failed to comply with the provisions of this paragraph, it shall
take no action on the application other than to postpone the public hearing for
at least four weeks or deny the applicant's request. If the hearing is
postponed, the required notification signs must be posted within 24 hours after
the public hearing is postponed and comply with all other requirements of this
paragraph.
         (E)   Illegal removal of signs. A person commits an offense if he
intentionally or knowingly removes a notification sign that has been posted
pursuant to this paragraph. It is a defense to prosecution under this paragraph
that the sign was no longer required to be posted pursuant to this paragraph at
the time of its removal.
      (4)   Hearing. The director of the department of development services
shall set a date for a public hearing before the city council within 60 days
after a complete application is filed. Not less than 10 days before the public
hearing, the director of the department of development services shall:
         (A)   publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation;
         (B)   provide notice of the public hearing to all neighborhood
associations registered with the department of development services to receive
zoning notices for the area in which the alcoholic beverage premises, as
defined in Section 11.49 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, is located; and
         (C)   provide notice of the public hearing to the protected use that
creates the need for the variance.
      (5)   Standard for approval. A main motion to approve a variance must be
seconded two times, with each second made by a different city council member.
The city council may, but is not required, to allow variances to the spacing
requirements of Subsection (a) if the city council finds that:
         (A)   the application is for:
            (i)   a brewer's permit pursuant to Chapter 12 of the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code;
            (ii)   a distiller's and rectifier's permit pursuant to Chapter 14
of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
            (iii)   a winery permit pursuant to Chapter 16 of the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code;
            (iv)   a wine and beer retailer's permit pursuant to Chapter 25 of
the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
            (v)   a wine and beer retailer's off-premise permit pursuant to
Chapter 26 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
            (vi)   a mixed beverage permit pursuant to Chapter 28 of the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code with a food and beverage certificate;
            (vii)   a manufacturer's license pursuant to Chapter 62 of the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
         (B)   the application is for one of the following uses as defined in
the Dallas Development Code:
            (i)   general merchandise or food store with 10,000 square feet or
more of floor area;
            (ii)   restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service with a
food and beverage certificate pursuant to the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
            (iii)   alcoholic beverage establishment limited to a microbrewery,
microdistillery, or winery; or
            (iv)   alcoholic beverage manufacturing;
         (C)   alcoholic beverages will not be sold by drive-in or drive-
through service; and
         (D)   enforcement of the spacing requirements in this particular
instance:
            (i)   is not in the best interest of the public;
            (ii)   constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other
resources;
            (iii)   creates an undue hardship on an applicant for an alcohol
permit;
            (iv)   does not serve its intended purpose;
            (v)   is not effective or necessary; or
            (vi)   for any other reason that the city council, after
consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities
of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community.
      (6)   Conditions. City council may impose reasonable conditions on the
granting of a variance and may require development pursuant to a site plan.
      (7)   Renewal and transfer. A variance granted pursuant to this
subsection is valid for subsequent renewals of the alcohol permit. A variance
granted pursuant to this subsection may not be transferred to another location
or to another alcohol permit holder. (Ord. Nos. 8096; 13172; 15669; 21735;
22537; 25174; 25465; 27747; 28444; 28565; 28799; 29208; 29261; 31143; 32002)
SEC. 6-5.   PUBLIC SCHOOL ACTIVITIES.
   A person commits an offense if he possesses, transports, or consumes any
alcoholic beverage, at any high school athletic contest, at any school-
sponsored dance, party or other social gathering, or on the grounds or in the
buildings of any public school. Any police officer is authorized to seize and
confiscate such alcoholic beverages. (Ord. Nos. 4175; 21735)
SEC. 6-6.   RESERVED.  
(Ord. 21735)
SEC. 6-6.1.   OPEN CONTAINERS AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED
IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he consumes an alcoholic beverage
outside the Dallas central area on:
      (1)   any property owned or leased by the city; or
      (2)   a public street or any public place within 18 feet of a public
street.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he possesses an open container of or
consumes an alcoholic beverage on a public street, public alley, or public
sidewalk within 1,000 feet of the property line of a facility that is a public
or private school, including a parochial school, that provides all or any part
of prekindergarten through twelfth grade.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he possesses an open container of or
consumes an alcoholic beverage within the Dallas central area.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a), (b), or (c) of
this section that the person:
      (1)   was attending a special event:
         (A)   that was authorized by the city; and
         (B)   for which a valid permit or license to sell or serve alcoholic
beverages was issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission;
      (2)   was within the area of an establishment licensed by the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Commission for alcohol consumption on the premises.
      (3)   is able to prove a defense to prosecution under Section
32-11.3(b) of this code;
      (4)   was in a motor vehicle;
      (5)   was inside a building not owned or controlled by the city; or
      (6)   was inside a residential structure.
   (e)   Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit or otherwise control
the manufacture, sale, distribution, transportation, or possession of alcoholic
beverages, except to the extent allowed by state law. (Ord. Nos. 15635; 15816;
15849; 16600; 19963; 21021; 21352; 21385; 21735; 21828; 25174)
SEC. 6-7.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 16870)
SEC. 6-8.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 16870)
SEC. 6-9.   STATE LAW TO CONTROL.
   The penalties provided for by this chapter are subject to the limitations of
the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, and if there is any conflict between the
penalties of this chapter and the state law, then to that extent the state law
controls, and the municipal court of the city will have jurisdiction of any
offense under this chapter and under the state law only where the Constitution
and the general law of this state confer such jurisdiction. (Code 1941, Art.
69-14; Ord. 21735)
SEC. 6-10.   LOCAL FEES.
   (a)   The city hereby levies, and shall collect, a fee from every person who
is issued a permit or license for a premise located within the city, as allowed
under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. The amount of the fee is
the maximum permitted under state law.
   (b)   The Special Collections Division of the Dallas Water Utilities
Department shall, upon receipt of payment, issue and provide a receipt to the
permittee or licensee.
   (c)   The receipt must be displayed with the certificate of occupancy in a
conspicuous location at the permitted or licensed premise at all times. A
person commits an offense if he fails to display the receipt in accordance with
this subsection.
   (d)   A refund of the fees levied under this section may not be made for any
reason, except when:
      (1)   the permittee or licensee is prevented from continuing in business
as a result of a local option election; or
      (2)   the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission or its administrator
rejects a permit or license application.
   (e)   A permittee or licensee who sells an alcoholic beverage at a business
location within the city before the permittee or licensee pays the fees levied
under this section commits a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not
less than $10 and not more than $200. (Ord. Nos. 30653; 31332, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 6-11.   SALE OF BEER PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The sale of beer is prohibited at a location that is within a residential
zoning district or an identifiable portion of a planned development or
conservation district restricted to residential uses, except as allowed by the
Dallas Development Code. (Ord. Nos. 15371; 21735)
SEC. 6-12.   RESERVED.  
(Ord. 21735)
SEC. 6-13.   SEIZURE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (a)   A police officer of the city who arrests or issues a citation to a
person for public intoxication, or for any other alcohol-related Class C
misdemeanor or city ordinance violation, shall seize any alcoholic beverage in
the possession of the person at the time of the arrest or citation.
   (b)   Except as provided in Subsection (c), and unless specifically provided
otherwise by another applicable city ordinance or state or federal law,
containers of alcoholic beverages seized under Subsection (a) must be disposed
of as follows:
      (1)   If the person arrested or cited is under 21 years of age, each
container, whether opened or unopened, must be discarded in accordance with the
rules and regulations promulgated by the chief of police.
      (2)   If the person arrested or cited is 21 years of age or older:
         (A)   any open container must be discarded in accordance with the
rules and regulations promulgated by the chief of police; and
         (B)   any unopened container will be:
            (i)   released, with the consent of the person taken into custody,
to a third party who is 21 years of age or older; or
            (ii)   stored by the police department pending the release of the
person in custody.
   (c)   If 24 or more unopened containers of alcoholic beverages are seized
from a person under Subsection (a), each unopened container will be stored by
the police department pending a hearing to be held by the municipal court
following the disposition of the charge for which the person was arrested or
cited. At the hearing, the municipal court may order:
      (1)   the return of the containers of alcoholic beverages to the person
from whom they were seized, if the person is 21 years of age or older;
      (2)   the destruction of the alcoholic beverages by the police department
in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the chief of
police; or
      (3)   such other disposition as the municipal court deems necessary.
(Ord. Nos. 15868; 21735; 22619)
SEC. 6-14.   LATE HOURS SALES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN COUNTIES HAVING A
POPULATION OF LESS THAN 500,000.
   (a)   Pursuant to Sections 105.03(d) and 105.05(d) of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code, as amended, late hours sales of alcoholic beverages are
authorized in any part of the city of Dallas located within a county having a
population of less than 500,000, according to the last preceding federal
census, as follows:
      (1)   A holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit may sell and offer
for sale mixed beverages between midnight and 2 a.m. on any day.
      (2)   A holder of a retail dealer’s on-premise late hours license may
sell, offer for sale, and deliver beer between midnight and 2 a.m. on any day.
   (b)   This section expires on June 25, 2005, unless sooner terminated or
extended by ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 25322)
CHAPTER 6A
AMUSEMENT CENTERS
Sec.
6A-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
6A-2.   License required.
Sec.
6A-3.   Reserved.
Sec.
6A-4.   License application.
Sec.
6A-5.   Fee.
Sec.
6A-6.   License display, replacement, and transferability.
Sec.
6A-7.   Refusal to issue or renew license.
Sec.
6A-8.   License revocation.
Sec.
6A-9.   Appeal from refusal to issue or renew license; from decision to revoke
license.
Sec.
6A-10.   Hours of operation.
Sec.
6A-11.   Responsibility of licensee.
SEC. 6A-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
   (1)   AMUSEMENT CENTER means a business establishment in which at least 25
percent of the public floor area is devoted to coin-operated amusement devices
and their public use. If a billiard hall, as defined in
Chapter 9A of this code, occupies a portion of a business establishment, the
billiard hall floor area shall not be included in determining the total public
floor area of the establishment.
   (2)   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE means a machine or device operated by
electronic transfer of funds or by insertion of a coin, bill, token, card, or
similar object, for the purpose of amusement or skill. This term does not
include:
      (A)   musical devices;
      (B)   billiard tables;
      (C)   machines designed exclusively for children; or
      (D)   devices designed to train persons in athletic skills or golf,
tennis, baseball, archery, or other similar sports.
   (3)   CHIEF OF POLICE means the chief of police of the city of Dallas or his
designated agent.
   (4)   LICENSEE means a person licensed to operate an amusement center.
   (5)   OPERATOR means a person who manages or controls an amusement center.
   (6)   PERSON means an individual, assumed name entity, partnership, joint-
venture, association, or other legal entity. (Ord. Nos. 14736; 14932; 31620)
SEC. 6A-2.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person may operate an amusement center in the city without first
obtaining a license from the chief of police. (Ord. 14736)
SEC. 6A-3.   RESERVED.
(Repealed by Ord. 22140)
SEC. 6A-4.   LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   An applicant for a license shall file with the chief of police a
written application on a form provided for that purpose, which shall be signed
by the applicant, who shall be the owner of the amusement center. Should an
applicant maintain an amusement center at more than one location, a separate
application must be filed for each location. The following information is
required in the application:
      (1)   name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, including the
trade name by which applicant does business and the street address of the
amusement center, and if incorporated, the name registered with the Secretary
of State;
      (2)   name, address, and telephone number of the operator of the
amusement center and proof that the operator is at least 18 years of age;
      (3)   whether the applicant, operator, and, if applicable, any corporate
officer of the applicant has been convicted of a felony or within the preceding
five years of an offense involving drugs, gambling, prostitution, obscenity, or
unlawfully carrying a weapon;
      (4)   the previous occupation of the applicant, operator, and, if
applicable, all corporate officers of the applicant within the preceding five
years;
      (5)   whether a previous license of applicant, or, if applicable,
corporate officer of applicant has been revoked within two years of filing of
the application;
      (6)   number of coin-operated amusement devices in the center; and
      (7)   a statement that all the facts contained in the application are
true.
   (b)   The chief of police may require additional information of an applicant
or licensee to clarify items on the application.
   (c)   No applicant may maintain an amusement center in violation of the
comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. (Ord. Nos. 14736; 14932)
SEC. 6A-5.   FEE.
   The annual fee for an amusement center license is $25 for each coin-operated
amusement device located in the center. Amusement center licenses expire one
year from the date of issuance. The fee for issuing a replacement license for
one lost, destroyed, or mutilated is $2. The fee is payable to the city upon
approval of the license by the chief of police. No refund of license fees will
be made. (Ord. Nos. 14736; 18411; 29477; 29645; 30653; 32003; 33232)
SEC. 6A-6.   LICENSE DISPLAY, REPLACEMENT, AND TRANSFERABILITY.
   (a)   Each license issued pursuant to this article must be posted and kept
in a conspicuous place in the amusement center and must state the number of
coin- operated amusement devices for which the license was issued.
   (b)   A replacement license may be issued for one lost, destroyed, or
mutilated, upon application on a form provided by the chief of police. A
replacement license shall have the word “REPLACEMENT” stamped across its face
and shall bear the same number as the one it replaces.
   (c)   An amusement center license is not assignable or transferable.
   (d)   A licensee shall notify the chief of police within 10 days of a change
or partial change in the ownership or management of the amusement center, or a
change of address or trade name. (Ord. 14736)
SEC. 6A-7.   REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW LICENSE.
   The chief of police shall refuse to approve issuance or renewal of an
amusement center license for one or more of the following reasons:
   (1)   a false statement as to a material matter made in an application for a
license;
   (2)   conviction of the applicant or an operator or corporate officer of the
applicant of a felony or, within the preceding five years, of an offense
involving drugs, gambling, prostitution, obscenity, or unlawfully carrying a
weapon;
   (3)   revocation of a license, pursuant to this chapter, of the applicant or
corporate officer of the applicant within two years preceding the filing of the
application; or
   (4)   violation by the applicant or the applicant’s operator of the location
requirements of Section
6A-3 of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 14736; 14932; 20663)
SEC. 6A-8.   LICENSE REVOCATION.
   (a)   The chief of police shall revoke an amusement center license for one
or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   a false statement as to a material matter made in an application
for a license, license renewal, or a hearing concerning the license;
      (2)   conviction of the licensee or an operator or corporate officer of
the licensee of a felony or an offense involving drugs, gambling, prostitution,
obscenity, or unlawfully carrying a weapon;
      (3)   conviction twice within a one year period of the licensee or the
licensee’s operator for a violation of the hours of operation provision of this
chapter;
      (4)   employment by the licensee of an operator who is under 18 years of
age;
      (5)   operation of an amusement center containing more coin-operated
amusement devices than the center is licensed for;
      (6)   violation by the licensee or the licensee’s operator of Section
6A-11 of this chapter; or
      (7)   violation by the licensee or the licensee’s operator of the
location requirements of Section
6A-3 of this chapter.
   (b)   The chief of police shall send written notice of revocation to a
licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the reasons
for the revocation. (Ord. Nos. 14736; 14932; 20663)
SEC. 6A-9.   APPEAL FROM REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW LICENSE; FROM DECISION TO
REVOKE LICENSE.
   If the chief of police refuses to approve the issuance of a license or the
renewal of a license to an applicant, or revokes a license issued to a licensee
under this article, this action is final unless the applicant or licensee,
within 10 days after the receipt of written notice of the action, files with
the city manager a written appeal. The city manager shall, within 10 days after
the appeal is filed, consider all the evidence in support of or against the
action appealed, and render a decision either sustaining or reversing the
action. If the city manager sustains the action, the applicant or licensee may,
within 10 days of that decision file a written appeal with the city secretary
to the city council setting forth specific grounds for the appeal. The city
council shall, within 30 days, grant a hearing to consider the action. The city
council has authority to sustain, reverse, or modify the action appealed. The
decision of the city council is final. (Ord. 14736)
SEC. 6A-10.   HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b) or (c) of this section, no
licensee or his operator may operate the amusement center between the hours of
12:01 a.m. to 9 a.m., Monday through Friday, and between the hours of 2 a.m. to
9 a.m., Saturday and Sunday.
   (b)   If an amusement center is within 500 feet of a district restricted to
residential use under the Comprehensive General Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Dallas, no licensee or his operator may operate the amusement center except
between the hours of 9 a.m. to 11 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and between
the hours of 9 a.m. to 12 midnight, Friday and Saturday.
   (c)   If an amusement center is within 500 feet of a public or private
elementary or secondary school, no licensee or his operator may operate the
amusement center between the hours of 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. during the fall or
spring term when students are required to attend school in the school district
in which the center is located.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
entry door in the portion of the building used as an amusement center to the
nearest point of a district restricted to residential use or nearest entry door
of a school.
   (e)   If an amusement center’s hours are restricted only by Subsection (a)
of this section, a licensee may obtain a temporary permit to operate
continuously. The chief of police shall issue a temporary permit for no longer
than 30 days and only once a year. (Ord. Nos. 14736; 14932; 16586; 20663)
SEC. 6A-11.   RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.
   (a)   A licensee or his operator may not permit any of the following
activities within the amusement center:
      (1)   violation of any possession, sale, or delivery provision in
Subchapter 4 of the Texas Controlled Substances Act;
      (2)   violation of any provision in Article 666-17 (14) of the Texas
Liquor Control Act;
      (3)   prostitution;
      (4)   gambling; or
      (5)   entry of a person younger than 17 years between the hours of 9 a.m.
to 3 p.m. during the fall or spring term when students are required to attend
school in the school district in which the center is located.
   (b)   A licensee or his operator may not permit any of the following
activities on premises of the amusement center:
      (1)   violation of Section 42.01 of the Penal Code; or
      (2)   violation of
Chapter 7A of the Dallas City Code.
   (c)   In Subsection (b) of this section, “premises” means an area, other
than the interior of an amusement center, to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and which is under the control of an owner or
operator of an amusement center, such as a parking facility or private
sidewalk. (Ord. Nos. 14736; 14932)
CHAPTER 7
ANIMALS
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
Sec.
7-1.1.   Definitions.
ARTICLE II.
ANIMAL SERVICES; CITY ANIMAL SHELTERS.
Sec.
7-2.1.   State law; local rabies control authority designated.
Sec.
7-2.2.   Shelters established.
Sec.
7-2.3.   Policies and procedures.
Sec.
7-2.4.   Quarantine of animals.
Sec.
7-2.5.   Impoundment of animals.
Sec.
7-2.6.   Redemption of impounded animals.
Sec.
7-2.7.   Adoption of animals.
Sec.
7-2.8.   Killing or euthanasia of animals.
ARTICLE III.
CARE AND TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
Sec.
7-3.1.   Loose animals.
Sec.
7-3.2.   Sanitary conditions; maintenance of premises.
Sec.
7-3.3.   Trapping animals.
Sec.
7-3.4.   Unlawful placement of poisonous substances.
Sec.
7-3.5.   Transporting an animal in an open bed of a motor vehicle.
ARTICLE IV.
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR DOGS AND CATS.
Sec.
7-4.1.   Vaccination of dogs and cats.
Sec.
7-4.2.   Microchipping of dogs and cats.
Sec.
7-4.3.   Revocation and denial of registration.
Sec.
7-4.4.   Authorized registrars.
Sec.
7-4.5.   Sale of dogs and cats.
Sec.
7-4.6.   Limitation on the number of dogs and cats in dwelling units.
Sec.
7-4.7.   Tethered dogs.
Sec.
7-4.8.   Defecation of dogs on public and private property; failure to carry
materials and implements for the removal and disposal of dog excreta.
Sec.
7-4.9.   Confinement requirements for dogs kept outdoors.
Sec.
7-4.10.   Restrictions on unsterilized dogs and cats.
Sec.
7-4.11.   Breeding permit.
Sec.
7-4.12.   Duty to locate owners of loose dogs.
Sec.
7-4.13.   Confinement of dogs or cats in unattended motor vehicles.
Sec.
7-4.14.   Dog bites.
ARTICLE V.
DANGEROUS DOGS.
Sec.
7-5.1.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-5.2.   State law; animal control authority.
Sec.
7-5.3.   Determination as a dangerous dog.
Sec.
7-5.4.   Appeal of director's dangerous dog determination.
Sec.
7-5.5.   Requirements for ownership of a dangerous dog; noncompliance hearing.
Sec.
7-5.6.   Attacks by dangerous dog; hearing.
Sec.
7-5.7.   Prohibition on owning a dog determined dangerous by another
jurisdiction.
Sec.
7-5.8.   Surrender of a dangerous dog.
Sec.
7-5.9.   Dangerous dog owned or harbored by minor.
Sec.
7-5.10.   Defenses.
Sec.
7-5.11.   Dangerous dog registry.
ARTICLE V-a.
AGGRESSIVE DOGS.
Sec.
7-5.12.   Definitions.
Sec.
7-5.13.    Determination as an aggressive dog.
Sec.
7-5.14.   Appeals.
Sec.
7-5.15.   Requirements for ownership of an aggressive dog; noncompliance
hearing.
Sec.
7-5.16.   Attacks by an aggressive dog.
ARTICLE VI.
PROHIBITED AND REGULATED ANIMALS.
Sec.
7-6.1.   Prohibited animals.
Sec.
7-6.2.   Regulated animals.
ARTICLE VII.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Sec.
7-7.1.   Interference with an animal services officer.
Sec.
7-7.2.   Sale of animals from public property.
Sec.
7-7.3.   Keeping of roosters.
Sec.
7-7.4.   Disturbance by animals.
Sec.
7-7.5.   Vaccination of ferrets.
Sec.
7-7.6.   Animals as prizes, promotions, and novelties.
ARTICLE VIII.
VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND ENFORCEMENT.
Sec.
7-8.1.   Violations; criminal and civil penalties.
Sec.
7-8.2.   Additional enforcement provisions.
Sec.
7-8.3.   Reserved.
Sec.
7-8.4.   Dallas Animal Welfare Fund.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
SEC. 7-1.1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   ADOPTER means a person who adopts an animal from an animal shelter
or an animal adoption agency.
      (2)   ADOPTION AGENCY means an animal welfare organization or animal
placement group approved by the director to take impounded dogs and cats from
animal services for adoption to the public.
      (3)   ANIMAL means any nonhuman vertebrate.
      (4)   ANIMAL SERVICES means the department so designated by the director
for the purpose of animal care and control and enforcement of this chapter.
      (5)   ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER means an employee of animal services whose
duty it is to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      (6)   ANIMAL SHELTER means a city-owned and operated animal shelter
facility established for the impoundment, quarantine, care, adoption,
euthanasia, and other disposition of unwanted, loose, diseased, or vicious
animals.
      (7)   ANIMAL WELFARE ORGANIZATION means a non-profit organization
incorporated under state law and exempt from federal taxation under Section 501
(c)(3) of the federal Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and whose principal
purpose is the prevention of cruelty to animals and whose principal activity is
to rescue sick, injured, abused, neglected, unwanted, abandoned, orphaned,
lost, or displaced animals and to adopt them to good homes.
      (8)   AUTHORIZED REGISTRAR means a person issued written permission by
the director to register dogs and cats in compliance with this chapter.
      (8.1)   BODILY INJURY means physical pain, illness, or any impairment of
physical condition.
      (9)   CHIEF OF POLICE means the head of the police department of the city
of Dallas or a designated representative.
      (10)   COMPETITION CAT means a pedigreed cat not used for breeding that:
         (A)   is of a breed recognized by and registered with an approved cat
breed registry, such as the American Cat Fanciers Association, the Cat
Fanciers' Association, the International Cat Association, or any other cat
breed registry approved by the director; and
         (B)   competes in cat shows or other competition events sponsored by
an approved cat breed registry.
      (11)   COMPETITION DOG means a pedigreed dog not used for breeding that:
         (A)   is of a breed recognized by and registered with an approved dog
breed registry, such as the American Kennel Club, the United Kennel Club, the
American Dog Breeders Association, or any other dog breed registry approved by
the director; and
         (B)   shows or competes in a confirmation, obedience, agility,
carting, herding, protection, rally, sporting, working, or other event
sponsored by an approved dog breed registry.
      (12)   CONTACT INFORMATION means the owner's name, mailing address,
telephone number, and electronic mail address, if any.
      (13)   CONVICTION means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any
state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation
that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. "Conviction" includes
disposition of charges against a person by probation, deferred adjudication, or
deferred disposition.
      (14)   CURRENTLY VACCINATED means vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian, with a rabies vaccine licensed by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, and:
         (A)   not more than 12 months have elapsed since the animal's most
recent vaccination date, if the most recent vaccination was with a one-year
rabies vaccine or was the animal's initial vaccination; or
         (B)   not more than 36 months have elapsed since the animal's most
recent vaccination date, if the most recent vaccination was with a three-year
rabies vaccine and the animal is a dog or cat that has received at least two
vaccinations.
      (15)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to perform the duties assigned in this chapter or the director's
authorized representative.
      (16)   DOMESTIC ANIMAL means:
         (A)   a dog;
         (B)   a cat;
         (C)   a ferret;
         (D)   any bird, other than one in the Falconiforms or Strigiforms
Order, that is commonly kept as a human's companion;
         (E)   any "pocket pet," such as a mouse, hamster, gerbil, guinea pig,
or rabbit, that is commonly kept as a human's companion;
         (F)   any fish, such as a goldfish or tropical fish, that is commonly
kept as a human's companion; and
         (G)   any non-venomous and non- constrictor reptile or amphibian that
is commonly kept as a human's companion.
      (17)   EUTHANASIA means to put an animal to death in a humane manner.
      (18)   FENCED YARD means an area that is completely surrounded by a
substantial fence of sufficient strength, height, construction, materials, and
design as to prevent:
         (A)   any animal confined within from escaping; or
         (B)   the head of a dog confined within from extending over, under, or
through the fence.
      (19)   FERAL CAT means any homeless, wild, or untamed cat.
      (20)   LICENSED VETERINARIAN means a person licensed to practice
veterinary medicine within the United States, or an authorized representative
under that person's direct supervision.
      (21)   LIVESTOCK means any fowl, horse, mule, burro, ass, cattle, sheep,
swine, goat, llama, emu, ostrich, or other common farm animal.
      (22)   LOOSE means an unrestrained domestic animal or livestock that is
outside the boundaries of the premises owned, leased, or legally occupied by
the animal's owner.
      (23)   MICROCHIP means a passive electronic device that is injected into
an animal by means of a pre-packaged sterilized implanting device for purposes
of identification and/or the recovery of the animal by its owner.
      (24)   ONE-YEAR RABIES VACCINE means a rabies vaccine labeled and
licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as immunizing a dog, cat, or
ferret against rabies for one year.
      (25)   OWN means to have legal right of possession or to otherwise have
care, custody, possession, or control of an animal.
      (26)   OWNER means any person owning, harboring, or having care, custody,
possession, or control of an animal. An occupant of any premises on which a dog
or cat remains, or customarily returns to, is an owner for purposes of this
chapter. If a person under the age of 17 years owns an animal, the parent,
legal guardian, or head of the household is the owner for purposes of this
chapter. There may be more than one owner for an animal.
      (27)   PERMITTEE means a person issued a breeding permit under Section 7-
4.11 of this chapter.
      (28)   PERSON means an individual or group of individuals acting in
concert, a firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
      (29)   PET means a domestic animal to be kept as a human's companion.
      (30)   PROHIBITED ANIMAL means:
         (A)   a "dangerous wild animal" as that term is defined in Section
822.101 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended;
         (B)   a margay, badger, wolf, dingo, elephant, hippopotamus,
rhinoceros, non-human primate (other than a spider monkey or capuchin),
crocodile, alligator, caiman, gavial, venomous amphibian or reptile, racer, boa
(other than a red-tail boa), water snake, python (other than a ball python),
hawk, eagle, vulture, and owl; and
         (C)   any hybrid of an animal listed in Paragraph (A) or (B) of this
subsection (other than a dog-wolf hybrid).
      (31)   PROPERLY FITTED means, with respect to a collar or harness used
for a dog, a collar or harness that:
         (A)   does not impede the dog's normal breathing or swallowing; and
         (B)   is attached to the dog in a manner that does not allow for
escape and does not cause injury to the dog.
      (32)   PROTECTIVE CUSTODY means the holding of an animal in a city animal
shelter:
         (A)   due to the arrest, eviction, hospitalization, or death of the
animal's owner;
         (B)   pursuant to a court order; or
         (C)   at the request of a law enforcement agency.
      (33)   REGULATED ANIMAL means any animal other than a prohibited animal,
livestock, or domestic animal.
      (34)   RETAIL PET STORE means a business that regularly sells animals for
pet purposes to an ultimate owner. The term includes any owner, operator,
agent, or employee of the business.
      (35)   SERVICE ANIMAL means:
         (A)   any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained
to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability,
including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision,
alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, and
assisting non-ambulatory persons by pulling a wheelchair or fetching dropped
items; and
         (B)   any trained animal used by a governmental agency in police and
rescue work.
      (36)   TETHER means restraining an animal or the act of chaining, tying,
fastening, or otherwise securing an animal to a fixed point so that it can move
or range only within certain limits.
      (37)   TETHERING DEVICE means a cable, chain, cord, leash, rope, or other
means of attaching an animal to a stationary object.
      (38)   THREE-YEAR RABIES VACCINE means a rabies vaccine labeled and
licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as immunizing a dog or cat
against rabies for three years. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250; 30483; 30687; 30901)
ARTICLE II.
ANIMAL SERVICES; CITY ANIMAL SHELTERS.
SEC. 7-2.1.   STATE LAW; LOCAL RABIES CONTROL AUTHORITY DESIGNATED.
   (a)   The provisions of Chapters 823 and 826 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code, as amended, are incorporated into this article by reference.
   (b)   The director is designated as the local rabies control authority for
purposes of Chapter 826 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, and
shall perform the duties required of a local rabies control authority under
that chapter and under rules adopted by the Texas Board of Health pursuant to
that chapter. (Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-2.2.   SHELTERS ESTABLISHED.
   The city council shall select and establish one or more animal shelters in
the city for impoundment, quarantine, care, adoption, euthanasia, and other
humane disposition of unwanted, stray, diseased, or vicious animals. (Ord.
26024)
SEC. 7-2.3.   POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
   The director will develop written policies and procedures for all animal
services operations, including standards for city animal shelters; the training
of animal services personnel; the care, euthanasia, and disposition of animals
in the custody of animal services; the form and maintenance of records relating
to impounded animals; and the transfer and adoption of dogs and cats. (Ord.
26024)
SEC. 7-2.4.   QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS.
   (a)   The director is authorized to quarantine an animal as provided in
Chapter 826 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, and the rules
adopted by the Texas Board of Health under that chapter.
   (b)   Any person with knowledge of a likely rabies exposure to a human must
report the incident to the director as soon as possible after the incident.
This requirement does not apply to contact with low-risk animals as defined in
25 TAC §169.22.
   (c)   An owner of an animal commits an offense if, upon notification by the
director that the animal has bitten, scratched, or likely exposed a person to
rabies, the owner fails to either:
      (1)   surrender the animal immediately to the director for quarantine at
a city animal shelter;
      (2)   immediately deliver the animal to a veterinary clinic approved by
the director for quarantine at the owner's expense; or
      (3)   quarantine the animal on the owner's property in a secure enclosure
approved by the director. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 30483)
SEC. 7-2.5.   IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (a)   The director or the chief of police is authorized to seize and impound
any animal:
      (1)   in the city that is loose;
      (2)   for protective custody;
      (3)   required to be quarantined under Section
7-2.4;
      (4)   seized pursuant to a warrant or court order;
      (5)   that is a prohibited animal and kept in the city in violation of
Section
7-6.1;
      (6)   posing a threat to the public health or safety; and
      (7)   displaying signs and symptoms of extreme health concerns.
   (b)   If an animal is impounded, except pursuant to Subsection (a)(4) and
Section
7-2.6(e), the director shall make a reasonable effort to locate the animal's
owner by sending notice using contact information from the animal's vaccination
tag, microchip, or other identification. Additionally, the director shall call
all telephone numbers listed as part of the contact information.
      (1)   A notice delivered pursuant to this subsection is deemed to be
received on the earlier of the date actually received, or the third day
following the date upon which the notice was sent. On the second calendar day
following receipt of notice, the animal becomes the sole property of the city
and is subject to disposition as the director deems appropriate.
      (2)   If the director is unable to locate contact information for the
animal's owner from the animal's vaccination tag, microchip, or other
identification, the director shall hold the animal at an animal shelter for a
period of 72 hours, after which the animal becomes the sole property of the
city and subject to disposition as the director deems appropriate.
   (c)   If an animal described in Subsection (a) is on private property, the
impounding officer may enter the property for the purpose of impoundment or
issuance or a citation, or both.
   (d)   The director is the designated caretaker of a loose, impounded, or
surrendered animal immediately upon intake at the animal shelter.
   (e)   Visitation of a seized animal is prohibited.
   (f)   No animal impounded at a city animal shelter or in the custody or
control of animal services may be knowingly sold, released, or otherwise
disposed of for research purposes. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 29403; 30483; 30900)
SEC. 7-2.6.   REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (a)   To redeem an impounded animal from a city animal shelter, the owner of
the animal must provide proof of ownership and pay to the director the
following fees for services rendered before redemption:
      (1)   on all animals held at least one full day a redemption fee of:
         (A)   $25 for an animal delivered for impoundment to a city animal
shelter by a person other than a city employee in the performance of official
duties; or
         (B)   $25 for an animal delivered for impoundment to a city animal
shelter by a city employee in the performance of official duties;
      (2)   on all animals held at least one full day, $10 for each night the
animal is housed in a city shelter;
      (3)   $10 for a rabies vaccination of a dog, cat, or ferret if the owner
cannot show either:
         (A)   a current certificate of vaccination for the animal; or
         (B)   a letter from a licensed veterinarian on office stationery dated
prior to impoundment stating that the animal was not vaccinated due to health
reasons;
      (4)   $10 for a microchip implant and initial national registration of a
dog or cat unless:
         (A)   the animal was injected with a microchip implant prior to
impoundment;
         (B)   a letter from a licensed veterinarian on office stationery dated
prior to impoundment stating the animal should not be injected with a microchip
implant for health reasons; and
      (5)   $40 for sterilization of an animal, unless:
         (A)   the animal was spayed or neutered prior to impoundment;
         (B)   the animal is under six months of age;
         (C)   the owner provides a letter from a licensed veterinarian on
office stationery dated prior to impoundment certifying that the animal should
not be spayed or neutered for health reasons or is permanently non-fertile as
confirmed by a health examination within 90 days prior to impoundment.
   (b)   The redemption period for an animal impounded in a city animal
shelter, other than for quarantine or pursuant to a court order, is:
      (1)   three days after the date of impoundment, unless Paragraph (2) or
(3) of this subsection applies to the animal;
      (2)   five days after the date of impoundment if:
         (A)   the animal is wearing a legible tag or has a microchip implant
identifying its owner with contact information; or
         (B)   the director has reason to believe the animal has an owner; or
      (3)   10 days after the date of impoundment if the animal is being held
for protective custody.
   (c)   The redemption period for an animal impounded pursuant to a court
order is the time set forth in the court order or, if no provision is made in
the court order, five days after the court proceedings are final.
   (d)   Except as provided in Section
7-5.3(c), the redemption period for an animal, with an identified owner,
impounded for quarantine is the same day as completion of the quarantine
period.
   (e)   Kitten litters, puppy litters, and mothers nursing litters impounded
in the city's animal shelter cannot be redeemed and immediately become the sole
property of the city and are subject to disposition as the director deems
appropriate.
   (f)   If an animal is not redeemed within the appropriate time period
specified in Subsections (b) through (d), the animal will become the property
of the city and may be placed for adoption, euthanized, or otherwise disposed
of as recommended by the director.
   (g)   An owner of an impounded animal commits an offense if he removes or
attempts to remove the animal from a city animal shelter without first paying
all applicable fees required in Subsection (a). (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250; 29879;
29986; 30900; 31332, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 7-2.7.   ADOPTION OF ANIMALS.
   (a)   To adopt a dog or cat from animal services, the adopter shall:
      (1)   complete and sign an adoption application on a form provided by the
director for that purpose;
      (2)   sign an adoption contract on a form provided by the director for
that purpose, which shall include a statement that the adopter agrees that if
the adopter fails to comply with a sterilization agreement under Subsection
(d), the animal may be seized and impounded by the director and ownership will
automatically revert to the city; and
      (3)   pay to the director a non-refundable adoption fee (which includes,
but is not limited to, the costs of any required vaccination, microchip
implant, initial national registration, and sterilization) of:
         (A)   $45 for a dog and $15 for a cat, unless Subparagraph (B) of this
paragraph applies to the adoption; or
         (B)   $21 for a dog and $3 for a cat if:
            (i)   the dog or cat is at least six years of age, as determined by
the director;
            (ii)   the ultimate owner of the dog or cat will be a person who is
65 years of age or older as of the date of adoption; or
            (iii)   the adopter adopts two or more dogs and/or cats on the same
date and as a part of the same transaction, and the adopter will be the
ultimate owner of all of the animals adopted in the transaction.
   (b)   The director may, from time to time, designate and advertise
promotional adoption periods during which the non-refundable adoption fees
payable under Subsection (a)(3)(A) will be reduced or waived.
   (c)   Each dog or cat adopted from animal services will be spayed or
neutered prior to release of the animal to the adopter, unless:
      (1)   the dog or cat is under six months of age; or
      (2)   a licensed veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat should not be
spayed or neutered for health reasons or is permanently non- fertile.
   (d)   Before an unsterilized dog or cat under the age of six months will be
released from animal services for adoption, the adopter must sign a
sterilization agreement with the director, complying with Section 828.003 of
the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, agreeing to:
      (1)   have the dog or cat spayed or neutered within 30 days after the
date of adoption or the date the animal attains six months of age, whichever
occurs last; and
      (2)   furnish to the director, within seven days after the date of
sterilization, confirmation complying with Section 828.005 of the Texas Health
and Safety Code, as amended, that the animal was spayed or neutered by the
completion date required in Paragraph (1) of this subsection.
   (e)   An adopter who signs a sterilization agreement under Subsection (d)
commits an offense if he fails to:
      (1)   have the adopted dog or cat spayed or neutered within the time
period required under Subsection (d)(1); or
      (2)   furnish confirmation of sterilization as required under Subsection
(d)(2).
     (f)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (e) if, by the
seventh day after the sterilization completion date required in Subsection (d)
(1), the director receives from the adopter either:
      (1)   a letter complying with Section 828.006 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended, stating that the animal is dead; or
      (2)   a letter complying with Section 828.007 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended, stating that the animal is lost or stolen.
   (g)   The director may refuse to release a dog or cat for adoption under any
circumstances, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   the prospective adopter or adoption agency has previously violated
a provision of this chapter or has been convicted of an animal- related crime;
      (2)   the prospective adopter or adoption agency has inadequate or
inappropriate facilities for confining the animal and for providing proper care
to the animal as required by this chapter;
      (3)   the prospective adoption agency has failed to sign or comply with a
transfer agreement with animal services that requires the sterilization of
adopted animals or other conditions imposed by the director; or
      (4)   the director determines that the health, safety, or welfare of the
animal or of the public would be endangered.
   (h)   If an adopter of a dog or cat violates Subsection (e), the director
may seize and impound the animal, and ownership of the animal will
automatically revert to the city.
(Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250; 28335; 29403; 31332; 32556)
SEC. 7-2.8.   KILLING OR EUTHANASIA OF ANIMALS.
   (a)   The director or chief of police is authorized to kill by appropriate
and available means an animal that poses an imminent danger to a person or
another animal and a real or apparent necessity exists for destruction of the
animal.
   (b)   The director is authorized to euthanize, or to allow a licensed
veterinarian to euthanize, an animal impounded at a city animal shelter if:
      (1)   the director or a licensed veterinarian determines that euthanasia
is necessary to prevent the unnecessary pain and suffering of the animal;
      (2)   the director or a licensed veterinarian determines that recovery of
the animal from injury, disease, or sickness is in serious doubt; or
      (3)   the animal is not redeemed from a city animal shelter within the
applicable time period required under Section
7-2.6 of this chapter.
   (c)   An animal impounded at a city animal shelter may only be euthanized by
using a barbiturate or derivative substance approved for that purpose by the
Federal Food and Drug Administration and administered under the direction of a
licensed veterinarian. This section does not apply to action authorized by
Subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. 26024)
ARTICLE III.
CARE AND TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
SEC. 7-3.1.   LOOSE ANIMALS.
   (a)   An owner commits an offense if the owner fails to restrain the animal,
at all times:
      (1)   in a fenced yard;
      (2)   in an enclosed pen;
      (3)   in a structure; or
      (4)   by a tethering device, but only if the animal is in the owner's
immediate possession and accompanied by the animal's owner, and, if the animal
is a dog, the owner complies with the requirements in Section
7-4.7 of this chapter.
   (b)   An owner commits an offense if the owner restrains a domestic animal
without providing the domestic animal access, at all times, to potable water
and shelter which protects the domestic animal from direct sunlight, standing
water, and extreme weather conditions, including conditions in which:
      (1)   the actual or effective outdoor temperature is below 32 degrees
Fahrenheit;
      (2)   a heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority or
jurisdiction; or
      (3)   a hurricane, tropical storm, or tornado warning has been issued for
the jurisdiction by the National Weather Service.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the animal
was:
      (1)   a dog in an off-leash site established under Section
32-6.1 of this code; or
      (2)   a feral cat participating in a trap, neuter, and return program
approved by the director.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that:
      (1)   the domestic animal was a dog;
      (2)   the dog was restrained by a tethering device while in the owner's
immediate possession and accompanied by the dog's owner; and
      (3)   the owner was in compliance with the requirements in Section
7-4.7 of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250; 30483; 30687, eff. 2/1/18)
SEC. 7-3.2.   SANITARY CONDITIONS; MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.
   (a)   An owner of an animal commits an offense if he fails to:
      (1)   keep any cage, pen, enclosure, or other area in which the animal is
kept in a sanitary condition; or
      (2)   remove all animal excreta from the cage, pen, enclosure, or other
area in which the animal is kept as often as necessary to maintain a healthy
environment.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he permits any yard, ground, premises,
or structure belonging to, controlled by, or occupied by him to become
nauseating, foul, offensive, or injurious to the public health or unpleasant
and disagreeable to adjacent residents or persons due to the accumulation of
animal excreta. (Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-3.3.   TRAPPING ANIMALS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he uses, places, sets, or causes to be
set in the city any steel jaw trap, spring trap with teeth or perforated edges
on the holding mechanism, or any type of trap with a holding mechanism designed
to reasonably ensure the cutting, slicing, tearing or otherwise traumatizing of
the entrapped animal.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the trap was:
      (1)   specifically designed and used to kill common rodents such as rats
and mice, and the trap was not placed in a manner or location that would
endanger other animals or humans; or
      (2)   specifically designed to kill and was used under the direction of
the city public health officer, the city environmental health officer, or an
agent of another governmental entity authorized by the director to trap in the
city. (Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-3.4.   UNLAWFUL PLACEMENT OF POISONOUS SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   In this section, POISONOUS SUBSTANCE means any chemical or synthetic
substance or bait, including but not limited to antifreeze, that is deemed
harmful to domestic animals.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly places a poisonous
substance so that it is accessible to a domestic animal.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the poisonous
substance was placed:
      (1)   pursuant to an animal control program under the direction of the
director, the city public health officer, or the city environmental health
officer; or
      (2)   to control common rodents such as rats and mice. (Ord. 27250)
SEC. 7-3.5.   TRANSPORTING AN ANIMAL IN AN OPEN BED OF A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he carries or transports an animal
within the open bed of any moving pickup, flatbed, or similar vehicle.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the animal was
in a carrier or other device sufficient to keep the animal from falling from
the vehicle. (Ord. 26024)
ARTICLE IV.
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR DOGS AND CATS.
SEC. 7-4.1.   VACCINATION OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (a)   An owner of a dog or cat commits an offense if:
      (1)   the dog or cat is not currently vaccinated;
      (2)   the dog or cat is not wearing a collar or harness with a current
rabies tag securely attached to it; or
      (3)   the owner fails to show a current certificate of vaccination and
rabies tag for the dog or cat upon request by the director or a peace officer.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   the dog or cat is under four months of age;
      (2)   the dog or cat is unable to be vaccinated due to health reasons as
verified by a licensed veterinarian; or
      (3)   the person charged produces to the court proof of vaccination from
a licensed veterinarian showing the dog or cat was vaccinated at the time the
citation was issued or not later than 20 days after the citation was issued.
   (c)   A licensed veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat for rabies shall
issue to the owner of the animal a current rabies tag and a certificate of
vaccination and send a copy of the certificate of vaccination to the director
by the 10th day of the month following the month in which the dog or cat was
vaccinated. The certificate of vaccination must contain the following
information:
      (1)   name, address, and telephone number of the owner;
      (2)   animal identification, including species, sex, age, size (pounds),
predominant breed, and color;
      (3)   vaccine used (including whether it is a one-year or three-year
rabies vaccine), producer, expiration date, and serial number;
      (4)   date vaccinated and expiration date of the certificate of
vaccination;
      (5)   rabies tag number; and
      (6)   veterinarian’s signature and license number. (Ord. Nos. 26024;
30483)
SEC. 7-4.2.   MICROCHIPPING OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (a)   An owner of a dog or cat commits an offense if the dog or cat does not
have a microchip.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   the dog or cat was under four months of age;
      (2)   the dog or cat was being held for adoption by animal services or an
animal welfare organization;
      (3)   the owner of the dog or cat has resided in the city for fewer than
30 days;
      (4)   the dog or cat qualifies for a medical exception from a licensed
veterinarian;
      (5)   the dog or cat owner is not a resident of the city and is staying
in the city for fewer than 60 days; or
      (6)   the person charged produces to the court proof of a registered
microchip showing the dog or cat was implanted with a microchip at the time the
citation was issued or not later than 20 days after the citation was issued.
   (c)   The owner of a dog or cat shall maintain his or her current contact
information with a microchip registration company.
      (1)   If the owner's contact information changes, the owner shall update
the microchip registration company not later than 30 days after the change in
the contact information.
      (2)   If the ownership of a dog or cat changes, the new owner shall
provide the microchip registration company with his or her contact information
not later than 30 days after the change in ownership.
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the
person charged produces to the court proof that the contact information was
current and the correct owner was listed at the time the citation was issued or
the contact information was corrected and made current not later than 20 days
after the citation was issued. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250; 30483; 32194, eff. 11-
11-22)
SEC. 7-4.3.   REVOCATION AND DENIAL OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   If, within any 12-month period, a person commits two or more
violations of this chapter involving a dog or cat, the director may revoke the
existing registrations on all dogs and cats owned by that person and deny all
applications for registration of any dog or cat by that person.
   (b)   If the director revokes or denies the registration of a dog or cat, a
written notice of the action and of the right to an appeal must be given to the
owner of the dog or cat by personal service or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. The owner may appeal the decision of the director to the
permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing stays an
action of the director in revoking or denying registration until the permit and
license appeal board makes a final decision.
   (c)   Within 15 calendar days after receipt of a notice of revocation or
denial of registration, or after a final decision of the permit and license
appeal board if an appeal is filed, the owner shall remove and relocate all
dogs and cats from his premises or surrender and forfeit ownership of them to
the director. The director or the permit and license appeal board may extend
the 15-calendar-day removal and relocation period up to an additional 15
calendar days if it is determined that all dogs and cats of the owner cannot
reasonably be removed and relocated from the premises within the initial period
and no immediate threat to the public health exists. The owner shall
demonstrate to the director proof of removal and relocation by furnishing the
director with the address to which each dog or cat was relocated and by:
      (1)   allowing the director to inspect the premises of the owner to
determine that all dogs and cats have been removed from those premises; or
      (2)   providing the director with a written, sworn affidavit stating that
all dogs and cats have been removed from the premises.
   (d)   A person who has had the registration of a dog or cat revoked or
denied under this section may not apply for registration of any dog or cat
until 12 consecutive months have elapsed after the date of registration
revocation or denial without the person committing any violation of this
chapter involving a dog or cat.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   owns any dog or cat within the city during a period when he is
prohibited under Subsection (d) from applying for registration of a dog or cat;
or
      (2)   fails to remove all dogs and cats from his premises when required
by this section. (Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-4.4.   AUTHORIZED REGISTRARS.
   (a)   The director may, upon receipt of an application on a form provided
for that purpose, designate a person as an authorized registrar to collect the
annual registration fee and issue a registration receipt and registration tag
for a dog or cat. The director may, at his sole discretion and without cause,
deny or revoke the designation of any person to act as an authorized registrar.
   (b)   An authorized registrar shall not register a dog or cat without proof
that the animal is currently vaccinated or proof that the dog or cat was not
vaccinated due to health reasons as verified by a licensed veterinarian.
   (c)   An authorized registrar may, as a service charge, be paid $1 for each
dog or cat registration fee collected by the authorized registrar.
   (d)   The director shall provide an authorized registrar with registration
receipts, registration tags, and monthly report forms. An authorized registrar
must at all times be able to account for all registration receipts and tags
issued to the authorized registrar by the director.
   (e)   The director shall establish rules and procedures for the collection
and payment of registration fees by authorized registrars and a format for
monthly report forms to be used by authorized registrars.
   (f)   Registration fees collected by an authorized registrar must be sent to
the director, along with a properly completed monthly report form, by the end
of the month following the month in which the registration fees were collected.
   (g)   An authorized registrar who fails to comply with any requirement of
this section or with any rule or procedure for the collection and payment of
registration fees and the delivery of monthly report forms as established by
the director pursuant to this section forfeits the right to be paid a service
charge and may be issued a citation for a violation of this section. (Ord.
26024)
SEC. 7-4.5.   SALE OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person sells, exchanges, barters,
gives away, or transfers, or offers or advertises for sale, exchange, barter,
give away, or transfer, a dog or cat four months of age or older unless:
      (1)   the dog or cat is currently vaccinated or cannot be vaccinated due
to health reasons as verified by a licensed veterinarian; and
      (2)   the person has a current registration receipt and registration tag
for the dog or cat.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) if the person is:
      (1)   animal services;
      (2)   an animal welfare organization; or
      (3)   an animal adoption agency.
   (c)   Except as provided in this subsection, a retail pet store commits an
offense if the retail pet store sells, exchanges, barters, gives away, or
transfers, or offers or advertises for sale, exchange, barter, give away, or
transfer, a dog or cat, regardless of age.
      (1)   A retail pet store may provide space for the display of dogs or
cats available for adoption by an animal shelter, animal welfare organization,
or animal adoption agency, if the retail pet store does not have an ownership
interest in any of the displayed dogs or cats and the retail pet store does not
receive any fees or compensation associated with the display of the dogs or
cats.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection, if the
individual only sells, gives, or otherwise transfers dogs or cats bred by that
individual. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 32194, eff. 11-11-22)
SEC. 7-4.6.   LIMITATION ON THE NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS IN DWELLING UNITS.
   (a)   In this section, DWELLING UNIT has the meaning given it in Section
51A-2.102 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he harbors more than four dogs, cats,
or any combination of dogs and cats on the premises of a dwelling unit that
shares a common wall with another dwelling unit.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he harbors more than:
      (1)   six dogs, cats, or any combination of dogs and cats on the premises
of a dwelling unit that shares no common wall with another dwelling unit and
that is located on not more than one-half acre of land; or
      (2)   eight dogs, cats, or any combination of dogs and cats on the
premises of a dwelling unit that shares no common wall with another dwelling
unit and that is located on more than one-half acre of land.
   (d)   In determining the number of dogs or cats harbored on the premises of
a dwelling unit under Subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the director
shall not count any dog or cat under six months of age or any feral cat
participating in a trap, neuter, and return program approved by the director.
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (c) that:
      (1)   the person:
         (A)   was approved by the director as a foster care provider under a
foster care program sponsored by animal services or an animal welfare
organization;
         (B)   was not fostering more dogs, cats, or any combination of dogs
and cats on the premises than approved by the director based on the type and
size of the animals, the size of the premises, the location of the premises,
the facilities located on the premises, and other factors established by the
director; and
         (C)   had on file with the director a written document (on a form
provided by the director for that purpose) authorizing the director to conduct
unannounced inspections of the premises and all animals located on the premises
to ensure that the person was complying with all applicable provisions of this
chapter, which document must be signed and acknowledged before a notary public
by the legal owner of the dwelling unit and at least one occupant of the
dwelling unit who is 18 years of age or older; or
      (2)   the person:
         (A)    on June 25, 2008, was the owner of, and was harboring on the
premises of the dwelling unit, more than six dogs, cats, or any combination of
dogs and cats;
         (B)   before September 25, 2008, provided information to the director
(on a form provided by the director for that purpose) relating to each dog or
cat harbored on the premises of the dwelling unit;
         (C)   harbored no additional dogs or cats on the premises of the
dwelling unit on or after June 25, 2008; and
         (D)   was in compliance with all other requirements of this chapter
applicable to dogs and cats. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250)
SEC. 7-4.7.   TETHERED DOGS.
   An owner of a dog may only tether a dog if the dog is in the owner's
immediate possession and accompanied by the owner, as required by Section
7-3.1 of this chapter. In addition, the owner of a tethered dog shall:
      (1)   not allow the dog to be tethered in any manner or by any method
that allows the dog to become entangled or injured;
      (2)   use a properly fitted harness or collar that is specifically
designed for the dog; and
      (3)   attach the tethering device to the dog's harness or collar and not
directly to the dog's neck. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250; 30687, eff. 2/1/18)
SEC. 7-4.8.   DEFECATION OF DOGS ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY; FAILURE TO
CARRY MATERIALS AND IMPLEMENTS FOR THE REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF DOG EXCRETA.
   (a)   An owner of a dog commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by
insufficient control allows, the dog to defecate in the city on private
property or on property located in a public place.
   (b)   An owner of a dog commits an offense if he:
      (1)   knowingly permits the dog to enter or be present on private
property or on property located in a public place; and
      (2)   fails to have in his possession materials or implements that,
either alone or in combination with each other, can be used to immediately and
in a sanitary and lawful manner both remove and dispose of any excreta the dog
may deposit on the property.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the owner of
the dog immediately and in a sanitary and lawful manner removed and disposed
of, or caused the removal and disposal of, all excreta deposited on the
property by the dog.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) or (b) that:
      (1)   the property was owned, leased, or controlled by the owner of the
dog;
      (2)   the owner or person in control of the property had given prior
consent for the dog to defecate on the property; or
      (3)   the dog was a service dog being used in official law enforcement
activities.
   (e)   This section does not apply to a service dog that is specially trained
to assist a person with a disability and that was in the custody or control of
that disabled person at the time it defecated or was otherwise present on
private property or on property located in a public place. (Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-4.9.   CONFINEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR DOGS KEPT OUTDOORS.
   (a)   An owner of a dog commits an offense if the fenced yard, or other
outdoor pen or structure, used as the primary living area for the dog or used
as an area for the dog to regularly eat, sleep, drink, and eliminate is not:
      (1)   at least 150 square feet for each dog six months of age or older;
      (2)   designed, constructed, and composed of material sufficient to
prevent the dog’s escape; and
      (3)   designed in a manner that provides the dog access to the inside of
a doghouse, building, or shelter that meets all requirements of Subsection (b)
of this section.
   (b)   A doghouse or other building or shelter for a dog must:
      (1)   have a weatherproof top, bottom, and sides;
      (2)   have an opening on no more than one side that allows the dog to
remain dry and provides adequate shade during daylight hours to prevent
overheating or discomfort to the dog;
      (3)   have a floor that is level and dry;
      (4)   be free from cracks, depressions, and rough areas that might be
conducive to insects, parasites, and other pests;
      (5)   be of adequate size to allow the dog to stand erect with the dog’s
head up, to turn around easily, and to sit and lie down in a comfortable and
normal position;
      (6)   have sufficient clean and dry bedding material or other means of
protection from the weather that will allow the dog to retain body heat when
the weather is colder than what a dog of that breed and condition can
comfortably tolerate;
      (7)   provide a suitable means for the prompt elimination of excess
liquid;
      (8)   be structurally sound, maintained in good repair, and constructed
with material that protects the dog from injury; and
      (9)   allow the dog easy access in and out. (Ord. 27250)
SEC. 7-4.10.   RESTRICTIONS ON UNSTERILIZED DOGS AND CATS.
   (a)   An owner of a dog or cat commits an offense if the animal is not
spayed or neutered.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   the animal is under six months of age;
      (2)   a licensed veterinarian annually certifies that the dog or cat
should not be spayed or neutered for health reasons or is permanently non-
fertile;
      (3)   the animal is being held for adoption by animal services or an
animal welfare organization;
      (4)   the animal is certified annually as a competition cat or
competition dog;
      (5)   the person charged produces to the court proof of sterilization
from a licensed veterinarian showing the dog or cat was sterilized at the time
the citation was issued or not later than 20 days after the citation was
issued; or
      (6)   the owner holds a valid breeding permit issued under Section
7-4.11 of this chapter for the animal. (Ord. Nos. 27250; 30483; 32194, eff. 11-
11-22)
SEC. 7-4.11.   BREEDING PERMIT.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he breeds or allows the breeding of a
dog or cat without a valid breeding permit for the dog or cat. A separate
permit is required for each dog or cat that the person keeps unsterilized for
breeding purposes.
   (b)   A breeding permit may only be issued for a dog or cat:
      (1)   that is currently in compliance with the vaccination requirements
of Section
7-4.1 of this chapter;
      (2)   that is currently in compliance with the microchipping requirements
of Section
7-4.2 of this chapter;
      (3)   that, not more than 90 days before the date of the breeding permit
application, has been approved to breed by a licensed veterinarian; and
      (4)   whose owner:
         (A)   is a member of a purebred dog or cat club, approved by the
director, that maintains and enforces a code of ethics for breeding that
includes restrictions on breeding dogs and cats with genetic defects and life
threatening health problems common to the breed; or
         (B)   holds a license as required by Texas Occupation Code, §802.101
for each facility owned or operated in the state.
   (c)   To obtain a breeding permit, a person must submit an application to
the director (on a form provided by the director for that purpose) and pay an
annual breeding fee of $51. The breeding permit application must include:
      (1)   the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   the location where the dog or cat is harbored;
      (3)   a description of the dog or cat, including but not limited to, a
photograph of the animal;
      (4)   proof that the animal is qualified for a breeding permit under
Subsection (b) of this section; and
      (5)   any other information determined necessary by the director for the
enforcement and administration of this section.
   (d)   A breeding permit expires one year after the date of issuance and may
be renewed by applying in accordance with Subsection (c) of this section. If
the director does not receive an application for a permit renewal within 45
days after the expiration of the permit, a $10 late fee will be added to the
permit fee.
   (e)   A breeding permit is not transferable.
   (f)   A permittee commits an offense if he allows a permitted female dog or
cat to have more than one litter during the permit term.
   (g)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (f) that the
permittee:
      (1)   received written authorization from the director under Subsection
(h) of this section to allow the female dog or cat to have two litters during
the permit term; and
      (2)   did not allow the female dog or cat to have more than the number of
litters authorized by the director for the permit term.
   (h)   Upon request of a permittee, the director may, in writing, authorize
the permittee to allow a permitted female dog or cat to have two litters during
the permit term if the permittee establishes, according to regulations adopted
by the director, that:
      (1)   having two litters during the permit term is required to:
         (A)   protect the health of the female dog or cat; or
         (B)   avert a substantial economic loss to the permittee; or
      (2)   previously in the permit term, the female dog's or cat's litter was
euthanized or did not survive for other reasons.
   (i)   A permittee commits an offense if the permittee:
      (1)   allows the offspring of a female dog or cat for which he holds a
breeding permit to be sold, adopted, or otherwise transferred, regardless of
compensation, before the offspring have reached at least eight weeks of age and
have been vaccinated against common diseases;
      (2)   fails to keep a permitted dog or cat restrained pursuant to Section
7-3.1 of this chapter;
      (3)   fails to prominently display the breeding permit number on any
advertisement by the permittee for the sale, adoption, or other transfer of any
dog or cat, regardless of compensation; or
      (4)   sells, adopts, or otherwise transfers any dog or cat, regardless of
compensation and fails to:
         (A)   include a statement signed by the permittee attesting to
knowledge of the animal's health and immunization history;
         (B)   prominently display the breeding permit number on any sales
receipt or transfer document;
         (C)   provide the breeding permit number to any person who purchases,
adopts, or receives any dog or cat from the permittee;
         (D)   provide written information regarding the vaccination,
microchipping, and sterilization requirements of this chapter applicable to the
dog or cat; or
         (E)   provide to the director (on a form provided by the director for
that purpose) the name, address, and telephone number of the dog's or cat's new
owner within five days after the date of the sale, adoption, or other transfer
of the animal.
   (j)   The director shall deny or revoke a breeding permit if the director
determines that the applicant or permittee:
      (1)   failed to comply with any provision of this chapter; or
      (2)   intentionally made a false statement as to a material matter on the
breeding permit application.
   (k)   If the director denies or revokes a breeding permit, the director
shall notify the applicant or permittee in writing of the action and a
statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permittee may appeal the
decision of the director to the permit and license appeal board in accordance
with Section
2-96 of this code. The filing of an appeal stays an action of the director in
revoking the permit until the permit and license appeal board makes a final
decision. (Ord. Nos. 27250; 29879; 30483; 31332; 32556)
SEC. 7-4.12.   DUTY TO LOCATE OWNERS OF LOOSE DOGS.
   A person commits an offense if he takes possession of a loose dog in the
city and knowingly fails to make, within 72 hours after taking possession, a
reasonable effort to locate the dog's owner by:
      (1)   calling the telephone number listed on the dog's tags;
      (2)   taking the dog to a licensed veterinarian for a microchip, tattoo,
or other identification screening and calling the owner identified through the
screening;
      (3)   calling 311 to request that animal services pick up the dog for
identification screening and impoundment; or
      (4)   delivering the dog to the city's animal shelter for identification
screening and impoundment. (Ord. Nos. 27888; 30483)
SEC. 7-4.13.   CONFINEMENT OF DOGS OR CATS IN UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly confines a dog or
cat in an unattended motor vehicle for more than five minutes under conditions
that, in the opinion of a trained peace officer, animal services officer, or
licensed veterinarian, endanger the health of the dog or cat due to extreme
temperatures, lack of adequate ventilation, or other circumstances that could
reasonably be expected to cause the suffering, disability, or death of the dog
or cat and as demonstrated by, but not limited to, the dog or cat's excessive
drooling or panting, lethargic behavior, collapse, vomiting, or convulsions.
   (b)   A peace officer, animal services officer, or licensed veterinarian
may, after reasonably attempting to locate the dog or cat's owner, remove the
dog or cat from the motor vehicle using any reasonable means, including
breaking a window or lock. If professional services are required to remove the
cat or dog from the vehicle, the owner is responsible for the cost of
professional services. A peace officer, animal services officer, or licensed
veterinarian who removes a dog or cat from a motor vehicle in accordance with
this section is not liable for any resulting property damage.
   (c)   This section does not create a cause of action for damages or
enforcement of this section. (Ord. 30483)
SEC. 7-4.14.   DOG BITES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person is the owner or keeper of a
dog and the person fails to secure the dog and the dog makes an unprovoked bite
that causes bodily injury to another person, legally restrained domestic
animal, or livestock, that occurs at a location other than the owner's or
keeper's real property or in or on the owner's or keeper's motor vehicle or
boat.
   (b)   An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person:
      (1)   is a veterinarian, a veterinary clinic employee, a peace officer, a
person employed by the city, or a subdivision of the city, to deal with stray
animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in
connection to that position; or
      (2)   is an employee of a law enforcement agency and trains dogs or uses
dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes and is training or using the
dog in connection with the person's official capacity. (Ord. 30901)
ARTICLE V.
DANGEROUS DOGS.
SEC. 7-5.1.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Except where a term is otherwise defined in Subsection (b) of this
section, the definitions contained in Subchapter D, Chapter 822 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code, as amended, are incorporated into this article by
reference.
   (b)   In this article:
      (1)   BODILY INJURY means physical pain, illness, or any impairment of
physical condition.
      (2)   DANGEROUS DOG means a dog that:
         (A)   makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury
and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure
on its own; or
         (B)   commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in
which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog
from leaving the enclosure on its own, and those acts cause a person to
reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that
person.
      (3)   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY means an injury characterized by severe bite
wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably
prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require
hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical
treatment.
      (4)   UNPROVOKED means an action by a dog that is not:
         (A)   in response to being tormented, abused, or assaulted by any
person;
         (B)   in response to pain or injury;
         (C)   in protection of itself or its food, kennel, immediate
territory, or nursing offspring; or
         (D)   in response to an assault or attempted assault on a person.
(Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250)
SEC. 7-5.2.   STATE LAW; ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.
   (a)   The provisions of Subchapter D, Chapter 822 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended, are incorporated into this article, and a violation of
any provision of Subchapter D, Chapter 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code,
as amended, is an offense under this article.
   (b)   The director shall serve as the animal control authority for the city
for purposes of administering and enforcing this article and Subchapter D,
Chapter 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
   (c)   Seizure, impoundment, and humane destruction of a dog that has caused
death or serious bodily injury to a person is governed by Subchapter A, Chapter
822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250)
SEC. 7-5.3.   DETERMINATION AS A DANGEROUS DOG.
   In addition to the provisions of Section 822.0421 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended:
   (a)   At the conclusion of the investigation authorized by Section 822.0421
of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, the director shall:
      (1)   determine that the dog is not dangerous and, if the dog is
impounded, may waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its
owner; or
      (2)   determine that the dog is dangerous and order the owner to comply
with the requirements for ownership of a dangerous dog set forth in Section
7-5.5 of this article and in Subchapter D, Chapter 822 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended, and, if the dog is impounded, release the dog to its
owner after compliance with all applicable requirements of Subsection (c) of
this section.
   (b)   If a dog is determined to be dangerous, the director shall notify the
dog owner, either in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested:
      (1)   that the dog has been determined to be a dangerous dog;
      (2)   what the owner must do to comply with requirements for ownership of
a dangerous dog and to reclaim the dog, if impounded; and
      (3)   that the owner has the right to appeal the determination of
dangerousness.
   (c)   An impounded dog determined by the director to be dangerous must
remain impounded, or confined at a location approved by the director, and may
not be released to the owner until the owner pays all fees incurred for
impoundment of the dog and complies with all requirements for ownership of a
dangerous dog set forth in this article and Subchapter D, Chapter 822 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
   (d)   If the owner of an impounded dog has not complied with Subsection (c)
within 15 days after a final determination is made that an impounded dog is
dangerous, the dog will become the sole property of the city and is subject to
disposition as the director deems appropriate. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250; 29403;
30901)
SEC. 7-5.4.   APPEAL OF DIRECTOR'S DANGEROUS DOG DETERMINATION.
   (a)   If, under Section
7-5.3 of this article, the director determines that a dog is dangerous, that
decision is final unless the dog owner files a written appeal with the
municipal, justice, or county court within 15 days after receiving notice that
the dog has been determined to be dangerous. The appeal is a de novo hearing
and is a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the
director's determination of dangerousness. If the municipal court affirms the
director's determination of dangerousness, the court shall order that the dog
owner comply with the ownership requirements set forth in Section
7-5.5 of this article.
   (b)   The dog owner filing an appeal of a municipal court's affirmation of
the director's determination shall also file an appeal bond in an amount
determined as the estimated costs to board and impound the dog during the
appeal process. The bond must be filed with the court if the dog is impounded
in the city's animal shelter or another director-approved facility. The bond
must be used to cover the cost of daily care of the dog. Should the judge or
jury determine the dog is not dangerous, the appeal bond
may be returned if the amount has not been assessed as costs of daily care.
   (c)   In addition to the appeal bond, the dog owner is responsible for any
costs beyond feeding, including but not limited to: veterinary care,
immunizations, medications, and care for other animals or employees injured by
the animal. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250; 29403; 30483; 30901)
SEC. 7-5.5.   REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNERSHIP OF A DANGEROUS DOG; NONCOMPLIANCE
HEARING.
   (a)   In addition to complying with the requirements of Subchapter D,
Chapter 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, a person shall,
not later than the 30th day after learning that he is the owner of a dangerous
dog:
      (1)   have an unsterilized dangerous dog spayed or neutered;
      (2)   register the dangerous dog with the director and pay to the
director a dangerous dog registration fee of $252;
      (3)   restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate
control of a person or in a secure enclosure;
      (4)   when taken outside the enclosure, securely muzzle the dangerous dog
in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog nor interfere with its vision
or respiration. The muzzle must prevent the dangerous dog from biting any
person or animal;
      (5)   show acceptable proof of financial responsibility in the amount of
at least $100,000 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous
dog causing bodily injury to a person. The owner shall maintain proof of
financial responsibility at all times as required by this article. Failure or
refusal of the owner to have and maintain proof of financial responsibility in
full force and effect is a violation of this article and an offense. The owner
may show acceptable proof of financial responsibility by any of the following
methods:
         (A)   Obtaining liability insurance conditioned for payment to cover
damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to
a person.
         (B)   Obtaining a surety bond conditioned for payment to cover damages
resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a
person.
         (C)   Obtaining an escrow account conditioned for payment to cover
damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to
a person.
         (D)   Obtaining a certificate of deposit at a financial institution
that is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National
Credit Union Administration and an affidavit stating the certificate of deposit
is intended to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog
causing bodily injury to a person.
         (E)   Any other proof of financial responsibility deemed acceptable by
the judge who heard the appeal under Section
7-5.4;
      (6)   place and maintain on the dangerous dog a collar or harness with a
current dangerous dog registration tag securely attached to it;
      (7)   have the dangerous dog injected with a microchip implant and
registered with a national registry for dogs; and
      (8)   post a legible sign at the entrance to the enclosure in which the
dangerous dog is confined stating "BEWARE DANGEROUS DOG." The aforementioned
sign must be purchased from Dallas Animal Services.
   (b)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall renew registration of the dangerous
dog with the director annually and pay an annual dangerous dog registration fee
to the director of $50.
   (c)   The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with Subsection (a)
shall deliver the dog to the director not later than the 30th day after
learning that the animal is dangerous.
   (d)   Upon receipt of a sworn, written complaint by any person that the
owner of a previously determined dangerous dog has failed to comply with
Subsection (a) of this section, the municipal court shall conduct a hearing to
determine whether the owner is in compliance with Subsection (a). The hearing
must be conducted within 30 days after receipt of the complaint, but, if the
dog is already impounded, not later than 10 days after the date on which the
dog was seized or delivered. The municipal court shall provide by mail, written
notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing to the dog owner and to
the complainant. Any interested party may present evidence at the hearing.
   (e)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the municipal court shall:
      (1)   find that the owner of a dangerous dog is in compliance with
Subsection (a) of this section and, if the dog is impounded, order the director
to waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its owner; or
      (2)   find that the owner of a dangerous dog is not in compliance with
Subsection (a) of this section and order the director to seize and impound the
dog (if the dog is not already impounded) and to:
         (A)   humanely destroy the dog if the director determines that the
owner has not complied with Subsection (a) of this section by the 11th day
after the date the municipal court issues an order under this subsection or the
dog is seized and impounded, whichever occurs later, or release the dog to the
owner if the director determines that the owner has complied with Subsection
(a) before the 11th day;
         (B)   humanely destroy the dog if:
            (i)   the director determines that the owner has not complied with
Subsection (a) of this section by the 11th day after the date the municipal
court issues an order under this subsection or the dog is seized and impounded,
whichever occurs later;
            (ii)   the owner of the dog cannot be located before the 15th day
after the date the municipal court issues an order under this subsection or the
dog is seized and impounded, whichever occurs later; or
            (iii)   the dog was previously determined dangerous was at large.
   (f)   Prior to transferring ownership, either inside or outside the city
limits, the owner shall notify the director in writing of his intention. In
addition to written notification if ownership of the dangerous dog is being
transferred to a person who resides within the city limits, the new owner must
provide proof to the director of complying with Subsection (a) before the
dangerous dog can be moved from the previous owner's custody. A person commits
an offense if he transfers ownership without complying with the requirements of
this subsection.
   (g)   The owner of the dangerous dog is responsible for all costs of
seizure, acceptance, and impoundment, and all costs must be paid before the dog
will be released to the owner. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250; 30901; 31332; 32556;
32843)
SEC. 7-5.6.   ATTACKS BY DANGEROUS DOG; HEARING.
   (a)   If a previously determined dangerous dog commits an act described in
Section
7-5.1(b)(2)(A) or (B) of this article, the director may seize and impound the
dangerous dog at the owner’s expense pending a hearing before the municipal
court in accordance with this section.
   (b)   Upon receipt of a sworn, written complaint by any person of an
incident described in Section
7-5.1(b)(2)(A) or (B) of this article, the owner of a dangerous dog, in
accordance with Section 822.0422 of Subchapter D, Chapter 822 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code, as amended, shall deliver the dog to the director not
later than the fifth day after the date on which the owner receives notice that
a complaint has been filed. Additionally, the municipal court shall conduct a
hearing to determine whether a dangerous dog committed an act described in
Section
7-5.1(b)(2)(A) or (B) of this article. The hearing must be conducted within 30
days after receipt of the complaint, but, if the dog is already impounded, not
later than 10 days after the date on which the dog was seized or delivered. The
municipal court shall provide, either in person or by mail, written notice of
the date, time, and location of the hearing to the dog owner and the
complainant. Any interested person may present evidence at the hearing.
   (c)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the municipal court shall:
      (1)   find that the dangerous dog did not commit an act described in
Section
7-5.1(b)(2)(A) or (B) of this article, and, if the dog is impounded, order the
director to waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its
owner; or
      (2)   find that the dangerous dog did commit an act described in Section
7-5.1(b)(2)(A) or (B) of this article, and order the director to seize and
impound the dog (if the dog is not already impounded) and to:
         (A)   humanely destroy the dog;
         (B)   humanely destroy the dog if the director determines that the
owner has not complied with Section
7-5.5(a) within a period of time designated by the court, or release the dog to
the owner if the director determines that the owner has complied with Section
7-5.5(a) within the designated period of time; or
         (C)   humanely destroy the dog if the owner of the dog has not been
located before the 15th day after the municipal court issues an order under
this subsection or the dog is seized and impounded, whichever occurs later.
(Ord. Nos. 27250; 30901; 32843)
SEC. 7-5.7.   PROHIBITION ON OWNING A DOG DETERMINED DANGEROUS BY ANOTHER
JURISDICTION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he owns a dog in the city that has been
determined to be a dangerous dog by any other jurisdiction.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the person
owned the dog in the city on June 25, 2008. (Ord. 27250)
SEC. 7-5.8.   SURRENDER OF A DANGEROUS DOG.
   A person who owns a dog that has been ordered to be seized or impounded
under this article commits an offense if the person does not surrender the dog
to the director within the time period ordered by the director or the municipal
court, whichever applies. (Ord. 27250)
SEC. 7-5.9.   DANGEROUS DOG OWNED OR HARBORED BY MINOR.
   If the owner of a dangerous dog is a minor, the parent or guardian of the
minor is liable for all injuries sustained by any person or another animal in
an unprovoked attack by the dog. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250)
SEC. 7-5.10.   DEFENSES.
   Any defense to prosecution under Subchapter D, Chapter 822 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code, as amended, is a defense to prosecution for a violation
under this article. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 27250)
SEC. 7-5.11.   DANGEROUS DOG REGISTRY.
   The director shall publish a list including identifying information on all
dogs determined dangerous in the city. The list must include the dangerous
dog's address, description, pictures, microchip number, the owner's name, and
any other pertinent information. This list must be publicly available at the
Dallas Animal Services Facility and on the animal services website. (Ord.
30901)
ARTICLE V-a.
AGGRESSIVE DOGS.
SEC. 7-5.12.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   AGGRESSIVE DOG means a dog that on at least one occasion, while not
legally restrained, killed or injured a legally restrained domestic animal or
livestock.
      (2)   SECURE ENCLOSURE means a secure enclosure as defined by Texas
Health and Safety Code Chapter 822, Subchapter D, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 30901;
32843)
SEC. 7-5.13.    DETERMINATION AS AN AGGRESSIVE DOG.
   (a)   Upon notification of an incident described in Section
7-5.12 of this article, the director shall investigate to determine if a dog is
aggressive unless the dog becomes the property of the city. The determination
must be based upon an investigation that includes observation and testimony
about the dog's actions at the date of the incident, including the owner's or
keeper's control of the dog, and any other relevant evidence determined by the
director. Observations and testimony can be provided by the animal services
officer or by other witnesses who personally observed the dog's actions on the
date of the incident. Animal service officers or other witnesses shall sign an
affidavit attesting to the observed actions on the date of the incident or
other evidence collected and detailed in a report by an animal services officer
and agree to provide testimony regarding the dog's actions on the date of the
incident if necessary.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Subsection (a), the director shall have discretionary
authority to refrain from determining a dog is an aggressive dog, even if the
dog engaged in acts specified in Section
7-5.12.
   (c)   The director may seize and impound the dog at the owner's expense
pending the investigation and determination of whether the dog is an aggressive
dog. The director shall impound the dog, if the director cannot, with due
diligence locate the owner of the dog that has been seized under this
subsection. If the owner of the dog has not been located before the 15th day
after seizure and impoundment, the dog will become the sole property of the
city and is subject to disposition as the director deems appropriate.
   (d)   At the conclusion of the investigation required by this section, the
director shall:
      (1)   determine that the dog is not aggressive and, if the dog is
impounded, may waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its
owner;
      (2)   determine that the dog is aggressive and order the owner to comply
with the requirements for ownership of an aggressive dog set forth in Section
7-5.15 of this article and, if the dog is impounded, release the dog to its
owner after compliance with all applicable requirements of Subsection (e) of
this section.
      (3)   If a dog is determined to be an aggressive dog, the director shall
notify the dog owner in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested:
         (i)   that the dog has been determined to be an aggressive dog;
         (ii)   what the owner must do to comply with requirements for
ownership of an aggressive dog and to reclaim the dog, if impounded; and
         (iii)   that the owner has the right to appeal the determination of
aggressiveness.
   (e)   An impounded dog determined by the director to be aggressive must
remain impounded, or confined at a location approved by the director, and may
not be released to the owner until the owner pays all fees incurred for
impoundment of the dog and complies with all requirements for ownership of an
aggressive dog set forth in this article.
   (f)   If the owner of an impounded dog has not complied with Subsection (e)
within 15 days after a final determination is made that an impounded dog is
aggressive, the dog will become the sole property of the city and is subject to
disposition as the director deems appropriate. (Ord. Nos. 30901; 32843)
SEC. 7-5.14.   APPEALS.
   If, under Section
7-5.13 of this article, the director determines that a dog is aggressive, that
decision is final unless the dog owner files a written appeal with the
municipal court within 10 days after receiving notice that the dog has been
determined to be aggressive. The appeal is a de novo hearing and is a civil
proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the director's
determination of aggressiveness. If the municipal court affirms the director's
determination of aggressiveness, the court shall order that the dog owner
comply with the ownership requirements set forth in Section
7-5.15 of this article. If the municipal court reverses the director's
determination of aggressiveness and, if the dog is impounded, the court may
waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its owner. (Ord.
30901)
SEC. 7-5.15.   REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNERSHIP OF AN AGGRESSIVE DOG; NONCOMPLIANCE
HEARING.
   (a)   A person shall, not later than the 30th day after learning that he is
the owner of an aggressive dog:
      (1)   have an unsterilized aggressive dog spayed or neutered;
      (2)   register the aggressive dog with the director and pay to the
director an aggressive dog fee of $201;
      (3)   restrain the aggressive dog at all times on a leash in the
immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure;
      (4)   when taken outside the secure enclosure, securely muzzle the dog in
a manner that will not cause injury to the dog nor interfere with its vision or
respiration. The muzzle must prevent the aggressive dog from biting any person
or animal;
      (5)   show acceptable proof of financial responsibility in the amount of
at least $100,000 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the aggressive
dog causing bodily injury to a person or another animal. The owner shall
maintain proof of financial responsibility at all times as required by this
article. Failure or refusal of the owner to have and maintain proof of
financial responsibility in full force and effect is a violation of this
article and an offense. The owner may show acceptable proof of financial
responsibility by any of the following methods:
         (A)   Obtaining liability insurance conditioned for payment to cover
damages resulting from an attack by the aggressive dog causing bodily injury to
a person or another animal.
         (B)   Obtaining a surety bond conditioned for payment to cover damages
resulting from an attack by the aggressive dog causing bodily injury to a
person or another animal.
         (C)   Obtaining an escrow account conditioned for payment to cover
damages resulting from an attack by the aggressive dog causing bodily injury to
a person or another animal.
         (D)   Obtaining a certificate of deposit at a financial institution
that is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National
Credit Union Administration and an affidavit stating the certificate of deposit
is intended to cover damages resulting from an attack by the aggressive dog
causing bodily injury to a person or another animal.
         (E)   Any other proof of financial responsibility deemed acceptable by
the judge who heard the appeal under Section
7-5.14;
      (6)   place and maintain on the aggressive dog a collar or harness with a
current aggressive dog registration tag securely attached to it;
      (7)   have the aggressive dog injected with a microchip implant and
registered with a national registry for dogs;
      (8)   post a legible sign at each entrance to the enclosure in which the
aggressive dog is confined stating "BEWARE AGGRESSIVE DOG." The aforementioned
sign must be purchased from Dallas Animal Services.
   (b)   The owner of the aggressive dog shall renew the registration of the
aggressive dog with the director annually and pay an annual aggressive dog
registration fee of $50.
   (c)   The owner of an aggressive dog who does not comply with Subsection (a)
shall deliver the dog to the director not later than the 30th day after
learning that the animal is aggressive.
   (d)   Upon receipt of a sworn, written complaint by any person that the
owner of a previously determined aggressive dog has failed to comply with
Subsection (a) of this section, the municipal court shall conduct a hearing to
determine whether the owner is in compliance with Subsection (a). The hearing
must be conducted within 30 days after receipt of the complaint, but, if the
dog is already impounded, not later than 10 days after the date on which the
dog was seized or delivered. The municipal court shall provide by mail, written
notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing to the dog owner and to
the complainant. Any interested party may present evidence at the hearing.
   (e)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the municipal court shall:
      (1)   find that the owner of an aggressive dog is in compliance with
Subsection (a) of this section and, if the dog is impounded, order the director
to waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its owner; or
      (2)   find that the owner of an aggressive dog is not in compliance with
Subsection (a) of this section and order the director to seize and impound the
dog (if the dog is not already impounded) and to:
         (A)   humanely destroy the dog if the director determines that the
owner has not complied with Subsection (a) of this section by the 11th day
after the date the municipal court issues an order under this subsection or the
dog is seized and impounded, whichever occurs later, or release the dog to the
owner if the director determines that the owner has complied with Subsection
(a) before the 11th day;
         (B)   humanely destroy the dog if:
            (i)   the director determines that the owner has not complied with
Subsection (a) of this section by the 11th day after the date the municipal
court issues an order under this subsection or the dog is seized and impounded,
whichever occurs later;
            (ii)   the owner of the dog cannot be located before the 15th day
after the date the municipal court issues an order under this subsection or the
dog is seized and impounded, whichever occurs later; or
            (iii)   the dog was previously determined aggressive was at large.
   (f)   Prior to transferring ownership, either inside or outside the city
limits, the owner shall notify the director in writing of his or her intention.
In addition to written notification if ownership of the aggressive dog is being
transferred to a person who resides within the city limits, the new owner must
provide proof to the director of complying with Subsection (a) before the
aggressive dog can be moved from the previous owner's custody. A person commits
an offense if he or she transfers ownership without complying with the
requirements of this subsection.
   (g)   The owner of the aggressive dog is responsible for all costs of
seizure, acceptance, and impoundment, and all costs must be paid before the dog
will be released to the owner. (Ord. Nos. 30901; 31332; 32556; 32843)
SEC. 7-5.16.   ATTACKS BY AN AGGRESSIVE DOG.
   (a)   If a previously determined aggressive dog commits an act described in
Section
7-5.12 of this article, the director may seize and impound the aggressive dog
at the owner's expense pending a hearing before the municipal court in
accordance with this section.
   (b)   Upon receipt of a sworn, written complaint by any person, including
the director, of an incident described in Section
7-5.12 of this article, the municipal court shall conduct a hearing to
determine whether an aggressive dog committed an act described in Section
7-5.12 of this article. The hearing must be conducted within 30 days after
receipt of the complaint, but if the dog is already impounded, not later than
10 days after the date on which the dog was seized or delivered. The municipal
court shall provide, by mail, written notice of the date, time, and location of
the hearing to the owner of the aggressive dog and the complainant. Any
interested party may present evidence at the hearing.
   (c)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the municipal court shall:
      (1)   find that the aggressive dog did not commit an act described in
Section
7-5.12 of this article, and, if the dog is impounded, order the director to
waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its owner; or
      (2)   find that the aggressive dog did commit an act described in Section
7-5.12 of this article, and order the director to seize and impound the dog, if
the dog is not already impounded, and the aggressive dog will become the sole
property of the city and is subject to disposition as the director deems
appropriate.
   (d)   The owner of an aggressive dog is responsible for all costs of
seizure, acceptance, and impoundment, and all costs must be paid before the dog
will be released to the owner. (Ord. Nos. 30901; 32843)
ARTICLE VI.
PROHIBITED AND REGULATED ANIMALS.
SEC. 7-6.1.   PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   owns a prohibited animal for any purpose in the city; or
      (2)   sells, exchanges, gives away, or transfers a prohibited animal to
any person in the city for use, retention, resale, or transfer as a pet or as a
human’s companion.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(1) that the person
is:
      (1)   a federal, state, county, or municipal agency or an agent of such
an agency acting in an official capacity that:
         (A)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits; and
         (B)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the animal;
      (2)   a research facility licensed by the United States Secretary of
Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. Section 2131, et seq.), as
amended, that:
         (A)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits;
         (B)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the animal; and
         (C)   has on file with the director, on a form provided for that
purpose, a current list describing all prohibited animals kept in the city by
the facility and specifying the location where each animal is kept;
      (3)   an organization that is an accredited member of the American Zoo
and Aquarium Association that:
         (A)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits;
         (B)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the animal; and
         (C)   has on file with the director, on a form provided for that
purpose, a current list describing all prohibited animals kept in the city by
the organization and specifying the location where each animal is kept;
      (4)   transporting an injured, infirm, orphaned, or abandoned prohibited
animal for care or treatment, if the person:
         (A)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits; and
         (B)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the animal;
      (5)   a licensed veterinarian, an incorporated humane society or animal
shelter, or a person who holds a rehabilitation permit issued under Subchapter
C, Chapter 43 of the Parks and Wildlife Code, as amended, who is temporarily
treating or caring for a sick or injured prohibited animal, if the
veterinarian, humane society, animal shelter, or rehabilitator:
         (A)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits; and
         (B)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the animal;
      (6)   a transient circus company not based in the State of Texas, if:
         (A)   the prohibited animal is used as an integral part of the circus
performances;
         (B)   the animal is kept within the city only during the time the
circus is performing in the city; and
         (C)   the circus:
            (i)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits;
            (ii)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the animal; and
            (iii)   has on file with the director, on a form provided for that
purpose, a current list describing all prohibited animals kept in the city by
the circus and specifying the location where each animal is kept;
      (7)   a television or motion picture production company that has
temporary custody or control of the prohibited animal during the filming of a
television or motion picture production in the city, if the production company:
         (A)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits;
         (B)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the animal; and
         (C)   has on file with the director, on a form provided for that
purpose, a current list describing all prohibited animals kept in the city by
the production company and specifying the location where each animal is kept;
      (8)   a college or university that owns and has possession, custody, or
control of the prohibited animal solely as a mascot for the college or
university, if the college or university:
         (A)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits;
         (B)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the animal; and
         (C)   has on file with the director, on a form provided for that
purpose, a current list describing all prohibited animals kept in the city by
the college or university and specifying the location where each animal is
kept;
      (9)   transporting the prohibited animal in interstate commerce in
compliance with the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. Section 2131, et seq.), as
amended, and any regulations adopted under that act, if the person:
         (A)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits; and
         (B)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the prohibited animal;
      (10)   a person whose only business is to supply nonhuman primates
directly and exclusively to biomedical research facilities and who holds a
Class “A” or Class “B” dealer’s license issued by the United States Secretary
of Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. Section 2131, et seq.),
as amended, if:
         (A)   the prohibited animal is a nonhuman primate owned by and in the
custody and control of the person;
         (B)   the person has all required state and federal licenses and
permits;
         (C)   the person is in compliance with all federal, state, and city
laws or regulations applicable to the animal; and
         (D)   the person has on file with the director, on a form provided for
that purpose, a current list describing all prohibited animals kept in the city
by the person and specifying the location where each animal is kept;
      (11)   a participant in a species survival plan of the American Zoo and
Aquarium Association for the species of prohibited animal owned by or in the
possession, control, or custody of the person, if:
         (A)   the prohibited animal is an integral part of the species
survival plan;
         (B)   the person has all required state and federal licenses and
permits;
         (C)   the person is in compliance with all federal, state, and city
laws or regulations applicable to the animal; and
         (D)   the person has on file with the director, on a form provided for
that purpose, a current list describing all prohibited animals kept in the city
by the person and specifying the location where each animal is kept; or
      (12)   exhibiting a prohibited animal (other than a dangerous wild animal
as defined in Section 822.101 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended)
at the State Fair of Texas or at a special event conducted with written
permission of the city, if the person:
         (A)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits;
         (B)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the animal; and
         (C)   has on file with the director, on a form provided for that
purpose, a current list describing all prohibited animals kept in the city by
the person and specifying the location where each animal is kept. (Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-6.2.   REGULATED ANIMALS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he owns a regulated animal for any
purpose in the city without holding a valid regulated animal permit issued for
the animal under this section.
   (b)   All defenses set forth in Section
7-6.1(b) relating to prohibited animals are defenses to prosecution under
Subsection (a) of this section when applied to regulated animals.
   (c)   A regulated animal permit may be issued only to a person who is in the
business of exhibiting one or more regulated animals to the public and who:
      (1)   has all required state and federal licenses and permits; and
      (2)   is in compliance with all federal, state, and city laws or
regulations applicable to the regulated animal.
   (d)   Regulated animal permits are classified as follows:
      (1)   Annual regulated animal permit. Possession of an annual regulated
animal permit is required to keep a regulated animal in the city for more than
10 days within any calendar year. The permit is valid for one year after the
date of issuance, unless sooner revoked by the director, and may be renewed by
filing an application in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Temporary regulated animal permit. Possession of a temporary
regulated animal permit is required to keep a regulated animal in the city for
not more than 10 days within any calendar year. The permit is valid for a
period designated by the director not to exceed 10 days.
   (e)   The fees for a regulated animal permit are as follows:
 
Type of Permit Fee
(1) Annual     $350
(2) Temporary  $250
 
   (f)   A regulated animal permit is nontransferable, and the permit fee is
nonrefundable.
   (g)   An applicant for a regulated animal permit shall file an application
with the director on a form provided for that purpose. The application must
include:
      (1)   the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   a complete identification of each regulated animal kept in the
city, including species, sex, age (if known), and any distinguishing marks or
coloration that would aid in the identification of the animal;
      (3)   the exact location where each regulated animal is to be kept; and
      (4)   any other information the director determines necessary to the
enforcement and administration of this section.
   (h)   An application for a regulated animal permit must be accompanied by:
      (1)   the applicable regulated animal permit fee set forth in Subsection
(e) of this section;
      (2)   proof, in a form acceptable to the director, that the applicant has
the liability insurance required in Subsection (i) of this section; and
      (3)   if the applicant holds a Class “A” or Class “B” dealer’s license or
a Class “C” exhibitor’s license issued by the United States Secretary of
Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. Section 2131, et seq.), as
amended, a clear and legible photocopy of the license.
   (i)   An owner of a regulated animal shall maintain liability insurance
acceptable to the city, in an amount of not less than $100,000 for each
occurrence, that provides coverage for any damage to or destruction of
property, and for any death or bodily injury to a person, caused by the
regulated animal.
   (j)   An owner of a regulated animal shall, at all reasonable times, allow
the director or a designated licensed veterinarian to enter the premises where
the animal is kept and to inspect the animal, the animal’s enclosure, and the
owner’s records relating to the animal to ensure compliance with this section.
   (k)   An owner of a regulated animal may not permanently relocate the animal
to another location in the city unless the owner first notifies the director in
writing of the exact location to which the animal will be relocated.
   (l)   Within 10 days after the death, sale, or other disposition of a
regulated animal, the owner of the animal shall notify the director in writing
of that event.
   (m)   An owner of a regulated animal shall immediately notify the director
of any attack on a human by the animal and of any escape by the animal.
   (n)   An owner of a regulated animal that escapes is liable for all costs
incurred in apprehending and confining the animal. The city, animal services,
and any law enforcement agency (and their employees and agents) are not liable
to an owner of a regulated animal for damages arising in connection with the
escape of the animal, including any liability for damage, injury, or death
caused by the animal during or after its escape, or for injury to or death of
the animal resulting from the apprehension or confinement of the animal after
its escape.
   (o)   The director may establish caging requirements and standards for the
keeping and confinement of a regulated animal to ensure that the animal is kept
and confined in a manner that:
      (1)   protects and enhances the public’s health and safety;
      (2)   prevents escape by the animal; and
      (3)   provides a safe, healthy, and humane environment for the animal.
   (p)   An owner of a regulated animal shall keep and confine the animal in
accordance with the caging requirements and standards established by the
director.
   (q)   For each regulated animal, the owner shall comply with all applicable
standards of the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. Section 2131, et seq.), as
amended, and with regulations adopted under that Act relating to:
      (1)   facilities and operations;
      (2)   animal health and husbandry; and
      (3)   veterinary care.
   (r)   An owner of a regulated animal commits an offense if he fails to
comply with this section. Each animal with respect to which there is a
violation and each day that a violation continues is a separate offense.
   (s)   The director shall deny issuance or renewal of a regulated animal
permit if the applicant:
      (1)   makes a false statement of material fact on an application for a
regulated animal permit;
      (2)   is not in compliance with this section or
Article III of this chapter;
      (3)   is not in compliance with any conditions of the permit or any rules
established by the director relating to the regulated animal;
      (4)   has had a regulated animal permit revoked by the director within
the preceding 12 months; or
      (5)   intentionally or knowingly impeded a lawful inspection by the
director or the director’s authorized representative.
   (t)   The director shall revoke a regulated animal permit if the director
determines that the permit holder has:
      (1)   made a false statement of material fact on an application for a
regulated animal permit;
      (2)   violated a provision of this section or
Article III of this chapter;
      (3)   violated a condition of the permit or a rule established by the
director relating to the regulated animal; or
      (4)   intentionally or knowingly impeded a lawful inspection by the
director or the director’s authorized representative.
   (u)   If the director refuses to issue or renew a regulated animal permit,
or revokes a regulated animal permit, the director shall send to the applicant
or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of
the action, including the reason for the action, and a statement of the right
to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the
director to a permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the
permit and license appeal board stays an action of the director in revoking a
permit until the permit and license appeal board makes a final decision. (Ord.
Nos. 26024; 29879; 31332, eff. 10/1/19)
ARTICLE VII.
MISCELLANEOUS.
SEC. 7-7.1.   INTERFERENCE WITH AN ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER.
   A person commits an offense if he interferes with, hinders, or molests any
employee or agent of animal services in the performance of official duties.
(Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-7.2.   SALE OF ANIMALS FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he sells, exchanges, barters, or gives
away, or offers to sell, exchange, barter, or give away, any animal from:
      (1)   any public property; or
      (2)   any property to which the public has access that does not have a
valid certificate of occupancy allowing the sale of animals on the property.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the person
is:
      (1)   animal services; or
      (2)   an animal adoption agency. (Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-7.3.   KEEPING OF ROOSTERS.
   (a)   In this section, ROOSTER means the male of the domestic fowl.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he owns a live rooster on any premises
within the city.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the rooster
is:
      (1)   kept on premises upon which animal production is permitted under
Section
51A-4.201 of the Dallas Development Code;
      (2)   being exhibited at the State Fair of Texas or at a special event
conducted with written permission of the city;
      (3)   owned by a governmental entity or participating in a health,
research, educational, or similar program conducted by a governmental entity;
      (4)   owned by a medical, educational, or research institution operating
in compliance with all city ordinances and state and federal laws; or
      (5)   being held for slaughter in a slaughterhouse or meat packing plant
operating in compliance with all city ordinances and state and federal laws.
   (d)   A person who owns a live rooster commits an offense if he:
      (1)   fails to confine the rooster at all times within an enclosure that
is of sufficient height and strength to retain the rooster;
      (2)   confines the rooster in an enclosure that is wholly or partially
located less than 20 feet from any adjacent property line;
      (3)   maintains the enclosure in which the rooster is confined in a
manner that creates offensive odors, fly breeding, or any other nuisance or
condition that is injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
      (4)   allows the rooster to violate the noise restrictions of Section
7-7.4 of this chapter.
   (e)   For the purpose of calculating the distance requirement of Subsection
(d)(2) of this section, the width of alleys, street rights-of-way, and other
public rights-of-way will be used. The distance between a rooster enclosure and
an adjacent property line must be measured in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest exterior wall of the
enclosure to the nearest property line. (Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-7.4.   DISTURBANCE BY ANIMALS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly owns an animal that
unreasonably barks, howls, crows, or makes other unreasonable noise near a
private residence. Noise made by an animal is unreasonable under this
subsection if the noise:
      (1)   continues more than 15 consecutive minutes; or
      (2)   exceeds the sound pressure level allowed in a residential district
under the Dallas Development Code.
   (b)   A person who is disturbed by an animal that unreasonably barks, howls,
crows, or makes other unreasonable noise near a private residence may file a
disturbance complaint with the director. A disturbance complaint must include
the name and address of the complainant, the location of the disturbance, the
type of animal causing the disturbance, and the times that the animal is
causing the disturbance.
   (c)   The director shall mail to the animal’s owner a notice that the
disturbance complaint has been received. A copy of the notice must be mailed to
the complainant.
   (d)   If, after receiving notice from the director that a disturbance
complaint has been received, the owner continues to allow the animal to cause a
disturbance:
      (1)   the complainant may file a complaint, in writing, with the city
attorney; or
      (2)   the director may issue a citation to the owner for the violation of
this section. (Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-7.5.   VACCINATION OF FERRETS.
   (a)   An owner of a ferret commits an offense if:
      (1)   the ferret is not currently vaccinated; or
      (2)   the owner fails to show a current certificate of vaccination and
rabies tag for the ferret upon request by the director or a peace officer.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the ferret
is:
      (1)   under four months of age; or
      (2)   unable to be vaccinated due to health reasons as verified by a
licensed veterinarian.
   (c)   A licensed veterinarian who vaccinates a ferret for rabies shall issue
to the owner of the ferret a current rabies tag and a certificate of
vaccination and send a copy of the certificate of vaccination to the director
by the 10th day of the month following the month in which the ferret was
vaccinated. The certificate of vaccination must contain the following
information:
      (1)   name, address, and telephone number of the owner;
      (2)   animal identification, including species, sex, age, size (pounds),
predominant breed, and color;
      (3)   vaccine used, producer, expiration date, and serial number;
      (4)   date vaccinated and expiration date of the certificate of
vaccination;
      (5)   rabies tag number; and
      (6)   veterinarian’s signature and license number. (Ord. 26024)
SEC. 7-7.6.   ANIMALS AS PRIZES, PROMOTIONS, AND NOVELTIES.
   A person commits an offense if he sells, exchanges, raffles, auctions, or
gives away or offers to sell, exchange, raffle, auction, or give away any live
animal as:
      (1)    a prize;
      (2)   an inducement to enter a place of amusement or a business
establishment; or
      (3)   an inducement to participate in a charitable fund-raising event.
(Ord. 27250)
ARTICLE VIII.
VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND ENFORCEMENT.
SEC. 7-8.1.   VIOLATIONS; CRIMINAL AND CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to
perform an act required of him by this chapter, commits an offense.
   (b)   A person violating a provision of this chapter commits a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which a violation is committed,
continued, or permitted.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (d)   Unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, an offense
under this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed:
      (1)   $2,000 if the provision violated governs public health or
sanitation;
      (2)   the amount fixed by state law if the violation is one for which the
state has fixed a fine; or
      (3)   $500 for all other offenses.
   (e)   Unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter or by state
law, an offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than:
      (1)   $50 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
7-2.6(f),
7-2.7(d),
7-3.1,
7-4.2(a),
7-4.5(a),
7-4.6,
7-4.8,
7-7.2, or
7-7.4(a);
      (2)   $100 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
7-3.3,
7-4.1(a),
7-4.7,
7-4.10,
7-5.15(a),
7-7.3, or
7-7.5(a); and
      (3)   $150 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
7-2.4(b),
7-3.2,
7-4.3(e),
7-4.11,
7-4.14,
7-6.1,
7-6.2, or
7-7.1.
   (f)   The minimum fines established in Subsection (e) will be doubled for
the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and
trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any
24-month period. At no time may the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine
established in Subsection (d).
   (g)   Prosecution for an offense under Subsection (a) does not prevent the
use of civil enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person
charged with or the conduct involved in the offense.
   (h)   In addition to imposing a criminal penalty, the city may, in
accordance with Section 54.012(5) and (10) of the Texas Local Government Code,
bring a civil action against a person violating a provision of this chapter.
The civil action may include, but is not limited to, a suit to recover a civil
penalty pursuant to Section 54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code not to
exceed $1,000 for each day or portion of a day during which each violation is
committed, continued, or permitted.
   (i)   As an alternative to imposing the criminal penalty prescribed in
Subsections (d) and (e), the city may, as authorized by Section 54.044 of the
Texas Local Government Code, impose administrative penalties, fees, and court
costs in accordance with
Article IV-b of
Chapter 27 of this code for an offense under this chapter. The alternative
administrative penalty range for an offense is the same as is prescribed in
Subsections (d) and (e). The provisions of
Article IV-b of
Chapter 27 of this code pertaining to financial inability to comply with an
administrative order do not apply to violations of this chapter. (Ord. Nos.
26024; 27250; 29403; 30901; 32194, eff. 11-11-22; 32843)
SEC. 7-8.2.   ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
   (a)   In addition to imposing a monetary penalty against a person convicted
of an offense under this chapter, a court may do one or more of the following:
      (1)   require the person, at the person's expense, to attend a
responsible pet ownership program approved by the director;
      (2)   revoke any permit issued to the person under this chapter;
      (3)   require the person to have any animal owned by the person spayed or
neutered within a time period specified by the court; or
      (4)   impose any other conditions or restrictions that would reasonably
abate the violation for which the person was convicted.
   (b)   Upon a person's third conviction of violating Section
7-3.1,
7-4.1,
7-4.2,
7-4.7,
7-4.10,
7-4.11, or
7-4.14 of this chapter, a court may do one or more of the following:
      (1)   order the impoundment of any animal owned by the person, forfeit
the person's ownership of the animal, and award sole possession of the animal
to the city; or
      (2)   suspend the person's right to own an animal in the city for a
period of time as specified by the court. (Ord. Nos. 26024; 30483; 30901)
SEC. 7-8.3.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 30483)
SEC. 7-8.4.   DALLAS ANIMAL WELFARE FUND.
   (a)   The Dallas Animal Welfare Fund is composed of:
      (1)   All Dallas Animal Welfare Fund administrative penalties collected
under Sections
27-16.16(b),
27-16.18(g), and
27-16.21(b) of
Chapter 27 of this code;
      (2)   30 percent of all civil fines collected by the city for lawsuits
filed in the municipal court under Subchapter B, Chapter 54 of the Texas Local
Government Code; and
      (3)   Any funds donated by an individual or entity, any of which may be
refused by a majority vote of the city council.
   (b)   The director shall adopt rules and procedures consistent with this
article for the administration of the Dallas Animal Welfare Fund.
   (c)   To be eligible to receive funds from the Dallas Animal Welfare Fund, a
person must:
      (1)   establish to the satisfaction of the director that the person’s
income does not exceed the Dallas area median family income as determined by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; and
      (2)   not have received funds from the Dallas Animal Welfare Fund within
the preceding 24 months.
   (d)   The director may not make an award from the Dallas Animal Welfare Fund
in excess of $1,000. The director may not make an award unless the award is for
less than or equal to the amount in the Dallas Animal Welfare Fund at any one
time. If the fund is temporarily out of money, the director may not make an
award until such time as there are additional funds equal to or exceeding the
amount of the award. (Ord. 29403)
CHAPTER 7A
ANTI-LITTER REGULATIONS
Sec.
7A-1.   Short title.
Sec.
7A-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
7A-3.   Throwing or depositing litter in public places prohibited; exceptions.
Sec.
7A-3.1.   City removal of shopping cart from a public place.
Sec.
7A-4.   Manner of placing litter in receptacles.
Sec.
7A-4.1.   Unattended drop boxes.
Sec.
7A-5.   Sweeping litter into gutters, etc. prohibited; sidewalks to be kept
free of litter by abutting property owners or occupants.
Sec.
7A-6.   Duty of merchants and contractors as to litter in abutting sidewalks,
streets, etc.
Sec.
7A-7.   Throwing litter from vehicles prohibited.
Sec.
7A-7.1.   Removal of injurious material from streets.
Sec.
7A-8.   Litter in parks.
Sec.
7A-9.   Litter in fountains, lakes, etc.
Sec.
7A-10.   Throwing, distributing, etc., handbills in public places.
Sec.
7A-11.   Placing handbills in or upon vehicles.
Sec.
7A-12.   Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
Sec.
7A-13.   Distribution of handbills where posted or indicated as prohibited.
Sec.
7A-14.   Manner of distribution of handbills to inhabited premises.
Sec.
7A-15.   Dropping litter, etc., from aircraft prohibited.
Sec.
7A-16.   Prohibiting the posting of notices on poles, trees, and structures;
presumptions; defenses.
Sec.
7A-17.   Throwing or depositing litter on private premises.
Sec.
7A-18.   Duty to maintain premises free from litter.
Sec.
7A-19.   Depositing litter on vacant lots prohibited.
Sec.
7A-19.1.   City removal of litter from private premises; notice required.
Sec.
7A-19.2.   Charges to be levied against the premises; lien on premises for
failure to pay charges.
Sec.
7A-20.   Penalty for violation of chapter; enforcement of chapter.
SEC. 7A-1.   SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Dallas Anti-
Litter Ordinance”. (Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the
singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
      (1)   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word “aircraft” shall
include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
      (2)   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection
receptacle as required and authorized in Chapter 18.
      (3)   CITY. The city of Dallas, Texas.
      (4)   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
         (A)   which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing; or
         (B)   which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly
or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
         (C)   which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up
for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held,
given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which
is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public
peace, safety and good order. Nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed
to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such
license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance
of this city; or
         (D)   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
      (5)   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      (6)   LITTER. “Garbage”, “refuse” and “rubbish” as defined herein and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
      (7)   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the
United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general
law; and, in addition thereto, any periodical or current magazine regularly
published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public.
      (8)   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial
handbill or newspaper.
      (9)   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
      (10)   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
      (11)   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any vacant land or dwelling, house, building, or
other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private
residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or non-profit purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, parking
lot, loading dock, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building, or other structure.
      (12)   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys,
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
      (13)   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
      (14)   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and
similar materials.
      (14.1)   SHOPPING CART. An object that has the same meaning as in Chapter
17 of the Texas Business and Commerce Code, as amended.
      (15)   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. Nos. 10371; 25371; 30136;
32655)
SEC. 7A-3.   THROWING OR DEPOSITING LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the city, except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles for collection or in official city dumps. (Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-3.1.   CITY REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CART FROM A PUBLIC PLACE.
   (a)   A shopping cart found by the city in a public place shall be presumed
lost or abandoned, unless the shopping cart has:
      (1)   been reported as stolen to the Dallas Police Department within the
last 30 days;
      (2)   a legible name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the
shopping cart; and
      (3)   a legible unique identifier, such as a serial number.
   (b)   A shopping cart found by the city in a public place is hereby declared
a public nuisance.
   (c)   A shopping cart found by the city in a public place shall be
considered litter.
   (d)   Upon collection, the city may immediately dispose of the shopping
cart, including by recycling it, or the city may temporarily store the shopping
cart before disposing of it, whichever method the director, in the director's
discretion, deems appropriate. For purposes of this section, DIRECTOR is the
director of the department of street services of the city of Dallas. (Ord.
30136)
SEC. 7A-4.   MANNER OF PLACING LITTER IN RECEPTACLES.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property. (Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-4.1.   UNATTENDED DROP BOXES.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to eliminate nuisance, blight,
and safety issues associated with unattended drop boxes by establishing
operator and property owner accountability through a permitting and application
process and time, place, and manner restrictions.
   (b)   Applicability. Except as provided in this section, the requirements of
this section apply to all unattended drop boxes regardless of whether the
unattended drop boxes were placed prior to the effective date of these
regulations.
   (c)   Definitions. For purposes of this section,
      (1)   DEPARTMENT means the department of code compliance.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department of code compliance or
the director’s representative.
      (3)   OPERATOR means a person who maintains an unattended drop box to
solicit collections of salvageable personal property.
      (4)   PROPERTY means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any
structures on the land.
      (5)   UNATTENDED DROP BOX (UDB) means any unattended or unstaffed outdoor
container, box, receptacle, or similar device or facility, designed with a
door, slot, or other opening that is used for soliciting and collecting
donations of textiles, clothing, shoes, books, toys, dishes, and other
salvageable items of personal property to be used by the operator for
distribution, resale, or recycling. This term does not include unattended boxes
intended for the collection of mail or parcels conveyed by the United States
Postal Service or private shipping companies. A drop box is considered
"unattended" for purposes of this section if a person dropping any of the
above-listed items may do so while there is no representative or employee of
the operator present to receive the items.
   (d)   Application.
      (1)   Applications for UDB permits must be made on a form provided by the
department and must include the following information:
         (A)   The legal name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address,
and telephone number of the operator and property owner who can be reached 24
hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of an emergency condition
involving the UDB.   
         (B)   A signed authorization from the property owner, property
manager, or an authorized agent where the proposed unattended box is to be
placed if the property owner is not the operator.
         (C)   A non-refundable application fee of $248.
         (D)   A site plan showing:
            (i)   location and dimensions of property boundaries;
            (ii)   location of all buildings located on the property;
            (iii)   proposed UDB location; and
            (iv)   distance between the proposed UDB and any structures located
on adjacent properties.
         (E)   Elevations showing the appearance, graphics or designs,
materials, and dimensions of the UDB.
         (F)   A description of the proposed locking mechanism for the UDB.
         (G)   A maintenance plan, including graffiti removal, weekly pick-up
schedule, and litter and trash removal on and around the UDB, that is
sufficient to prevent and eliminate blight- related conditions.
         (H)   Any other information regarding time, place, and manner of the
UDB operation, placement, or maintenance that the director requires to evaluate
the operator’s application consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   An applicant shall notify the director within 10 days after any
change in the information provided to the director.
      (3)   Each UDB must comply with all applicable state and federal laws,
including, but not limited to, Section 17.922 of the Texas Business and
Commerce Code.
   (e)   Permit expiration and renewals.
      (1)   A permit for a UDB expires one year after the date of issuance.
      (2)   A permit may be renewed by making an application in accordance with
Section 7A-4.1(d). An applicant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before
the expiration of the permit.
   (f)    Permit issuance.
      (1)   The director shall issue a permit for a UDB, along with a permit
decal, within 60 calendar days of receipt of a complete application, if the
director determines that:
         (A)   the applicant has complied with all of the application
requirements for issuance of the permit and decal listed in subsection (d) and
the proposed UDB is in compliance with all of the regulations listed in
subsection (l); and
         (B)   the applicant has not made a false statement as to a material
matter in an application for a permit.
      (2)   Permits may not be transferred, conveyed, or assigned to another
operator.
      (3)   The fee for issuing a replacement UDB permit decal for one that is
lost, stolen, damaged, or destroyed is $101.
   (g)   Application denial.
      (1)   The director shall deny, within 60 calendar days of receipt of a
complete application, an application if the director determines:
         (A)   the operator has had a UDB permit revoked within the preceding
12-month period or the property owner has had a UDB permit revoked on the
subject property within the preceding 12-month period;
         (B)   the applicant, property owner, or operator intentionally made a
false statement as to a material fact in the application for a UDB permit; or
         (C)   the operation or location of the UDB would violate the
regulations in paragraph (l) of this subsection.
      (2)   If the director determines that an applicant’s application should
be denied, the director shall issue by personal service or mailed via United
States certified mail and first class mail to the operator’s last known address
that the application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial
and a statement informing the applicant of the right of appeal.
   (h)   Permit revocation.
      (1)   A permit issued under this section may be revoked by the director
if the operator or property owner:
         (A)   has received one or more citations for a violation of this
section within the preceding 12 months;
         (B)   intentionally made a false statement as to a material fact in
the application for a UDB permit; or
         (C)   has failed to notify the director of any material change of
information in the permit application as required in Section 7A-4.1(d)(2).
      (2)   Before revoking a permit, the director shall deliver written notice
to the permit holder that the permit is being considered for revocation. The
notice must include the reason for the proposed revocation, action the permit
holder must take to prevent the revocation, and a statement that the registrant
has 10 days after the notice is mailed to comply with the notice. Notice must
be mailed via United States certified mail and first class mail to the
operator's address that is on file.
      (3)   If, after 10 days from the date the notice is mailed, the permit
holder has not complied with the notice, the director shall revoke the permit
and deliver written notice of the revocation to the permit holder via United
States certified mail and first class mail. The notice must include the reason
for the revocation, and a statement informing the permit holder of the right of
appeal.
   (i)   Appeals. If the director denies issuance or renewal of a permit or
revokes a permit, this action is final unless the applicant or operator files
an appeal with the permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code.
   (j)   Removal of UDB. The operator or property owner must remove the UDB no
more than 10 days after the revocation or 10 days after the final resolution of
the appeal hearing. Failure to timely remove a UDB in compliance with this
subsection is a violation of this section.
   (k)   One-year waiting period. If a permit is revoked, no additional permit
must be issued to that operator or property owner within one year after the
revocation date.
   (l)   UDB regulations.
      (1)   Violation. A person commits an offense if the person violates a
provision of this section or places, maintains, or allows to be placed, or
maintained, a UDB at any location without a valid permit issued in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Maximum number. Only two UDBs are allowed at any building site. A
separate permit is required for each UDB.
      (3)   Location.
         (A)   UDBs are prohibited on a building site that has a residential
use and the following areas:
            (i)   Within required zoning and building line setbacks.
            (ii)   Visibility triangles as defined in Section
51A-4.602.
            (iii)   Required parking areas.
            (iv)   Driveways.
            (v)   Sidewalks.
            (vi)   Easements.
            (vii)   Fire lanes.
            (viii)   Floodplains.
            (ix)   City rights- of-way.
            (x)   Vacant lots as defined in
Chapter 48B.
            (xi)   City owned or controlled property.
            (xii)   Any location that will impede traffic; impair motor vehicle
operation within a parking lot, driveway, street or alley; or block access to
off-street parking spaces, access easements, fire lanes, fire hydrants, or
dumpsters.
         (B)   UDBs may not be located within 1,100 feet of any other property
where UDBs are located.
         (C)   UDBs may only be placed on concrete or asphalt surfaces.
      (4)    Permit decal display. Each permitted UDB must display a clearly
visible decal on the outside of the UDB, adjacent to where goods are being
placed in the box, that contains the following information:
         (A)   UDB permit number.
         (B)   Dates the permit is valid.
         (C)   Permit issuance date.
         (D)   ISO form number.
         (E)   Service request number.
         (F)   Revision number.
      (5)   Maximum dimensions. A UDB may not exceed 84 inches in height, 48
inches in depth, 48 inches in width, and a total volume of 112 cubic feet. This
paragraph does not apply to UDBs placed prior to the effective date of this
section.
      (6)   UDB construction material. Each UDB must be constructed of metal
material.
      (7)    Operator name and contact information display. Each UDB must
display the UDB operator’s name and a current phone number at which the
operator can be reached. The operator’s name and phone number must be in
reasonably visible font on one of the UDB’s sides.
      (8)   Item removal. The operator and property owner must remove all items
placed within the UDB at least one time per week.
      (9)   Operation and maintenance.
         (A)   The operator and property owner are responsible for the
maintenance, upkeep, and servicing of the UDB and cleanup and removal of any
graffiti, items left outside of the UDB, and any other detractors.
         (B)   The city is authorized to abate any property in violation of
this section that is deemed a public nuisance under the procedures in Section
31-10.
         (C)   The structural integrity of the UDB must be maintained at all
times.
         (D)   The operator and property owner shall keep the property within
25 feet of the location of a UDB clean and free of trash, debris, broken glass,
coat hangers, clothes, clothing accessories, or other items.
         (E)   UDBs must have a collection opening with a tamper resistant
locking mechanism.
         (F)   UDBs may not be electronically or hydraulically powered or
otherwise mechanized.
         (G)   UDBs may not be a fixture to the site or considered an
improvement to real property. (Ord. 32608)
SEC. 7A-5.   SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS, ETC. PROHIBITED; SIDEWALKS TO BE
KEPT FREE OF LITTER BY ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
(Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-6.   DUTY OF MERCHANTS AND CONTRACTORS AS TO LITTER IN ABUTTING
SIDEWALKS, ETC.
   (a)   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the
city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of
litter.
   (b)   A person doing construction work within the city shall at all times
keep the sidewalk, street, alley and public or private property abutting the
construction site free of construction trash, litter and debris. (Ord. Nos.
10371; 19566)
SEC. 7A-7.   THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private
property. (Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-7.1.   REMOVAL OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL FROM STREETS.
   A person who drops or throws or permits to be dropped or thrown upon a
street any destructive or injurious material, shall immediately remove the
material or cause the material to be removed. (Ord. 14587)
SEC. 7A-8.   LITTER IN PARKS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or
upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein. (Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-9.   LITTER IN FOUNTAINS, LAKES, ETC.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. (Ord.
10371)
SEC. 7A-10.   THROWING, DISTRIBUTING, ETC., HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in
or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city; nor shall
any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public
place. It shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place
within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the
receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept
it. (Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-11.   PLACING HANDBILLS IN OR UPON VEHICLES.
   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in
or upon any vehicle. It shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person
to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a
noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept
it. (Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-12.   DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES.
   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in
or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited
or vacant. (Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-13.   DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS WHERE POSTED OR INDICATED AS
PROHIBITED.
   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do
so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the
entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words “No Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or
Agents,” No Advertisement,” or any similar notice indicating in any manner that
the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or have their right
of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises.
(Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-14.   MANNER OF DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS TO INHABITED PREMISES.
   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or
transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person
then present in or upon such private premises. In case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such person, unless
requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any
such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is
so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown
or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places and
except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal
law or regulations.
   (a)   Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to
newspapers (as defined herein) except, that newspapers shall be placed on
private property in such manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited
by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property. (Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-15.   DROPPING LITTER, ETC., FROM AIRCRAFT PROHIBITED.
   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city
any litter, handbill or any other object. (Ord. 10371)
SEC. 7A-16.   PROHIBITING THE POSTING OF NOTICES ON POLES, TREES, AND
STRUCTURES; PRESUMPTIONS; DEFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he posts or affixes or causes to be
posted or affixed any notice, poster, paper, or device, which is calculated to
attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, utility pole, telephone
pole, cellular telephone pole, or tree that is located on any public right-of-
way or other public property, or to any public structure or building.
   (b)   Whenever any notice, poster, paper, or device is posted or affixed, or
caused to be posted or affixed, in violation of Subsection (a) of this section,
it is presumed that the person whose address or telephone number is listed in
the notice, poster, paper, or device, or who is otherwise named, described, or
identified in the notice, poster, paper, or device, is the person who committed
the violation, either personally or through an agent or employee.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section
that the notice, poster, paper, or device was posted or affixed in a manner and
location authorized or required by another city ordinance or by state or
federal law. (Ord. Nos. 10371; 23632)
SEC. 7A-17.   THROWING OR DEPOSITING LITTER ON PRIVATE PREMISES.
   A person commits an offense if he throws or deposits litter on any occupied
private premises within the city, whether owned by the person or not, or in or
on any gutter, parkway, sidewalk, or alley adjacent to the private premises;
except, that the owner, occupant, or person in control of private premises may
maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that
litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any street, gutter, parkway, sidewalk, alley, or other public place or upon any
private premises. (Ord. Nos. 10371; 20599)
SEC. 7A-18.   DUTY TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE FROM LITTER.
   An owner, occupant, or person in control of private premises commits an
offense if he places, deposits, or throws; permits to accumulate; or permits or
causes to be placed, deposited, or thrown, any litter on the premises or in or
on any gutter or parkway adjacent to the premises or on one-half of that
portion of an alley adjacent to the premises, unless the litter has been
deposited in an authorized private receptacle for collection. (Ord. Nos. 10371;
13804; 20599)
SEC. 7A-19.   DEPOSITING LITTER ON VACANT LOTS PROHIBITED.
   A person commits an offense if he throws or deposits litter on any open or
vacant private property within the city, whether owned by the person or not, or
in or on any gutter, parkway, sidewalk, or alley adjacent to the private
property. (Ord. Nos. 10371; 20599)
SEC. 7A-19.1.   CITY REMOVAL OF LITTER FROM PRIVATE PREMISES; NOTICE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Upon the failure of the owner, occupant, or person in control of
private premises to comply with Section
7A-18 of this chapter, the director shall have the litter removed from the
premises.
   (b)   Before having the litter removed, the director must notify the owner
of the premises to bring the premises into compliance with Section
7A-18 within seven days. The notice must be in writing and may be served by
handing it to the owner in person or by sending it United States regular mail,
addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as recorded in the appraisal
district records of the appraisal district in which the premises are located.
   (c)   If personal service to the owner cannot be obtained, then the owner
may be notified by:
      (1)   publication at least once in the official newspaper adopted by the
city council;
      (2)   posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on
the premises to which the violation relates; or
      (3)   posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the
ground on the premises to which the violation relates.
   (d)   If the director mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with
Subsection (b) and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as
“refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the
notice is considered as delivered.
   (e)   In a notice provided under this section, the director may, by regular
mail and by a posting on the property, inform the owner of the property on
which the violation exists that, if the owner commits another violation of the
same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or
before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may, without
further notice, correct the violation at the owner’s expense and then assess
the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this
subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been
informed in writing by the owner of a change in ownership of the property, then
the city may, without notice, take any action permitted by Subsection (a) and
assess its expenses as provided in Section
7A-19.2.
   (f)   The director may issue citations and prosecute persons for violating
Section
7A-18 regardless of whether a notice is issued under this section. (Ord. Nos.
22494; 25371)
SEC. 7A-19.2.   CHARGES TO BE LEVIED AGAINST THE PREMISES; LIEN ON PREMISES FOR
FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES.
   (a)   If the city removes litter on or from the private premises at the
request of the owner or upon the failure of the owner to comply with the notice
required under Section
7A-19.1, charges in the amount of the total actual costs incurred by the city
in performing the work will be collected from the owner, or levied, assessed,
and collected against the premises on which the work is performed. The charges
will be collected by the city controller. The city controller shall file a
statement by the director with the county clerk of the county in which the
property is located setting out the actual costs incurred by the city, the name
of the property owner if known, and a legal description of the property, as
required by state law.
   (b)   At the time a statement is filed under Subsection (a) as required by
state law, the city shall have a privileged lien against the premises, second
only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, in the amount of the
actual costs incurred, plus 10 percent interest on that amount from the date
costs were incurred.
   (c)   The city may file a suit in an appropriate court of law to foreclose
upon its lien and recover its actual costs incurred plus interest. The suit
must be filed in the name of the city. The statement filed under Subsection
(a), or a certified copy of the statement, is prima facie proof of the amount
of actual costs incurred by the city. (Ord. Nos. 22494; 25371)
SEC. 7A-20.   PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER; ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   Penalty for violation of chapter: A person who violates a provision of
this chapter, or who fails to perform an act required of him by this chapter,
commits an offense. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each day or
portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or
permitted.
   (b)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,000 nor less than:
      (1)   $50 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
7A-16,
7A-17, or
7A-19;
      (2)   $100 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
7A-18; and
      (3)   $200 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
7A-7.1.
   (c)   The minimum fines established in Subsection (b) shall be doubled for
the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and
trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any
24-month period. At no time shall the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine
established in Subsection (b).
   (d)   Except where otherwise specified, a culpable mental state is not
required for the commission of an offense under this chapter.
   (e)   Authority to enforce chapter: The director shall enforce this chapter
when violations occur on private property; except that, when a fire hazard
exists on private property, this chapter shall be enforced by the fire marshal.
Any police officer of the city shall enforce this chapter when a violation
occurs in a public place, and any member of the park patrol of the city is
empowered to enforce this chapter when a violation occurs in any public park in
the city.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section, DIRECTOR means the director of the
department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this
chapter or the director’s authorized representative.
   (g)   As an alternative to imposing the criminal penalty prescribed in
Subsection (b), the city may impose administrative penalties, fees, and court
costs in accordance with
Article IV-b of
Chapter 27 of this code, as authorized by Section 54.044 of the Texas Local
Government Code, for an offense under Section
7A-18 of this chapter. The alternative administrative penalty range for an
offense is the same as is prescribed for a criminal offense in Subsection (b).
(Ord. Nos. 10371; 12134; 13804; 17226; 19963; 20599; 25927)
CHAPTER 8
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
8-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
8-1.1.   Reports to the city council.
Sec.
8-1.2.   Notice of appointment; acceptance.
Sec.
8-1.3.   Eligibility of employee of franchise holder.
Sec.
8-1.4.   Qualification considerations in appointments to boards.
Sec.
8-1.5.   Limitation of terms.
ARTICLE II.
MEETINGS.
Sec.
8-2.   Regular meetings.
Sec.
8-3.   Special meetings.
Sec.
8-4.   Quorum.
Sec.
8-5.   Rules of order.
Sec.
8-6.   Public character of meetings and actions; executive sessions.
Sec.
8-7.   Notice of meetings.
Sec.
8-8.   Report of minutes.
ARTICLE III.
OFFICERS AND THEIR DUTIES.
Sec.
8-9.   Chair and vice-chair.
Sec.
8-10.   Preservation of order.
Sec.
8-11.   Questions to be stated.
Sec.
8-12.   Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
DUTIES AND PRIVILEGES OF MEMBERS.
Sec.
8-13.   Right to floor.
Sec.
8-14.   Financial interest.
Sec.
8-14.1.   Confidentiality.
Sec.
8-15.   Right of appeal.
Sec.
8-16.   Limitation of debate.
Sec.
8-17.   Voting.
Sec.
8-18.   Demand for roll card.
Sec.
8-19.   Personal privilege.
Sec.
8-20.   Attendance.
Sec.
8-20.1.   Special attendance requirements.
Sec.
8-21.   Excusal during meeting.
ARTICLE V.
CODE OF CONDUCT.
Sec.
8-22.   Board members.
Sec.
8-23.   Administrative staff.
Sec.
8-24.   News media members.
Sec.
8-25.   Members of the public.
ARTICLE VI.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
Sec.
8-26.   Board recommendations.
Sec.
8-27.   Dealings with city employees.
Sec.
8-28.   Legal opinions.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 8-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   BOARD means a board or commission of the city that is established
by ordinance or the Charter of the City of Dallas.
      (2)   CHAIR means the presiding officer of a board whether appointed by
the city council or elected by the other members of the board. During debate,
the chair shall be referred to by this official title and shall be addressed by
prefixing Mr. or Madam, as the case may be, to that title.
      (3)   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION means any information that could not be
obtained by the public under the Texas Open Records Act.
      (4)   CONSIDERATION means the process by which a board disposes of a
motion.
      (5)   CRIMINAL RECORD means a record of a person's criminal history,
which may include, without limitation, arrests, convictions, dismissals, and
acquittals.
      (6)   FORFEIT or FORFEITURE means automatic loss of membership on a
board, without the need for council action.
      (7)   ITEM means a particular subject of public business listed on a
posted agenda that requires consideration from the board during the public
meeting.
      (8)   MEMBER means a duly appointed or elected member of a board. (Ord.
Nos. 14180; 19924; 20488; 30555; 31350)
SEC. 8-1.1.   REPORTS TO THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (a)   By February 1 of each year, each board shall submit to the city
manager for distribution to the city council an annual report that has been
approved by the board of its activities containing the following:
      (1)   a cover letter transmitting the report, signed by the board chair,
addressed to the mayor and city council;
      (2)   a table of contents;
      (3)   a mission statement or the guiding principles of the reporting
body;
      (4)   a summary of the year just completed including highlights of
objectives and accomplishments;
      (5)   a list of objectives and programs for the coming year including
revised goals;
      (6)   a summary of the board's recommendations, including a summary of
the recommendations of the minority if there is a minority report;
      (7)   other information determined to be necessary by the board.
   (b)   Copies of the report should be furnished to the city manager, city
secretary, and each member of the board.
   (c)   The office of the city manager shall coordinate the preparation of the
reports within the applicable city departments and generally give assistance in
the development of the reports.
   (d)   The following formatting standards shall apply:
      (1)   The report should be 8-1/2 inches by 11 inches in size. Each larger
sheet should be folded to this size.
      (2)   Covers should include the city of Dallas logo.
   (e)   Minority or dissenting viewpoints should be given full disclosure in
the report so that the opinions of each board member are fairly conveyed. The
minority or dissenting report should be prepared by those holding such
viewpoints and it should be incorporated in the report without editing, except
in order to achieve compliance with this section. If the majority report,
including attachments, appendices, and index pages, numbers less than 100
pages, the minority report will be placed after the last page of the majority
report. If the majority report numbers 100 pages or more, the minority report
will be placed after the summary of recommendations and before the body of the
full majority report.
   (f)   If a board finds it necessary or important to publish a report other
than an annual report, the provisions of this section shall apply to the
special report.
   (g)   On behalf of the city council, the city manager shall analyze and
evaluate each report submitted pursuant to this section by March 15 of each
year. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 15126; 15378; 20488; 21118; 21155; 30555)
SEC. 8-1.2.   NOTICE OF APPOINTMENT; ACCEPTANCE.
   (a)   After the city council appoints a person to serve as a member of a
board, the city secretary shall notify the person in writing of the
appointment. The notification shall contain the city's code of ethics and a
form of acceptance of appointment to be returned to the city secretary by the
appointee. The form of acceptance shall contain a statement that the appointee
has read the entire code of ethics and agrees to comply with it.
   (b)   The appointee must return the signed acceptance of appointment to the
city secretary within 15 calendar days from the date of receiving notice of the
appointment. If the city secretary does not receive the signed acceptance of
appointment within the required 15 days, that board position shall be
considered vacant and a new appointment made. (Ord. Nos. 15848; 18560; 20488;
30555)
SEC. 8-1.3.   ELIGIBILITY OF EMPLOYEE OF FRANCHISE HOLDER.
   (a)   A person who is an employee of a public utility providing service
under a franchise with the city is not disqualified from serving as a member of
a board if the responsibilities of the board are not directly related to
regulation of the rates and service of the public utility.
   (b)   A board member who is an employee of a public utility providing
service under a franchise with the city shall abstain from voting and comply
with Section
8-14 on any matter before the board directly or indirectly related to the
business of the public utility. (Ord. Nos. 16467; 17489; 20488)
SEC. 8-1.4.   QUALIFICATION CONSIDERATIONS IN APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS.
   (a)   An appointee to a board must:
      (1)   have been a resident of the city for at least six months prior to
the date of appointment;
      (2)   have no conviction that is considered by the city council to be so
serious that it should serve as a disqualification;
      (3)   not be an adversary party to pending litigation or a claim against
the city or a city employee, except for eminent domain proceedings;
disqualification of an appointee under this subparagraph may be waived by the
city council after review of the specific circumstances unless the subject of
the litigation or claim involves the board on which the appointee will serve or
the department providing support services to that board;
      (4)   not be an employee or a business associate of either an adversary
party or a representative of an adversary party, nor have a pecuniary interest,
in any pending litigation or claim, other than an eminent domain proceeding,
against the city relating to the board on which the appointee will serve or the
department providing support services to that board or against any individual
officer or employee of the support department (unless unrelated to such
individual's office or employment); disqualification of an appointee under this
subparagraph may not be waived;
      (5)   not be in arrears on any city taxes, water service charges, or
other obligations owed the city;
      (6)   have a creditable record of attendance pursuant to Section
8-20 in any previous board service; and
      (7)   except as provided in this section, meet any other qualifications
for service on a board that are mandated by the city charter or other
ordinances.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Subsection (a), an appointee to a board is not
required to live in the district for which he or she is appointed, unless
district residency for a board is expressly required by this code.
   (c)   A person may serve on only one board at a time, except that this
restriction does not apply to ex officio board positions. It is the city
council's intent that a board member is not required to resign one board
position before being appointed to another board, but must resign the first
position before accepting appointment to the new board position.
   (d)   Notwithstanding Subsection (c), a person may serve on up to two boards
of directors of reinvestment zones established under the Tax Increment
Financing Act, as amended.
   (e)   A person appointed to a board must meet, at the time of appointment
and during the entire period of service on the board, all qualifications for
appointment to that board that are required by this section and any other
applicable provision of a city ordinance or the city charter. This subsection
does not apply to a qualification waived by the city council pursuant to
specific authority granted in a provision of a city ordinance or the city
charter applicable to the board to which the person is appointed.
   (f)   The city secretary, using resources available to the city, shall
inform the city council if any person nominated for appointment to a board has
been convicted of a misdemeanor offense, other than a traffic violation, or of
any felony offense.
   (g)   A person is not disqualified from board service under Subsection (a)
(6) if the person has entered into an agreement (authorized by the city, state
law, or court order) to pay the obligation on a scheduled payment plan and is
current on payments under the plan and in compliance with all terms and
conditions of the plan. Before the person is appointed or reappointed to any
board, the city secretary shall inform the city council if the person is on
such a payment plan. The city secretary shall monitor compliance with the
payment plan and notify the city council and the city attorney whenever the
person is not in compliance with the plan.
   (h)   Except as provided in this subsection, if a person does not meet or
continue to meet the qualifications set forth under this section, the city
secretary shall send the following:
      (1)   a notice that the person forfeits membership on the board due to
failure to satisfy a qualification requirement under Paragraph (1), (2), (5),
(6), or (7) of Subsection (a) of this section.
      (2)   a notice that the city secretary shall place an item on a council
agenda to consider appointment of the person to the board or removal of the
person from the board for failure to satisfy a qualification requirement under
Paragraph (3) or (4) of Subsection (a) of this section.
   (i)   City council may waive a special qualification requirement in other
chapters of the Dallas City Code when waiver would be in the public interest.
(Ord. Nos. 16525; 17087; 19983; 20016; 20488; 21933; 22495; 26007; 26246;
30555; 30789; 31504; 31505)
SEC. 8-1.5.   LIMITATION OF TERMS.
   (a)   A person who has served as a member of a particular board for four
consecutive two-year terms will not again be eligible to serve on that same
board until at least one term has elapsed, regardless of whether service was as
a member or chair.
   (a-1)   Reserved.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Subsection (a), a person may serve as a member of a
particular board for the maximum number of terms that may be fixed for the
particular board by the city charter or federal law and will not again be
eligible to serve on that same board until at least one term has elapsed.
   (c)   In determining whether a full term has been served by a board member,
the same definition of "term" that applies to a city council member, as set
forth in Chapter III, Section 3A(c) of the city charter, will also apply to a
board member. (Ord. Nos. 22259; 22570; 24141; 30555; 32801)
ARTICLE II.
MEETINGS.
SEC. 8-2.   REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (a)   Each board shall determine the time and place of its meetings. Regular
meetings shall be scheduled weekly, monthly, semi-monthly, or quarterly, as the
responsibilities of the board necessitate, at a location within a public
building.
   (b)   Department directors will biennially inform the city secretary's
office of the board's regular meeting schedule, or at any other such time as
that schedule changes. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488; 30555)
SEC. 8-3.   SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings may be called by the chair at any time and shall be called
by the chair upon written request of members comprising at least one-third of
the board. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-4.   QUORUM.
   (a)   At the beginning of each regular or special meeting, the chair shall
determine whether or not a quorum exists in order to properly transact business
of the board. Unless otherwise provided by another city ordinance, the city
charter, or state law, a quorum exists when there are physically present a
simple majority of the number of members officially appointed to the board,
regardless of the total number of members actually provided for the board,
except that no board required to be composed of 15 or more members may have a
quorum of fewer than six members. If a quorum does not exist 30 minutes after
the time for which the meeting was called, the chair shall adjourn the meeting
and may call a special meeting in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act,
as amended.
   (b)   For purposes of calculating attendance, special meetings will not be
counted. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488; 23123; 30555)
SEC. 8-5.   RULES OF ORDER.
   Unless otherwise stipulated by the board or this chapter, proceedings of a
board shall in all cases be governed by rules of order as set forth in
“Robert’s Rules of Order.” (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-6.   PUBLIC CHARACTER OF MEETINGS AND ACTIONS; EXECUTIVE SESSIONS.
   (a)   All meetings of a board shall be open to the public unless pertaining
to matters authorized under the Texas Open Meetings Act, as amended, to be
discussed in executive session. All actions of the board shall be public and
sufficient copies of the minutes shall be made available by the coordinating
city staff member to the news media and other interested persons upon request.
   (b)   When meeting in executive session, a board shall publicly announce the
category under the Texas Open Meetings Act that permits the executive session,
tape record the executive session, and comply with all other requirements of
the Texas Open Meetings Act applicable to executive sessions.
   (c)   A printed agenda of items to be considered at each regular meeting
shall be posted for public inspection at least three days prior to the meeting.
   (d)   A board that has rulemaking or quasi-judicial power shall allow any
member of the public to address the board regarding any item on the board's
posted agenda at a designated time before or during the board's consideration
of the item. A board may adopt reasonable rules regarding the public's right to
address the body, including rules that limit the total amount of time that a
member of the public may address the body.
   (e)   If a board that has rulemaking or quasi-judicial power adopts a rule
placing a time limit on public comments, any member of the public requiring the
use of a translator to relay public comments shall be afforded twice the amount
of time as a member of the public who does not require a translator.
   (f)   Compliance with this section shall be the responsibility of the city
department designated to provide staff support to the board. The city secretary
shall be responsible for establishing guidelines for the security of all tapes
on which board executive sessions are recorded pursuant to Subsection (b).
(Ord. Nos. 14180; 20302; 20488; 30555; 31350)
SEC. 8-7.   NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
   Notice of all special and regular meetings of the board shall be published
in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-8.   REPORT OF MINUTES.
   Each board shall submit to the city secretary, within five days following
each regular and special meeting the following:
   (a)   a list of members absent from the meeting; and
   (b)   the approved minutes of each meeting, signed by the presiding officer.
(Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488; 30555)
ARTICLE III.
OFFICERS AND THEIR DUTIES.
SEC. 8-9.   CHAIR AND VICE-CHAIR.
   (a)   The chair shall preside at all meetings of the board. In the absence
of the chair, the vice-chair shall exercise the powers of the chair. The
seniority of the vice-chairs, if more than one, must be stipulated at the time
of their selections. If no chair or vice-chair is available, the board may
appoint a temporary chair. The first adjournment puts an end to this
appointment.
   (b)   The presiding officer shall rule on points of order and procedures
that are brought up in board meetings.
   (c)   If the chair and all vice-chairs are absent at the beginning of a
meeting, the board shall elect a temporary chair.
   (d)   In debate the chair must be referred to by official title and be
addressed by prefixing Mr. or Madam, as the case may be, to that title.
   (e)   Unless specifically provided otherwise in the ordinance or city
charter provision creating a particular board:
      (1)   The mayor shall appoint the chair of each board from among the
members appointed, subject to confirmation by the city council, and the vice-
chair of every board of the city must be appointed by the full city council,
unless otherwise provided in state law, city charter, or city code;
      (2)   no city board may have more than one vice-chair appointed to serve
on it at any given time, unless otherwise provided in state law, city charter,
or city code;
      (3)   the term of appointment for a chair or vice-chair must run
concurrently with his or her term of appointment to the board; and
      (4)   Notwithstanding paragraph (3) of this section, the chair or vice-
chair may be removed from the position of chair or vice-chair for any cause the
city council deems sufficient for removal in the interest of the public, but
only after a public hearing before the city council on charges publicly made,
if demanded by such member within 10 days. Removal of the position of chair or
vice chair does not affect the member's term of appointment to the board. (Ord.
Nos. 14180; 18997; 20488; 22259; 30555)
SEC. 8-10.   PRESERVATION OF ORDER.
   The chair shall preserve order and decorum and shall appoint a sergeant-at-
arms and a deputy to enforce compliance with the rules contained in this
chapter. The chair shall require members of the board engaged in debate to
limit discussion to the question under consideration. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-11.   QUESTIONS TO BE STATED.
   The chair shall state all questions submitted for a vote, call for an
affirmative and negative vote, and announce the result. A roll call vote shall
be taken upon the request of any member. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-12.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. Nos. 18997; 20488)
ARTICLE IV.
DUTIES AND PRIVILEGES OF MEMBERS.
SEC. 8-13.   RIGHT TO FLOOR.
   When recognized by the chair, a member shall confine remarks to the question
under debate, avoid personalities, and refrain from impugning the motives of
any other member’s argument or vote. No member shall address the chair or
demand the floor while a vote is being taken. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-14.   FINANCIAL INTEREST.
   (a)   A member stopped from voting on a matter for reasons of financial
interest shall:
      (1)   refrain from discussing the matter at any time with any other
member of the board or any other body that will consider the matter;
      (2)   leave the room during debate and hearing; and
      (3)   refrain from voting on the matter.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Subsection (a), a member of the board of directors of
a reinvestment zone established under the Tax Increment Financing Act, as
amended, may:
      (1)   own property within that reinvestment zone; and
      (2)   participate in discussions and voting on matters before the board
of directors that may directly or indirectly affect the member’s property
within the reinvestment zone. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 18560; 20488; 21961)
SEC. 8-14.1.   CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   The confidentiality of any file, record, or other data received by a
board that pertains to a land purchase, security, personnel, or legal matter
shall be strictly maintained by every member.
   (b)   A member commits an offense if the member discloses to another person
confidential information obtained in the course of board duties.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the
disclosure was made:
      (1)   to another member of the same board or to city staff assigned to
the board; or
      (2)   as compelled testimony in a court proceeding.
   (d)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.
   (e)   Any board member determined by the city council to have violated this
section shall forfeit membership on the board. A board member required to
forfeit board membership under this section is entitled to a public hearing in
accordance with Section 17, Chapter XXIV of the city charter. (Ord. Nos. 19924;
20488)
SEC. 8-15.   RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   A member may appeal to the board from a ruling of the chair. If the appeal
is seconded, the member making the appeal may briefly state reasons for the
appeal and the chair may briefly explain the ruling, but there shall be no
debate on the appeal and no other member shall participate in the discussion.
The chair shall then put the question, “Shall the decision of the chair be
sustained?” If a majority of the members present vote “Aye,” the ruling of the
chair is sustained; otherwise it is overruled. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-16.   LIMITATION OF DEBATE.
   No member shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any one subject
until every other member choosing to speak on the subject has spoken, and no
member shall speak more than twice upon any one subject, nor for a longer time
than five minutes, without a two-thirds affirmative vote of the board. (Ord.
Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-17.   VOTING.
   Every member present when a question is put shall vote either “yes” or “no,”
unless the member is prevented from voting because of conflict of interests. A
member who is absent from the meeting during a vote and returns to or arrives
at the meeting before adjournment shall, upon returning or arriving, vote on
the question for the record unless prevented from voting by a conflict of
interests. A member recorded present during a meeting who does not vote and who
is not prevented from voting by a conflict of interests shall be recorded as
having voted in the affirmative, unless the member has obtained the consent of
the chair to leave the meeting and is absent for the remainder of the meeting.
(Ord. Nos. 14180; 14326; 20488)
SEC. 8-18.   DEMAND FOR ROLL CALL.
   Upon demand from any member, made before the negative has been put, the roll
shall be called for “Yeas” and “Nays” upon any question before the board. It
shall not be in order for members to explain their votes during the roll call.
(Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-19.   PERSONAL PRIVILEGE.
   The right of a member to address the board on a question of personal
privilege shall be limited to cases in which the member’s integrity, character,
or motives are assailed, questioned, or impugned. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-20.   ATTENDANCE.
   (a)   No member shall be excused from attendance at a board meeting, unless
for medical reasons certified to by a physician or unless excused by the board
and the city council. More than three unexcused absences in succession shall
result in a forfeiture.
   (b)   A member of the board that meets weekly or semi-monthly, who is absent
from more than 25 percent of the regular meetings in any six-month period,
whether excused or not, shall result in a forfeiture.
   (c)   A member of a board that meets monthly, who is absent from more than
25 percent of the regular meetings during any 12-month period, whether excused
or not, shall result in a forfeiture.
   (d)   An office that has been forfeited under the provisions of this section
shall be filled for the remainder of the term by appointment of the city
council.
   (e)   For purposes of this section, the record of a member's absences will
begin with the first regular meeting after the 15th day from the date the
member received notice of appointment. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 15848; 20488; 30555)
SEC. 8-20.1.   SPECIAL ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   If a board or commission, as part of its decision-making process, schedules
an inspection trip to the location of a matter that is to be considered by the
board or commission at that day's meeting, a member will be counted absent
unless:
      (1)   the member attends both the inspection trip and the meeting;
      (2)   the member represents that a personal inspection has been made of
each location visited by the inspection trip and attends the meeting; or
      (3)   the board or commission, by rule, provides otherwise. (Ord. Nos.
17948; 20488; 30555)
SEC. 8-21.   EXCUSAL DURING MEETING.
   (a)    A member who leaves a board meeting after the board has been duly
called to order and is absent for the remainder of the meeting, without first
obtaining the consent of the chair, shall be charged with an unexcused absence
for that meeting. The consent of the chair may be given only in an emergency
beyond the control of the member that requires the member to leave the meeting.
   (b)   If a member is absent from more than 50 percent of a regular meeting,
the member will be deemed absent and the absence will count against the member,
unless the board, by rule, provides otherwise. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 14326; 20488;
30555)
ARTICLE V.
CODE OF CONDUCT.
SEC. 8-22.   BOARD MEMBERS.
   (a)   During board meetings, board members shall preserve order and decorum
and shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the
proceedings nor refuse to obey the orders of the chair or the rules of the
board.
   (b)   Every board member desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon
recognition by the chair, shall limit remarks to the question under debate and
shall avoid discussion of personalities and indecorous language.
   (c)   A board member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted while
speaking unless called to order by the chair, except when a point of order is
raised by another member or the speaker chooses to yield to questions from
another member. If a board member is called to order while speaking, the member
shall cease speaking immediately until the question of order is determined. If
ruled to be in order, the member shall be permitted to proceed. If ruled to be
not in order, the member shall remain silent or otherwise comply with rules of
the board.
   (d)   All members of the board shall accord the utmost courtesy to each
other, to city employees, and to members of the public appearing before the
board and shall refrain at all times from rude and derogatory remarks,
reflection as to integrity, abusive comments, and statements as to motives and
personalities.
   (e)   Board members shall confine their questions as to the particular
matters before the assembly and, in debate, shall confine their remarks to the
issues before the board.
   (f)   Members shall be removed from the meeting for failure to comply with
decisions of the chair or continued violations of the rules of the board. If
the chair fails to act, any member may move to require the chair to enforce the
rules, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the board shall require the
chair to act. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-23.   ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF.
   (a)   Members of the administrative staff and employees of the city may
attend board meetings but shall observe the same rules of procedure and decorum
applicable to members of the board.
   (b)   All remarks and questions addressed to the board by a staff member
shall be addressed to the board as a whole and not to any individual member.
   (c)   No staff member, other than a staff member having the floor, shall
enter into discussion either directly or indirectly without permission of the
chair. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-24.   NEWS MEDIA MEMBERS.
   (a)   During the conduct of official business, members of the news media
shall occupy spaces allocated for them.
   (b)   Members of the news media shall refrain from conversing privately with
other persons in the meeting room during the conduct of official business.
   (c)   Interview of persons attending board meetings shall be conducted
outside the meeting room. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-25.   MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC.
   (a)   Citizens are welcome to attend all official meetings of city boards
and will be admitted to the meeting room up to the fire safety capacity of the
room.
   (b)   Members of the public attending board meetings shall observe the same
rules of propriety, decorum, and good conduct applicable to members of the
board. Any person making personal, impertinent, and slanderous remarks, or who
becomes boisterous while addressing the board or while attending the board
meeting, shall be removed from the room if the sergeant-at-arms is so directed
by the chair, and the person shall be barred from attendance for the balance of
the meeting.
   (c)   Unauthorized remarks from the audience, stamping of feet, whistles,
yells, and similar demonstrations shall not be permitted by the chair, who
shall direct the sergeant-at-arms to remove offenders from the room. Aggravated
cases shall be prosecuted on appropriate complaint signed by the chair. If the
chair fails to act, any member of the board may move to require the chair to
act to enforce the rules, and the affirmative vote of the majority of the board
shall require the chair to act. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
ARTICLE VI.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
SEC. 8-26.   BOARD RECOMMENDATIONS.
   (a)   All recommendations, resolutions, reports, and findings of a board
shall be submitted through established administrative procedures within the
city to the appropriate city department or the city council. In no event shall
the members of the board, either individually or as a board, circumvent the
administrative procedure through which such information is to pass. If no
action is taken, or the resolution or suggestion is not properly passed to the
city council or appropriate city officials, then, upon motion duly made,
seconded, and passed by a majority of the members, the chair of the board shall
be directed and authorized to make known the wishes of the board to the city
council or appropriate city official.
   (b)   Unless approved by the city council, members of a board, either
individually or as a board, shall not present board recommendations,
resolutions, reports, or findings to persons or agencies outside the city
organization except in the ordinary course of official board meetings. (Ord.
Nos. 14180; 16226; 20488)
SEC. 8-27.   DEALINGS WITH CITY EMPLOYEES.
   Under no circumstances shall members of a board or commission interfere in
any manner with the employees or personnel who work with or under the board,
but they shall in all cases make their wishes known to the head of the
department, who shall handle the matter with employees the same as in other
employee-personnel problems. The board shall confine itself to the guidelines
provided in the charter, appointing ordinance, or resolution that sets out the
duties of the board. (Ord. Nos. 14180; 20488)
SEC. 8-28.   LEGAL OPINIONS.
   If a legal opinion has been rendered by the city attorney regarding a
board’s powers, duties, or responsibilities, that board shall conform its
actions in accordance with the opinion of the city attorney unless such opinion
is in conflict with a decision by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord.
21132)
CHAPTER 8A
BOARDING HOME FACILITIES
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
8A-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
8A-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
8A-3.   Authority of director.
ARTICLE II.
ADMINISTRATIVE.
Sec.
8A-4.   License required.
Sec.
8A-5.   Exemptions.
Sec.
8A-6.   License application.
Sec.
8A-7.   Notification of change of information.
Sec.
8A-8.   Fees.
Sec.
8A-9.   Issuance and denial of license.
Sec.
8A-10.   Prohibition of new residents; suspension of license.
Sec.
8A-11.   Revocation of license.
Sec.
8A-12.   Appeals of denials, suspensions, and revocations.
Sec.
8A-13.   Expiration and renewal of license.
Sec.
8A-14.   Nontransferability.
Sec.
8A-15.   Records.
Sec.
8A-16.   Posting requirements.
Sec.
8A-17.   Emergency response information.
Sec.
8A-18.   Failure to pay ad valorem taxes, fees, fines, and penalties.
Sec.
8A-19.   Reasonable accommodations.
Sec.
8A-20.   Inspections; fees.
Sec.
8A-21.   Reports to the Texas Health and Human Services Commission.
Sec.
8A-21.1.   When written notice is deemed delivered.
ARTICLE III.
STRUCTURE AND MAINTENANCE.
Sec.
8A-22.   Construction, remodeling, and maintenance.
Sec.
8A-23.   Sleeping rooms.
Sec.
8A-24.   Bathroom facilities.
Sec.
8A-25.   Telephone.
Sec.
8A-26.   Laundry facilities.
Sec.
8A-27.   Kitchen.
Sec.
8A-28.   Dining room.
ARTICLE IV.
RESIDENT HEALTH AND SAFETY.
Sec.
8A-29.   Emergency precautions.
Sec.
8A-30.   Water quality.
Sec.
8A-31.   Linens and laundry.
Sec.
8A-32.   Poisonous, toxic, and flammable materials.
Sec.
8A-33.   Food and drink; meals.
Sec.
8A-34.   Policies and procedures to ensure resident health and safety.
Sec.
8A-35.   Assistance with self-administration of medication.
Sec.
8A-36.   Requirements for in-service education of boarding home facility staff.
Sec.
8A-37.   Criminal history.
Sec.
8A-38.   Qualifications to own, operate, or work in facilities with persons
recovering from substance or alcohol abuse.
Sec.
8A-39.   Assessment and periodic monitoring of residents.
ARTICLE V.
ENFORCEMENT.
Sec.
8A-40.   Violations; penalty.
Sec.
8A-41.   Retaliation against residents prohibited.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 8A-1.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purposes of this chapter are to ensure that:
      (1)   residents of boarding home facilities live in safe, sanitary, and
decent housing;
      (2)   these residents are not abused, neglected, or exploited by the
owners, operators, or employees of boarding home facilities;
      (3)   adequate fire-rescue and police personnel and vehicles are
available to serve these residents; and
      (4)   the city can identify and facilitate appropriate responses for
residents who may require special assistance during an emergency or at any
other time.
   (b)   The city is accomplishing those purposes by implementing standards for
construction, maintenance, reporting, record-keeping, education, and care for
the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of residents of boarding home
facilities. These standards are implemented pursuant to the city’s home-rule
authority under Article XI, Section 5 of the Texas Constitution and the
authority to license lawful businesses subject to the city’s police power
granted by Sections 54.004 and 215.075 of the Texas Local Government Code.
   (c)   The city council also intends that this chapter fully comply with the
Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (“FHAA”), as amended, the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990 (“ADA”), as amended, and all other applicable
state and federal legislation. It is the express intent of the city council
that this chapter be construed in a manner consistent with the FHAA, the ADA,
and all other applicable state and federal legislation at all times. (Ord.
28706)
SEC. 8A-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, in this chapter:
      (1)   ABUSE means:
         (A)   the negligent or wilful infliction of injury, unreasonable
confinement, intimidation, or cruel punishment with resulting physical or
emotional harm or pain to a resident by the person’s caretaker, family member,
or other individual who has an on- going relationship with the person; or
         (B)   sexual abuse of a resident, including any involuntary or non-
consensual sexual conduct that would constitute an offense under Section 21.08
of the Texas Penal Code (indecent exposure), as amended, or Chapter 22 of the
Texas Penal Code (assaultive offenses), as amended, committed by the person’s
caretaker, family member, or other individual who has an on-going relationship
with the person.
      (2)   ALCOHOL means any beverage containing more than one-half of one
percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes,
either alone or when diluted.
      (3)   ASSISTANCE WITH SELF- ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION means:
         (A)   assisting a resident by reminding the resident to take
medication;
         (B)   opening and removing medications from a container;
         (C)   placing medication in a resident’s hand or in or on a clean
surface such as a medication reminder box; and
         (D)   reminding a resident when a prescription medication needs to be
refilled.
      (4)   BOARDING HOME FACILITY means an establishment that:
         (A)   furnishes, in one or more buildings, lodging to three or more
persons who are unrelated to the owner of the establishment by blood or
marriage; and
         (B)   provides community meals, light housework, meal preparation,
transportation, grocery shopping, money management, laundry services, or
assistance with self-administration of medication but does not provide personal
care services to those persons.
      (5)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE means a substance regulated under 21 C.F.R. §
1308, as amended.
      (6)   CONVICTION means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any
state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation
that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. "Conviction" includes
disposition of charges against a person by probation or deferred adjudication.
      (7)   DEPARTMENT means the department designated by the city manager to
enforce and administer this chapter.
      (8)   DIRECT THREAT means a significant risk to the health or safety of
one or more individuals that cannot be eliminated by a modification of
policies, practices, or procedures, or by the provision of auxiliary aids or
service.
      (9)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter and includes
representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director.
      (10)   DISABILITY means a disability as defined in 42 U.S.C. § 12102, as
amended.
      (11)   EMERGENCY CONDITION means any fire, natural disaster, collapse
hazard, burst pipe, leaking sewage, lack of working utilities, dangerous
utilities, serious police incident, or other condition that requires an
immediate response to prevent harm to the property, the occupants of the
property, or the public.
      (12)   EMPLOYEE means any individual who performs caretaking duties or
regularly works in a boarding home facility for any form of compensation or
consideration.
      (13)   EXPLOITATION means the illegal or improper act or process of an
owner, operator, employee, caretaker, family member, or other individual who
has an on-going relationship with the resident using the resources of a
resident for monetary or personal benefit, profit, or gain without the informed
voluntary consent of the resident.
      (14)   GOOD NEIGHBOR AGREEMENT means a contract between the city and a
licensee whereby the city agrees to defer one or more forms of enforcement
action in consideration for the licensee agreeing to perform actions, or
refrain from performing actions, that are not already required or prohibited by
city ordinance, rule, or regulation, or any county, state, or federal law or
regulation and that enhances the peace, health, safety, good morals, and
general welfare of the residents and employees of the boarding home facility
and the surrounding community.
      (15)   INJURY, INCIDENT, OR UNUSUAL ACCIDENT means an event that occurred
in the boarding home facility, on the grounds of the boarding home facility, or
under the licensee's supervision and resulted in a change in a resident's
physical or mental status that requires intervention by a private or public
entity responsible for medical or mental health services or an event that
requires the facility to take safety and protection measures for the resident
or others. This term includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         (A)   An allegation of abuse, neglect, or exploitation.
         (B)   Death.
         (C)   A resident's unexplained absence from the boarding home
facility.
         (D)   Fire.
         (E)   Criminal acts.
         (F)   Fights between residents.
      (16)   LICENSEE means:
         (A)   a person in whose name a boarding home facility license has been
issued;
         (B)   each individual listed as an owner or operator of the boarding
home facility on a pending or approved application for a boarding home facility
license;
         (C)   each individual who has a 20 percent or greater ownership
interest in the corporation or other legal entity owning or operating the
boarding home facility, regardless of whether the individual's name or
signature appears on the pending or approved boarding home facility license
application;
         (D)    each officer, director, and board member of the corporation or
other legal entity owning or operating a boarding home facility, regardless of
whether the individual's name or signature appears on the pending or approved
boarding home facility license application; and
         (E)   each individual that exercises substantial de facto control over
a boarding home facility regardless of whether the individual's name or
signature appears on the pending or approved boarding home facility license
application.
      (17)   NEGLECT means the failure of a resident or licensee to provide
goods or services, including medical services, that are necessary to avoid
physical or emotional harm or pain.
      (17.1)   OPERATE means to manage, run, or be in control of a boarding
home facility.
      (18)   OPERATOR means any person exerting control over a boarding home
facility, including, any sole proprietor, his or her agent, and any officer,
director, board member, staff member, or agent of a corporation or other legal
entity who has managerial control of the on-site, day-to-day operations of a
boarding home facility, regardless of whether that person is listed as an
operator on the boarding home facility license application.
      (18.1)   OWN means a right by law to possess, manage, sell, or donate
property.
      (19)   OWNER means an individual who owns a boarding home facility as a
sole proprietorship, an individual who has 20 percent or greater ownership
interest in a corporation or other legal entity that owns or operates a
boarding home facility, a non-profit entity that owns or operates a boarding
home facility, or the owner of the real property where a boarding home facility
is located.
      (20)   PERSONAL CARE SERVICES means:
         (A)   assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing, or other
personal needs or maintenance;
         (B)   the administration of medication by a person licensed to
administer medication or the assistance with or supervision of medication; or
         (C)   general supervision or oversight of the physical and mental
well-being of a person who needs assistance to maintain a private and
independent residence in an assisted living facility or who needs assistance to
manage the person’s personal life, regardless of whether a guardian has been
appointed for the person.
      (21)   RESIDENT means a person who is residing in a boarding home
facility.
      (22)   VOLUNTEER means a person who is not an employee and works at or
for a boarding home facility without any expectation of or entitlement to any
form of compensation. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-3.   AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this chapter and may by written
order establish such rules, regulations, or procedures, not inconsistent with
this chapter or other city ordinances, rules, or regulations, or any county,
state, or federal laws or regulations, as the director determines are necessary
to discharge any duty under or to effect the policy of this chapter. (Ord.
28706, eff. 10-1-12)
ARTICLE II.
ADMINISTRATIVE.
SEC. 8A-4.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he owns or operates a boarding home
facility in the city without a valid license issued under this chapter. A
separate license is required for each boarding home facility that a person
operates.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a person operates
a boarding home facility while an application under Section
8A-6 is pending.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a person operates
a facility listed in Section
8A-5 of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753; 32397)
SEC. 8A-5.   EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   This chapter does not apply to the following:
      (1)   Home and community support services licensed under Chapter 142 of
the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (2)   Convalescent and nursing homes and related institutions licensed
under Chapter 242 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (3)   Continuing care facilities licensed under Chapter 246 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (4)   Assisted living facilities licensed under Chapter 247 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (5)   Intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded licensed
under Chapter 252 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (6)   A person that provides home health, hospice, or personal assistance
services only to persons enrolled in a program funded wholly or partly by a
state agency with jurisdiction over mental health and mental disability and
monitored by that state agency or its designated local authority in accordance
with standards set by that agency.
      (7)   An establishment conducted by or for persons who have a sincere
religious belief in providing facilities to care and treat the sick by
depending exclusively on prayer or spiritual means for healing, without the use
of any drug or material remedy, if the establishment complies with safety,
sanitary, and quarantine laws and rules including Sections
8A-22,
8A-23,
8A-24,
8A-27(h),
8A-29,
8A-30,
8A-31,
8A-32,
8A-33, and
8A-34 of this chapter.
      (8)   A hotel as defined by Section 156.001 of the Texas Tax Code, as
amended.
      (9)   A retirement community as defined by Section 11.18 of the Texas Tax
Code, as amended.
      (10)   A monastery or convent as defined by Section
51A-4.204 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (11)   A child-care facility as defined by Section 42.002 of the Texas
Human Resources Code, as amended.
      (12)   A family violence shelter center as defined by Section 51.002 of
the Texas Human Resources Code, as amended.
      (13)   A college dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house as defined by
Section
51A-4.209 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (14)   A facility listed in this section with a pending application for a
state license falling within one of the above-listed exemption categories.
   (b)   The director may inspect an establishment described in Subsection (a)
(7) for the purpose of ascertaining whether any violations of any safety,
sanitary, and quarantine laws and rules, including Sections
8A-22,
8A-23,
8A-24,
8A-27(h),
8A-29,
8A-30,
8A-31,
8A-32,
8A-33, and
8A-34 of this chapter exist. If the director identifies any violation or if the
owner, occupant, or person in control of the establishment denies permission to
search any part of the interior or exterior of the structure or the surrounding
premises, the establishment is not exempt from the application of Sections
8A-4(a),
8A-40, or any other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-6.   LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a license to operate a boarding home facility, a person must
submit an application to the director on a form provided for that purpose. The
applicant must be the owner or operator of the boarding home facility. If the
owner or operator is not an individual, an authorized officer or agent of the
owner or operator must file the form. The application must contain the
following information and be accompanied by the fee, if any, required under
Section
8A-8 of this chapter before it is considered to be complete:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address,
telephone number, a legible copy of the driver's license or other official
state or federal identification card, and date of birth of the applicant. The
street address may not be the address of the boarding home facility unless the
applicant actually resides full-time at the boarding home facility.
      (2)   The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address,
telephone number, a legible copy of the driver's license or other official
state or federal identification card, and position of the authorized officer or
agent filing the form on behalf of the applicant, if the applicant is not an
individual. The street address may not be the address of the boarding home
facility unless the authorized officer or agent actually resides full-time at
the boarding home facility.
      (3)   The form of business of the applicant; the name, street address,
mailing address, e-mail address, telephone number, a legible copy of the
driver's license or other official state or federal identification card, and
date of birth of a high managerial agent of the business; and, if the business
is a legal entity, such as a corporation or association, a copy of the
documents establishing the business.
      (4)   The street address and telephone number of the boarding home
facility.
      (5)   The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address, and
telephone number of a person or persons to contact in an emergency as required
by Section
8A-17 of this chapter.
      (6)   Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes, fees, fines,
and penalties owed to the city in connection with the boarding home facility or
documentary evidence that the applicant is current on a payment plan for any
back ad valorem taxes, fees, fines, and penalties owed to the city in
connection with the boarding home facility.
      (7)   The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, e-mail addresses,
telephone numbers, legible copies of the drivers' licenses or other official
state or federal identification cards, and dates of birth of any owners,
operators, employees, and volunteers of the boarding home facility other than
the applicant. The street address may not be the address of the boarding home
facility, unless the owner, operator, or employee actually resides full-time at
the boarding home facility.
      (8)   If the owner or operator of the boarding home facility is not also
the owner of the property on which the boarding home facility is located, a
letter signed by the owner of the property stating that the applicant has
permission to operate a boarding home facility on the property and
acknowledging the requirements for the property to be used as a boarding home
facility as set forth in this chapter. If the owner of the property is an
entity, the letter must be on official letterhead and signed by an officer of
the entity or other person with the authority to make binding representations
on the entity's behalf regarding the use of the property.
      (9)   Criminal history reports for each owner, operator, employee, and
volunteer of the boarding home facility showing that they are not disqualified
to own, operate, or work at a boarding home facility under Section 8A-37 of
this chapter. Such reports must include a current official Texas criminal
history report (issued within the preceding 12 months) for each owner,
operator, employee, and volunteer of the boarding home facility as well as an
official criminal history report issued within the preceding 12 months from all
other states in which an owner, operator, employee, or volunteer has resided
within the past 10 years.
      (10)   The maximum number of residents that will reside at the boarding
home facility.
      (11)   The services to be offered or provided to the residents of the
boarding home facility.
      (12)   Proof that the proposed use of the property complies with the
Dallas Development Code.
      (13)   If the boarding home facility has one or more residents with a
disability, a list of the categories of disabilities of the residents (vision
impairment, hearing impairment, mobility impairment, dementia, and other).
      (14)   A sworn certification from the applicant, owner, or operator that
the boarding home facility does not have, and will not have, any residents with
an addiction to alcohol or a controlled substance, or alternatively, a document
that describes the applicant's, owner's, or operator's plan for ensuring that
the residents who are addicted to alcohol or a controlled substance, or who are
recovering from such an addiction, refrain from using alcohol or the controlled
substance, including all rules by which residents must abide, as required by
Section
8A-34 of this chapter.
      (15)   A statement that, by filing the application, the applicant swears
or affirms under penalty of perjury that, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge, all information contained in the application is true and correct and
that the application is complete and includes all information required to be
disclosed under this section.
      (16)   A survey showing the location and distances of the boarding home
facility from other boarding home facilities and group dwelling facilities
located within 2,000 feet. For purposes of this paragraph, group dwelling
facility includes a group residential facility and handicapped group dwelling
unit, as those terms are defined in Section
51A-4.209 of the Dallas City Code. For purposes of this paragraph, the distance
between uses is measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, between the nearest boundaries of the building sites on
which the uses are located. (Note: The spacing component of these regulations
is based, not on the handicapped status of the residents, but on the non-family
status of the groups.)
      (17)   Such additional information as the applicant desires to include or
that the director deems necessary to aid in the determination of whether the
requested license should be granted.
   (b)   If the applicant failed to provide all of the information required by
Subsection (a) or to pay the fee required by Section
8A-8 of this chapter, the director shall give the applicant notice in writing
by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the application's deficiencies.
   (c)   The application will automatically expire if either the fee or the
information requested in Subsection (b) is not provided to the director within
30 days of the date written notice was sent to applicant by the director.
   (d)   The director, at his sole discretion, may extend the 30-day deadline
to provide the fee or information requested in Subsection (b). (Ord. Nos.
28706; 29753; 32397)
SEC. 8A-7.   NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE OF INFORMATION.
   The licensee shall notify the director within 10 days after any material
change in the information contained in the application for a license to operate
a boarding home facility, including any change in ownership or operation of the
property, any new criminal convictions or charges brought against a boarding
home facility's owners, operators, employees, or volunteers and any new
categories of disabilities served by the boarding home facility. (Ord. Nos.
28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-8.   FEES.
   (a)   The fee for a license to operate a boarding home facility is $889.
   (b)   No refund of a license fee will be made. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753;
32397; 32556)
SEC. 8A-9.   ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Approval. Upon the submission of a complete application, the director
shall issue a license to operate a boarding home facility to the applicant if
the director determines:
      (1)   the applicant has complied with all requirements for issuance of
the license;
      (2)   the applicant, owners, operators, employees, and volunteers of the
boarding home facility meet the criminal history qualifications of Section
8A-37 of this chapter;
      (3)   the applicant, owners, operators, or employees of the boarding home
facility do not own or operate another licensed boarding home facility in the
city for which the license is currently suspended or has been revoked within
the past 12 months;
      (4)   the applicant has not made a false statement as to a material
matter in the application for a license;
      (5)   the condition and use of the boarding home facility comply with the
zoning regulations in the Dallas Development Code, the minimum housing
standards in
Chapter 27, and the standards in this chapter applicable to the property;
      (6)   the applicant, owners, and operators are not delinquent in any ad
valorem taxes, fees, fines, or penalties owed to the city in relation to the
property where the boarding home facility is located or have established and
are current on a payment plan for any delinquent ad valorem taxes, fees, fines,
or penalties owed; and
      (7)   the applicant, owners, and operators of the boarding home facility
have not had a license for that boarding home facility revoked within the past
12 months.
   (b)   Denial. The director shall deny the license if:
      (1)   the director determines that the requirements of Subsection (a)
have not been met; or
      (2)   the boarding home facility is located within 2,000 feet of another
boarding home facility or group dwelling facility.
         (A)   This paragraph does not apply to a boarding home facility
licensed before February 22, 2023 and that continuously maintains a boarding
home license.
         (B)   For purposes of this paragraph, group dwelling facility includes
a group residential facility and handicapped group dwelling unit, as those
terms are defined in Section
51A-4.209 of the Dallas City Code. For purposes of this paragraph, the distance
between uses is measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, between the nearest boundaries of the building sites on
which the uses are located. (Note: The spacing component of these regulations
is based, not on the handicapped status of the residents, but on the non-family
status of the groups.)
   (c)   Notification. If the director determines that an applicant should be
denied a license, the director shall notify the applicant in writing by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that the application is denied and
include in the notice the reason for denial and a statement informing the
applicant of the right to appeal. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753; 32397)
SEC. 8A-10.   PROHIBITION OF NEW RESIDENTS; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The director may suspend a boarding home facility license for a period
not to exceed 90 days if the director finds that:
      (1)   the licensee or employee of the boarding home facility failed to
comply with any provision of this chapter, any other ordinance, or any state or
federal law applicable to the operation of a boarding home facility;
      (2)   the licensee or employee of the boarding home facility
intentionally or knowingly impeded or refused to allow an inspection by the
director authorized under this chapter; or
      (3)   the possession, use, or sale of a controlled substance occurs at a
boarding home facility.
   (b)   A boarding home facility for which the license has been suspended must
provide a list of current residents to the director on the first day of the
suspension and may not admit new residents during the time the license is
suspended.
   (c)   The director, at his sole discretion, may enter into a good neighbor
agreement with a licensee if the director determines that the good neighbor
agreement would eliminate the noncompliance that would otherwise justify a
suspension, result in prompt future inspections, and elevate one or more
conditions at the boarding home facility to a standard above the requirements
of this chapter.
   (d)   The director shall send to the licensee by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a written statement of the reasons for the suspension, the
date the suspension is to begin, the duration of the suspension, and the
licensee’s right to appeal.
   (e)   A licensee whose license is suspended may not be granted a license to
operate additional boarding home facilities during the period of suspension.
   (f)   A licensee commits an offense if he operates or owns a boarding home
facility that admits new residents during the time that the suspension of the
license is in effect. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-11.   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b), the director shall revoke any
license issued to operate a boarding home facility if the director determines
that:
      (1)   the licensee fails to meet the criminal history qualifications of
Section
8A-37 of this chapter or allows an employee or volunteer to work at the
facility who fails to meet the criminal history qualifications;
      (2)   the licensee intentionally made a false statement as to a material
matter in the application or in a hearing concerning the license;
      (3)   the licensee failed to pay a fee required by this chapter at the
time it was due; or
      (4)   a cause for suspension under Section
8A-10 has occurred and the license has already been suspended at least once
within the preceding 12 months.
   (b)   The director, at his sole discretion, may enter into a good neighbor
agreement with a licensee if the director determines that the good neighbor
agreement would eliminate the noncompliance that would otherwise justify a
revocation, result in prompt future inspections, and elevate one or more
conditions at the boarding home facility to a standard above the requirements
of this chapter.
   (c)   Before revoking a license under Subsection (a), the director shall
notify the licensee in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested,
that the license is being considered for revocation. The notice must include
the reason for the proposed revocation, action the licensee must take, if any,
to prevent the revocation, and a statement that the licensee has 10 days to
comply with the notice.
   (d)   If, after 10 days from the date of the notice required in Subsection
(c) was sent or delivered, the licensee has not complied with required actions
listed in the notice, the director shall revoke the license and notify the
licensee in writing of the revocation by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The notice must include the reason for the revocation, and a
statement informing the licensee of the right of appeal.
   (e)   If a boarding home facility license has been revoked, the licensee may
not apply for a new license for 12 months from the date of revocation.
   (f)   If a boarding home facility license has been revoked, the licensee has
10 days to relocate residents of the facility and cease operations.
   (g)   If a licensee does not relocate residents of the facility within 10
days of revocation of a boarding home facility license, the director may
relocate residents and seek to recover relocation costs from the licensee.
(Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753; 32397)
SEC. 8A-12.   APPEALS OF DENIALS, SUSPENSIONS, AND REVOCATIONS.
   (a)   If the director denies issuance or renewal of a license or suspends or
revokes a license issued under this chapter, the action is final unless the
licensee files an appeal with the permit and license appeal board in accordance
with Section
2-96 of this code.
   (b)   The filing of an appeal stays the action of the director in suspending
or revoking a license, or in denying renewal of a license that was valid on the
date the application for renewal was submitted, until the permit and license
appeal board makes a final decision.
   (c)   A good neighbor agreement may not be appealed.
   (d)   The permit and license appeal board may not impose a good neighbor
agreement in connection with an appeal of a suspension or revocation.
   (e)   The permit and license appeal board shall consider the facts as they
existed at the time of the license denial, suspension, or revocation in making
its decision.
   (f)   The applicant or licensee has the burden of proof on appeal. (Ord.
Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-13.   EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (a)   A license to operate a boarding home facility expires one year after
the date of issuance. A pending application for renewal does not extend the
expiration date of a previously issued license.
   (b)   A licensee shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the license on a form provided by the director. The licensee
shall submit the fee, if any, prescribed by Section
8A-8 of this chapter, supply updated criminal background checks for all owners,
operators, employees, and volunteers in accordance with Sections
8A-6(a)(9) and
8A-37 of this chapter, and update information contained in the original license
application required under Section
8A-6 of this chapter, or any subsequent renewals under this section, if any of
the information has changed. The licensee shall also sign a statement under
penalty of perjury affirming that there is either no change in the information
contained on the original license application and any subsequent renewal
applications, or that the information that has been updated is accurate and
complete.
   (c)   The director shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 8A-
9 when determining whether to renew a license. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-14.   NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   A license to operate a boarding home facility and a license fee under
Section 8A-8 is not transferable to another owner, operator, applicant, or
location. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 32397)
SEC. 8A-15.   RECORDS.
   (a)   The licensee shall maintain the records listed in Subsection (b)
either at the boarding home facility to which the records pertain or at a
single location within the city. The licensee shall make those records
available for inspection by the director or a peace officer at reasonable times
upon request for purposes of administering this chapter.
   (b)   Records that must be maintained by the licensee include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   current records of ownership of the property where the boarding
home facility is located;
      (2)   a copy of any current good neighbor agreement as described in
Sections
8A-10 and
8A-11;
      (3)    a copy of the boarding home facility's privacy policy, as required
by Section
8A-34;
      (4)   records demonstrating compliance with applicable laws and
regulations, as required by Section
8A-20;
      (5)   records documenting that each resident has received training on the
emergency evacuation plan of the boarding home facility at least two times per
calendar year, as required by Section
8A-29;
      (6)   records documenting that each resident was shown how to use all
emergency exits from the facility within 24 hours of arrival at the facility,
as required by Section
8A-30;
      (7)   records documenting the results of water sample testing if the
boarding home facility obtains drinking water from a water well, as required by
Section
8A-30;
      (8)   records documenting the initial screening of potential residents
and the individualized assessments of residents, as required by Section
8A-34;
      (9)   records documenting whether residents have taken, or been reminded
to take, their medication, as required by Section
8A-34;
      (10)   records documenting injuries, incidents, and unusual accidents
that involve residents, as required by Section
8A-34;
      (11)   records documenting any allegations of abuse, neglect, or
exploitation of a resident, as required by Section
8A-34;
      (12)   financial records for each resident for which the licensee is the
representative payee or assists the resident with general money management, as
required by Section
8A-34;
      (13)   a copy of the service agreement signed by each current resident,
as required by Section
8A-34;
      (14)   records documenting required in-service education of boarding home
facility staff;
      (15)   records documenting annual assessment and periodic monitoring of
current residents to determine if residents are capable of self-administering
medication and completing basic elements of personal care, as required by
Section
8A-39;
      (16)   a roll of current residents, including their date of arrival,
assigned room, and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or
entity that referred them to the facility;
      (17)   a roll of former residents, including their date of departure, and
the name, address, and telephone number of the person or entity in control of
the residence to which they moved (if known);
      (18)   records documenting any work-related compensation received by each
resident, as required by Section
8A-34 of this chapter; and
      (19)   any other records deemed necessary by the director for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided, a licensee shall maintain a record that
concerns a resident for three years after the resident no longer resides at the
boarding home facility.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided, a licensee shall maintain a record that
does not concern a resident for three years. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-16.   POSTING REQUIREMENTS.
   The licensee shall prominently and conspicuously post for display in a
public area inside the boarding home facility that is readily available to
residents, the operator, employees, and visitors the following:
      (1)   The license issued under this chapter to operate the boarding home
facility. The license must be presented upon request to the director or to a
peace officer for examination.
      (2)   A sign prescribed by the director specifying how complaints may be
registered with the city.
      (3)   A notice in a form prescribed by the director stating that
inspection reports are available at the facility for public inspection and
providing a telephone number that may be used to obtain information concerning
the facility. The licensee shall redact inspection reports where necessary to
protect residents' privacy.
      (4)   A copy of the most recent inspection report relating to the
facility by the city or a concise and accurate summary of that inspection
report. The licensee shall redact inspection reports where necessary to protect
residents' privacy.
      (5)   A notice in a form prescribed by the director that lists the name,
location, and contact information for:
         (A)   the North Texas Behavioral Health Authority and the closest
local public health services agency in the proximity of the facility; and
         (B)   a local organization or entity that represents, advocates, or
serves elderly persons or persons with disabilities, including any related
toll-free contact information for reporting emergencies to the organization or
entity.
      (6)   Information concerning tenants' rights and responsibilities
including a copy of Article V, "Enforcement," of Chapter 8A, "Boarding Home
Facilities," of the Dallas City Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753;
32397)
SEC. 8A-17.   EMERGENCY RESPONSE INFORMATION.
   (a)   The licensee shall provide the director with the name, street address,
mailing address, e-mail address, and telephone number of a person or persons
who can be contacted 24 hours a day, seven days a week in the event of an
emergency condition on the property where the boarding home facility is
located.
   (b)   The licensee shall notify the director within five days after any
change in the emergency response information.
   (c)   The licensee, or an authorized agent, must arrive at the property
within one hour after a contact person named under this section is notified by
a city employee or emergency response personnel that an emergency condition has
occurred on the property. (Ord. 28706)
SEC. 8A-18.   FAILURE TO PAY AD VALOREM TAXES, FEES, FINES, AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   A licensee commits an offense if he allows any ad valorem taxes, fees,
fines, or penalties owed to the city in connection with the boarding home
facility to become delinquent.
   (b)   It is a defence to prosecution under this section that the licensee
diligently entered into a payment plan and makes regular payments in accordance
with that plan to pay the delinquent ad valorem taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 32397)
SEC. 8A-19.   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS.
   (a)   Purpose. The city, pursuant to the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988
(“FHAA”) 42 U.S.C. § 3601, et seq., as amended, and the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 (“ADA”), 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq., as amended,
intends to ensure that all persons with a disability have an equal opportunity
to use and enjoy a dwelling by providing such persons with reasonable
accommodations in rules, policies, practices, and procedures promulgated under
this chapter. This section allows a person to seek relief from the enforcement
of any regulation contained in this chapter that would result in illegal
discrimination against the disabled.
   (b)   Method of submitting a request for a reasonable accommodation; fees;
confidentiality.
      (1)   A request for a reasonable accommodation may be submitted at any
time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.
      (2)   A request for a reasonable accommodation may be submitted by an
individual with a disability, the person’s representative, or a licensee
providing housing for one or more individuals with disabilities.
      (3)   A request for a reasonable accommodation should be submitted in
writing to the director on a form provided by the department, or in the form of
a letter.
      (4)   There is no fee for an application requesting a reasonable
accommodation.
      (5)   The city will retain any information identified by an applicant as
confidential in compliance with applicable law and will not disclose the
information unless required by law.
      (6)   If an individual needs assistance in making a request for a
reasonable accommodation, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the
application process is accessible to the individual.
   (c)    Application. An applicant shall submit the following information
before an application for a reasonable accommodation is considered to be
complete:
      (1)   The applicant's name, mailing address, street address, telephone
number, and e-mail address.
      (2)   The applicant's relation to the individual or individuals with a
disability, if applicable.
      (3)   The address of the property to which the requested reasonable
accommodation would apply.
      (4)   If the disability is not obvious, information substantiating that
the individual who would obtain the benefit of the reasonable accommodation is
disabled.
      (5)   The section or sections of this chapter from which a reasonable
accommodation is being requested.
      (6)   If the need for the accommodation is not readily apparent, a brief
explanation of why the requested accommodation is necessary for the individual
or individuals with disabilities to have equal access to housing.
   (d)   Review of application by director; required findings; appeals.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a complete application for a reasonable
accommodation, the director shall review the application and issue a written
ruling that grants, grants with conditions, or denies the application.
      (2)   Before making a decision, the director may request an inspection of
the boarding home facility, its records, and the land on which it is located.
If the director makes such a request the applicant must make the property, the
facility, and its records available for the inspection within 20 days after the
date of the request or the application is automatically denied. If the director
deems it necessary to request additional information from the applicant
consistent with federal and state law, the director shall contact the applicant
in writing and specify the additional information that is required. If the
director makes such a request, the applicant shall provide the additional
information to the director within 20 days after the date of the request or the
application is automatically denied.
      (3)   Before making a decision, the director shall consult with the city
attorney and the director of the office of fair housing to determine whether
the accommodation should be granted.
      (4)   The director may impose reasonable conditions on any accommodation
granted consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
      (5)   The written decision must be consistent with the FHAA and based on
a consideration of the following factors:
         (A)   Whether the housing that is the subject of the request will be
used by one or more individuals with a disability.
         (B)   Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make
specific housing available to one or more individuals with a disability.
         (C)   Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue
financial or administrative burden on the city.
         (D)   Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental
alteration in the nature of a city program or law.
         (E)   The potential impacts of the requested accommodation on the
applicant, the other residents of the boarding home facility, and the
surrounding neighborhood.
         (F)   Whether a failure to grant an accommodation would result in the
property having no economically viable use.
         (G)   Whether there are alternative accommodations that are reasonable
and have an equal or less of an impact on the city, the applicant, the other
residents of the boarding home facility, and the surrounding neighborhood.
      (6)   The director shall issue a written decision within 30 days of the
later of receipt of a completed application, provided that the director is able
to issue a decision based on the information provided in the original request;
the completed inspection of the property, facility, and its records, as
requested by the director; or the director's receipt of all additional
information requested.
      (7)   All written decisions must be sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and explain in detail the basis of the decision and notify
the applicant of the right to appeal the director's decision to the permit and
license appeal board.
      (8)   If the director denies an application for a reasonable
accommodation, the action is final unless the applicant files an appeal with
the permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section 2-96 of this
code as if it were a permit. The permit and license appeal board shall consider
the facts as they existed at the time of the director's decision. The applicant
or licensee has the burden of proof on appeal. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-20.   INSPECTIONS; FEES.
   (a)   Required inspections.
      (1)   A boarding home facility must pass all required inspections.
      (2)   The licensee shall keep a current file of reports and other
documentation on site that is needed to demonstrate compliance with applicable
ordinances, laws, and regulations. Inspection records must be signed and dated
by the appropriate authority and there must be no pending corrective actions.
      (3)   The following inspections are required:
         (A)   Licensing inspection.
         (B)   Annual licensing renewal inspection.
         (C)   Annual fire inspection.
         (D)   Annual kitchen inspection for a boarding home facility that
provides meal preparation.
         (E)   A gas pipe pressure test performed every three years by the
local gas company or a licensed plumber for a boarding home facility that
receives natural gas service.
         (F)   Annual inspection of liquefied natural gas systems performed by
an inspector certified by the Texas Railroad Commission for a boarding home
facility with a liquefied natural gas system.
   (b)   Other inspections. The director may inspect any boarding home facility
for the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this chapter or any other
city ordinances exist. The director is authorized at a reasonable time to
inspect:
      (1)   the exterior of a structure and the surrounding premises; and
      (2)   the interior of a structure if the permission of the owner,
occupant, or person in control is given or a search warrant is obtained.
   (c)   Consequences of refusal to inspect. If the owner, occupant, or person
in control denies permission to search any part of the interior or exterior of
the structure or the surrounding premises, the director may suspend the license
to operate a boarding home facility in accordance with Section
8A-10(a)(2).
   (d)   Reinspections. Whenever a boarding home facility is inspected by the
director and a violation of this code is found, the building or premises will,
after the expiration of any time limit for compliance given in the notice or
order issued because of the violation, be reinspected by the director to
determine that the violation has been eliminated.
   (e)   Reinspection fee. The licensee shall pay:
      (1)   to the director of code compliance $150 for each reinspection after
the first reinspection by that department that must be conducted before the
violation is determined to be eliminated; and
      (2)   to the director of any other city department the fee required (if
any) by the applicable code for each reinspection by that department that must
be conducted before the violation is determined to be eliminated. (Ord. Nos.
28706; 32556)
SEC. 8A-21.   REPORTS TO THE TEXAS HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION.
   Before September 30 of each year, the director shall submit a report to the
Texas Health and Human Services Commission. The report must contain the
following information:
      (1)   The total number of boarding home facilities licensed by the city
during the preceding state fiscal year.
      (2)   The total number of boarding home facility applications for which
licenses were denied, including a summary of the causes for denial.
      (3)   The total number of boarding home facility licenses that were
active on August 31 of the preceding state fiscal year.
      (4)   The total number of residents housed in each boarding home facility
reported.
      (5)   The total number of inspections conducted by the city at each
boarding home facility.
      (6)   The total number of licenses suspended or revoked as a result of an
inspection.
      (7)   A summary of the outcome for any residents displaced by suspension
or revocation of a license. (Ord. 28706)
SEC. 8A-21.1.   WHEN WRITTEN NOTICE IS DEEMED DELIVERED.
   (a)   For purposes of this chapter, written notice is deemed to be
delivered:
      (1)   on the date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or
licensee; or
      (2)   three days after the date the notice is placed in the United States
mail with proper postage and properly addressed to the applicant or licensee at
the address provided for the applicant or licensee in the most recent license
application.
   (b)   The fact that the notice is returned undelivered or that the return
receipt is not signed by the addressee shall not affect the validity of the
notice. (Ord. 29753)
ARTICLE III.
STRUCTURE AND MAINTENANCE.
SEC. 8A-22.   CONSTRUCTION, REMODELING, AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   In general. Each licensee shall ensure the residents’ health, safety,
comfort, and protection through the standards contained in this section that
address the construction, remodeling, and maintenance of a boarding home
facility.
   (b)   Applicable regulations. Each boarding home facility must comply with
the following codes and regulations:
      (1)   The Dallas Development Code. [NOTE: A boarding home facility is not
a zoning use and is separate from and unrelated to the lodging or boarding
house use defined in Chapter
51A.]
      (2)   The Dallas Building Code, the Dallas One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Code, or the Dallas Existing Building Code, as applicable.
      (3)   The Dallas Fire Code and any other applicable federal, state, or
local fire codes and standards, as amended.
      (4)   
Articles III and
IV of
Chapter 27, "Minimum Urban Rehabilitation Standards," of the Dallas City Code.
      (5)   Federal, state, and local health and safety codes.
      (6)   Federal and state accessibility regulations.
   (c)   Interior doors. An interior door to a living space, bedroom, bathroom,
or toilet room must fit the opening in which it is hung, be properly equipped
with hardware, and be maintained in good working
condition. Unless a resident has a disability that requires frequent check-ups
by others, a door with a locking device must be provided to provide privacy to
and protection of the resident.
      (1)   Every closet door latch must be such that it can be readily opened
from the inside in case of emergency.
      (2)   Every bathroom door or door lock must permit immediate opening of
the locked door in case of emergency.
   (d)   Public pathways and stairways. A public pathway or stairway in a
building must maintain a minimum unobstructed width in accordance with the
Dallas Fire Code, as amended, and must be provided with a convenient light
switch controlling an adequate light system.
   (e)   Windows and exterior doors.
      (1)   Every habitable room must have at least one window that can be
easily opened, or such other device as will ventilate the room.
      (2)   Locks that can be easily opened manually from inside must be
provided on all exterior doors.
      (3)   All windows must be capable of being opened without tools. Window
openings must meet the requirements of the Dallas Building Code, Dallas
Existing Building Code, the Dallas One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, and the
Dallas Fire Code, as applicable, for emergency egress.
      (4)   The bottom of the window opening must be not more than 44 inches
above the floor in accordance with the Dallas Fire Code, as amended.
      (5)   A door, window, or emergency escape and rescue opening may be
maintained that does not meet the requirements of this subsection upon the
written approval of the fire code official.
   (f)   Maintenance.
      (1)   The licensee shall maintain the dwelling and premises in a clean
and sanitary condition.
      (2)   The licensee shall keep a boarding home facility in good repair and
maintenance in a manner that will promote the health, comfort, safety, and
well-being of residents. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-23.   SLEEPING ROOMS.
   (a)   Sleeping space per person. Each room occupied for sleeping purposes by
one occupant must contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person must contain at
least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant in accordance with
Section
27-15 of this code.
   (b)   Bed spacing. If a boarding home facility has a resident with an
ambulatory impairment, beds must be spaced at least three feet apart when
placed side-by-side or end-to-end.
   (c)   Ceiling height. A sleeping room must have a ceiling height of at least
seven feet in accordance with Section
27-15 of this code.
   (d)   Accessibility. A sleeping room must provide accessibility for non-
ambulatory residents and residents with conditions that substantially limit
ambulation or mobility.
   (e)   Beds.
      (1)   The licensee shall provide one bed for every resident. It is
presumed that the boarding home facility has one resident for every bed present
in the facility, but an inspector may consider other factors and circumstances
in determining the number of residents.
      (2)   All beds must be at least six feet long and three feet wide.
      (3)   The licensee shall equip all beds with a bed frame, supportive
springs, and a clean, unsoiled supportive mattress, all of which must be in
good condition.
      (4)   The licensee shall equip all beds provided for non-ambulatory
residents or residents with an ambulatory impairment or reduced bladder or
bowel function with mattress covers that prevent bodily fluids from soiling the
mattress.
      (5)   More than two levels of stacked bunk beds are prohibited.
      (6)   The clear space above the top of the lower mattress of a double
decker bunk bed and the bottom of the upper bunk must be at least 27 inches.
      (7)   The distance from the top of the upper mattress to the ceiling must
be at least 36 inches.
   (f)   Pillows and sheets.
      (1)   The licensee shall provide each bed with at least one pillow with a
clean, unsoiled pillow case, at least two clean, unsoiled sheets, and a cover
such as a blanket or quilt.
      (2)   The licensee shall provide each resident with at least two extra,
unsoiled pillow cases, sheets, and blankets.
   (g)   Storage.
      (1)   The licensee shall provide at least one chest of drawers in good
working condition, or its equivalent, for each resident. The chest of drawers
must contain a sufficient number of lockable drawers to house all necessary
items of clothing and personal belongings of a resident.
      (2)   The licensee shall provide sufficient space in each resident’s room
or closet for residents to hang up clothes that are not stored in a chest of
drawers.
      (3)   Clothing may not be stored on the floor.
   (h)   Personal hygiene items. The licensee shall provide bath towels,
washcloths, soap, combs or brushes, and toothbrushes at all times in a quantity
sufficient to meet the needs of residents.
   (i)   Emergency exit. Each sleeping room must provide access to an emergency
exit without passing through another sleeping room in accordance with the
Dallas Fire Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-24.   BATHROOM FACILITIES.
   (a)   If a boarding home facility has a resident who is non-ambulatory or
has an ambulatory impairment:
      (1)   the licensee shall provide a toilet, lavatory, and bathtub or
shower on each floor when not provided in an individual room; and
      (2)   a bathroom door must have a minimum opening of 32 inches with the
door open 90 degrees, measured between the face of the door and the opposite
stop.
   (b)   The licensee shall provide toilets, lavatories, and bathtubs or
showers at a ratio of one toilet, one lavatory, and one bathtub or shower for
each eight residents, or fraction of eight residents.
   (c)   Toilets, lavatories, and bathtubs or showers must be accessible to
residents without going outside of the building or without going through a
sleeping room of another resident.
   (d)   The licensee shall keep all bathroom facilities clean and in good
repair.
   (e)   The licensee shall ensure that all bathroom facilities are well-
lighted and ventilated.
   (f)   The licensee shall adequately supply all bathroom facilities with
toilet paper, soap, and hand towels.
   (g)   The licensee shall supply bathtubs and showers with non-slip surfaces
and curtains or other safe enclosures for privacy. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-25.   TELEPHONE.
   A telephone that is connected to a land line must be available 24 hours a
day, be easily accessible, and afford privacy for use by residents. A list of
emergency telephone numbers, including the numbers of the Dallas Police
Department, Dallas Fire-Rescue Department, ambulance, the director, the Texas
Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS), the local mental health
authority, and the Texas Information and Referral Network, must be placed in
plain view on or next to the telephone and made accessible to persons who are
visually or hearing impaired, as needed. (Ord. 28706)
SEC. 8A-26.   LAUNDRY FACILITIES.
   A washer or dryer:
      (1)   cannot be located in the kitchen area; and
      (2)   must be properly vented to the outside of the structure. (Ord.
28706)
SEC. 8A-27.   KITCHEN.
   (a)   A kitchen must be accessible to each resident without going through a
sleeping room of another resident.
   (b)   A kitchen must have a food preparation area of at least six square
feet that is smooth, impermeable, free of cracks, and easily cleanable. This
surface area must not be primarily used for eating.
   (c)   If a boarding home facility has a kitchen without a dining area
attached, the licensee shall provide a separate dining area of 15 square feet
per resident. A kitchen with an attached dining area must be at least 100
square feet in area.
   (d)   A kitchen must contain a sink which allows for manual dishwashing that
is at least 22 inches by 27 inches by 5 inches.
   (e)   A kitchen must contain an operational cooking stove with at least two
burners fuelled by gas or electricity and an operational microwave oven.
   (f)   A kitchen must contain at least one cabinet with a minimum of five
cubic feet of storage space per resident, suitable for storage of food and
utensils.
   (g)   A kitchen must be equipped with at least one electrical outlet
suitable for plugging in small kitchen appliances.
   (h)   The licensee shall keep the kitchen in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (i)   A kitchen must contain a refrigerator that is at least 12 cubic feet
in area, is equipped with a thermometer, and is maintained in an operational,
clean, and sanitary condition. A refrigerator must maintain foods at the
temperatures required by Section
8A-33. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 32397)
SEC. 8A-28.   DINING ROOM.
   (a)   A dining room must be accessible to residents without going through
the sleeping room of another resident.
   (b)   The minimum floor area for a dining room is 15 square feet per
resident.
   (c)   If a boarding home facility provides community meals, the licensee
shall equip a dining room with one dining chair and two linear feet of dining
table space for each resident. (Ord. 28706)
ARTICLE IV.
RESIDENT HEALTH AND SAFETY.
SEC. 8A-29.   EMERGENCY PRECAUTIONS.
   (a)   The licensee shall provide fire escapes and exits that are kept in
good repair and accessible at all times in accordance with the Dallas Fire
Code, as amended.
   (b)   The licensee shall implement a written fire and evacuation plan that
sets forth the responsibilities and steps to be taken by staff and residents in
the event of a fire or other emergency. If a boarding home facility has a
resident who is non-ambulatory or has a mobility impairment, the license shall
submit the written plan to Dallas Fire-Rescue and obtain its approval of the
plan.
   (c)   The licensee shall post an emergency evacuation plan in each sleeping
room and the kitchen of the facility.
   (d)   The licensee shall ensure that each resident receives training on the
emergency evacuation plan at least two times per year and shall maintain
documentation of such training.
   (e)   Flammable supplies and gasoline-operated maintenance equipment and
lawn care equipment must be stored in the garage of the facility or in a
detached storage shed.
   (f)   The licensee shall provide a sufficient number of accessible fire
extinguishers in accordance with the Dallas Fire Code, as amended. The licensee
shall ensure that a person licensed to inspect fire extinguishers inspects the
fire extinguishers annually. The licensee shall ensure the fire extinguishers
are recharged when needed by a person licensed to inspect fire extinguishers.
   (g)   The licensee shall provide a smoke alarm approved by the fire marshal
in each place in the facility required by the Dallas Fire Code, as amended. The
licensee shall maintain a smoke alarm in good working order.
   (h)   If a boarding home facility has a resident that is hearing impaired,
the licensee shall install and properly maintain a visual smoke alarm that is
capable of alerting a hearing impaired person of the presence of fire or smoke
in accordance with the Dallas Fire Code, as amended.
   (i)   The licensee shall install and properly maintain carbon monoxide
detectors near sleeping rooms in accordance with Section 42.060 of the Texas
Human Resources Code, as amended.
   (j)   The licensee shall ensure that all residents are shown how to use all
emergency exits from the boarding home facility within 24 hours after arrival
at the boarding home facility. The licensee shall maintain documentation of
such training.
   (k)   First aid supplies.
      (1)   The licensee shall provide first aid supplies that are equivalent
to the 16-unit first aid kit that complies with the latest edition of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/International Safety Equipment
Association (ISEA) standard Z308.1.
      (2)   The licensee shall ensure that the first aid supplies are readily
accessible to all the residents and inform the residents of the location of the
supplies.
      (3)   The licensee shall provide one set of such supplies for each 50
persons, or fraction of 50 persons, residing in the boarding home facility.
(Ord. 28706)
SEC. 8A-30.   WATER QUALITY.
   If a boarding home facility uses well water, the licensee shall supply the
director with annual test results for water samples taken from the water well
from a laboratory accredited by the State of Texas under the National
Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program. If the sample results show
coliform bacteria present, a resample must be taken within seven days after
receipt of the results. The licensee shall supply results of testing the
resample to the director within seven business days of receipt. (Ord. 28706)
SEC. 8A-31.   LINENS AND LAUNDRY.
   (a)   If a boarding home facility provides laundry service or has laundry
facilities on site, all linens and laundry must be placed in a closed bag or
covered hamper before being transported to the laundry area.
   (b)   If a boarding home facility provides laundry service, all linens and
laundry must be properly identified to prevent loss.
   (c)   Soiled linens and laundry must not be sorted or processed in kitchens,
food preparation areas, or food storage areas. (Ord. 28706)
SEC. 8A-32.   POISONOUS, TOXIC, AND FLAMMABLE MATERIALS.
   (a)   The licensee shall ensure that poisonous, toxic, and flammable
materials:
      (1)   are stored and maintained away from bed linens, towels, food items,
and kitchen equipment; and
      (2)   are not used in a way that contaminates food equipment or utensils
or constitutes a hazard to employees or residents.
   (b)   The licensee shall prominently and distinctly label poisonous, toxic,
and flammable materials for easy identification of contents. (Ord. 28706)
SEC. 8A-33.   FOOD AND DRINK; MEALS.
   (a)   General. If a boarding home facility serves meals to one or more
residents, the licensee shall ensure the following:
      (1)   All food and drink is clean and free from spoilage, pathogenic
organisms, toxic chemicals, and other harmful substances.
      (2)   All food and drink is prepared, stored, handled, and served so as
to be safe for human consumption.
      (3)   All food or drink subject to spoilage is maintained at a
temperature of 41 degrees Fahrenheit or below.
      (4)   Hot foods that are ready to be served are maintained at 135 degrees
Fahrenheit or above at all times.
      (5)   All food or drink stored in the freezer is maintained at a
temperature of no higher than 0 degrees Fahrenheit.
      (6)   Alternative food selections are provided for residents who choose
to disclose their medically prescribed diets to the licensee.
      (7)   A time schedule for meals is posted daily.
      (8)   Meals are:
         (A)   nutritionally balanced and provide the U.S. Department of
Agriculture recommended daily allowance of vitamins, minerals, and calories;
         (B)   of sufficient quantity and quality to meet the nutritional needs
of residents; and
         (C)   served with not more than 14 hours between the beginning of the
evening meal and the beginning of the morning meal.
      (9)   A valid food handler's certificate issued under Section
17-2.2 of this code has been issued in the name of the licensee.
      (10)   After each usage, all eating and drinking utensils are thoroughly
washed and sanitized in hot water containing a suitable soap or synthetic
detergent and rinsed in clean hot water. If a mechanical dishwasher is used,
dish detergent is required.
   (b)   Animals prohibited. With the exception of service animals for persons
with disabilities, birds, cats, dogs, or other animals are not permitted in
areas where food is prepared or stored, or where utensils are washed or stored.
   (c)   Food handling.
      (1)   An owner, operator, employee, or resident engaged in food handling
shall:
         (A)   observe sanitary methods, including hand washing; and
         (B)   not be assigned to preparing foods for others at the facility if
carrying a disease that can be transmitted to others in the normal course of
food preparation.
      (2)   If preparing meals for residents, staff must meet food handling
requirements and training approved by the director. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-34.   POLICIES AND PROCEDURES TO ENSURE RESIDENT HEALTH AND SAFETY.
   (a)   Initial screening. Before permitting a potential resident to move into
a boarding home facility, the licensee shall ask each potential resident
whether he or she:
      (1)   has the ability to comply with the requirements of being a resident
at the boarding home facility, including:
         (A)   paying rent or other fees in accordance with the service
agreement between the operator and the resident, unless the payment of rent or
other fees is excused under the service agreement or by law;
         (B)   complying with the rules for the boarding home facility
established by the licensee;
         (C)   paying for any damage to the boarding home facility caused by
the resident; and
         (D)   timely vacating the premises when the service agreement,
including any extension, expires or is terminated;
      (2)   is qualified to reside at the boarding home facility if the
boarding home facility is available only to persons with disabilities or to
persons with a particular type of disability;
      (3)   is currently an illegal abuser or addict of a controlled substance;
      (4)   is currently on probation or parole;
      (5)   is currently using any prescription drugs; or
      (6)   has been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a
controlled substance.
   (b)   Individualized assessment.
      (1)   Before allowing an individual to reside at a boarding home
facility, the licensee shall conduct an individualized assessment of that
individual to determine if the individual would constitute a direct threat. The
assessment must consider:
         (A)   any prior criminal or violent acts of the person;
         (B)   the amount of time that has elapsed since the commission of any
such acts; and
         (C)   any actions taken by the person or other circumstances that may
have eliminated the direct threat.
      (2)   In the case of any male resident or potential male resident who has
been convicted of an offense requiring registration with any sex offender
registry, the individualized assessment must include an assessment of risk
performed by a Licensed Sex Offender Treatment Provider ("LSOTP") licensed
under the Texas Occupations Code Title 3.110, Subchapters A and G, as amended.
The assessment of risk must be obtained from the resident's or potential
resident's current or former LSOTP. If there is no current LSOTP, or if the
former LSOTP's assessment of risk is more than three years old, a new psycho-
sexual evaluation and assessment of risk must be obtained to evaluate the
resident's or potential resident's risk in the boarding home facility setting.
A letter from the LSOTP summarizing his or her assessment of risk is sufficient
documentation for the purposes of verifying compliance with the requirements of
this paragraph.
      (3)   The licensee shall ensure that any resident that has been convicted
of an offense requiring registration with any sex offender registry is
registered with the proper authorities.
      (4)   Prior to the occupancy of any boarding home facility and at least
quarterly thereafter, the licensee shall certify in a sworn affidavit to the
director that, based on the individualized assessment performed for each
resident, no person will or does reside in the boarding home facility whose
tenancy would likely constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of that
person or other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
   (c)   Persons who may not reside in a boarding home facility. The licensee
shall not allow the following individuals to reside at a boarding home
facility:
      (1)   An individual convicted within the last 10 years of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
      (2)   An individual who, based upon an individualized assessment, is
likely to constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of the individual
or other individuals or whose tenancy would likely result in substantial damage
to the property of others.
      (3)   An individual who requires the provision of personal care services
unless the personal care services are provided by outside professionals.
   (d)   Illegal drug use.
      (1)   All residents in a boarding home facility shall completely abstain
from using controlled substances. The licensee shall expel as promptly as
possible under state law any resident who uses a controlled substance, whether
on or off the premises, and shall not readmit the resident to any boarding home
facility under the control of the licensee for a period of at least 60 days
following the violation. However, nothing contained in this subsection may be
construed to prohibit a resident from taking a prescription drug for which that
resident has a valid and current prescription.
      (2)   If the boarding home facility has one or more residents who are
recovering from an addiction to alcohol or a controlled substance, the licensee
must develop a written plan for ensuring that the residents continue to refrain
from using alcohol or controlled substances, including any and all rules by
which residents must abide, and must provide such plan to the director at his
request.
   (e)   Duty to document. The licensee shall document the following:
      (1)   A resident’s illegal use of a controlled substance.
      (2)   A resident who poses a direct threat to the health or safety of
other individuals.
      (3)   A resident who poses a direct threat of substantial damage to the
property of others.
   (f)   Log. If a resident with dementia is currently taking a prescription
medication, or if a resident is taking a controlled substance or a psychotropic
medication pursuant to a current and valid prescription, the licensee shall
note in a written log whether the resident has taken, or been reminded to take,
his or her medication. The log must provide the resident's name, the name of
the medication, and the date and time that the resident took the medication or
was reminded by the licensee to take the medication. Unless prohibited by law,
the licensee shall make copies of the log available to the director for
inspection upon request.
   (g)   Injuries, incidents, and unusual accidents.
      (1)   The licensee shall notify a resident’s legal guardian, resident’s
legally authorized representative, or a family member designated by the
resident, the legal guardian, or the legally authorized representative of any
injury, incident, or unusual accident involving the resident.
      (2)   The licensee shall investigate and document on a form provided by
the director any injuries, incidents, or unusual accidents to a resident by
providing the following information:
         (A)   The resident's name.
         (B)   The date and time the injury, incident, or unusual accident
occurred.
         (C)   Description of the injury, incident, or unusual accident.
         (D)   Description of any medical or mental health treatment the
licensee sought for the resident.
         (E)   Steps taken by the owner or operator to prevent future injuries,
incidents, or unusual accidents if a problem at the boarding home facility
resulted in the injury, incident, or unusual accident.
         (F)   When the resident's legal guardian, resident's legally
authorized representative, or a family member designated by the resident, the
legal guardian, or the legally authorized representative was notified about the
injury, incident, or unusual accident.
   (h)   Access to records. Within one business day after a request by a
resident, the resident’s guardian, the resident’s legally authorized
representative, or a family member designated by the resident, the legal
guardian, or the legally authorized representative, the licensee shall allow
access to, and provide copies at a reasonable cost of, the records documenting
any injury, incident, or unusual accident involving that resident. Upon
request, the licensee must explain how to examine the records.
   (i)   Abuse, neglect, and exploitation.
      (1)   A licensee shall report and document any allegations of abuse,
neglect, or exploitation of a minor, an adult age 65 or older, or an adult with
a disability to the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services. Failure
to report suspected abuse, neglect, or exploitation of a minor, an elderly
adult, or an adult with a disability is a Class A misdemeanor under Texas law.
      (2)   A licensee shall ensure that no resident is harassed, threatened,
or intimidated at any time for making a report of abuse, neglect, or
exploitation.
      (3)   A licensee shall provide each resident with a copy of the
definitions of abuse, neglect, or exploitation as outlined in Chapter 48 of the
Texas Human Resources Code, as amended.
      (4)   A licensee shall allow law enforcement, emergency medical, and fire
personnel access to the boarding home facility when these professionals are
responding to a call at the boarding home facility.
      (5)   An owner, operator, or employee may not refer a person to the
boarding home facility with which he is associated or to any other facility if
he knows or reasonably should know that the facility or its services are not
appropriate for the condition of the person being referred.
      (6)   If the licensee or an employee has any medical or mental health
professional examine, diagnose, treat, or provide any other medical or mental
health services to a resident, the licensee or employee must provide the
resident with:
         (A)   the name, business address, and telephone number of the person
who examined, diagnosed, treated, or provided any other service to the
resident;
         (B)   a written explanation of the nature and results of the
examination, diagnosis, treatment, or other service if provided to the licensee
or employee by the medical or mental health professional; and
         (C)   a copy of any prescription for any medicine if provided to the
licensee or employee by the medical or mental health professional.
      (7)   No licensee or employee may:
         (A)   use corporal punishment on a resident;
         (B)   involuntarily seclude a resident from other residents;
         (C)   abuse, neglect, or exploit a resident;
         (D)   receive any referral fees, kickbacks, or other compensation in
connection with the placement of residents; or
         (E)   engage in any coercive practices involving residents' food
stamps or disability checks.
      (8)   Physical and chemical restraints.
         (A)   No licensee or employee may use a physical restraint or chemical
restraint on a resident.
         (B)   For purposes of Subsection (i)(8)(A), a physical restraint
includes a vest, a hand mitt, and a seatbelt, and a chemical restraint includes
an anti-psychotic drug and a sedative.
         (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (i)(8)(A) that:
            (i)    the restraint was authorized by a physician, in writing, for
a specified and limited period of time; or
            (ii)   the licensee or employee is the spouse, legal guardian, or
next of kin of the resident or former resident.
      (9)   Access.
         (A)   A licensee shall allow a resident's personal physician, nurse,
or other health care provider to have immediate access to the resident.
         (B)   A licensee shall allow the relatives, the guardian, and the
legally authorized representative of a resident to have immediate access to the
resident during the boarding home facility's visiting hours unless the resident
objects.
   (j)   Conflicts of interests. The purposes of this subsection are to ensure
both that residents have the right to manage their own affairs or to choose
someone they trust to manage their affairs for them and that licensees and
employees do not abuse their positions of power and trust for their own private
gain.
      (1)   A licensee or employee of a boarding home facility shall not:
         (A)   borrow money from or loan money to residents;
         (B)   be a beneficiary of a current or former resident's will or life
insurance;
         (C)   co-mingle a resident's funds with the funds of the licensee,
employee, or another resident;
         (D)   employ a resident;
         (E)   require a resident to perform any kind of work for any person or
entity;
         (F)   go into business with a resident;
         (G)   serve as an employee or independent contractor of a resident;
         (H)   have sexual relations with a resident; or
         (I)   have a power of attorney for a resident's affairs for any
purpose.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution:
         (A)   under Paragraph (1) that the licensee or employee is the spouse,
legal guardian, or next of kin of the resident or former resident;
         (B)   under Paragraph (1)(D) that the licensee or employee pays the
resident, either as a monetary payment or as an in-kind contribution towards
lodging, food, or services provided by the boarding home facility, at least the
federal minimum wage for each hour of work performed;
         (C)   under Paragraph (1)(E) that the licensee or employee does not
receive any direct or indirect monetary payment, kickback, or in-kind
compensation from any person or entity in connection with the resident's work
and ensures that the resident receives, either as a monetary payment or as an
in-kind contribution towards lodging, food, or services provided by the
boarding home facility, an hourly wage that exceeds the federal minimum wage by
at least $3.00 for each hour of work performed by the resident;
         (D)    under Paragraph (1)(E) that the work required is limited to
chores or other routine housekeeping activities; and
         (E)   under Paragraph (1)(I) that the licensee or employee is
assisting the resident to establish eligibility for a federal or state program
that provides financial assistance for medical services, such as Medicaid, or
other services needed by the resident.
      (3)   No licensee or employee may be a representative payee for a
resident or assist a resident with general money management unless the Social
Security Administration, the resident, the resident's guardian, the resident's
legally authorized representative, or a family member designated by the
resident, the legal guardian, or the legally authorized representative
authorizes in writing the licensee or employee to be a representative payee or
assist the resident with general money management.
      (4)   If a licensee or employee becomes the representative payee for a
resident or assists a resident with general money management, the licensee or
employee shall do the following:
         (A)    Maintain separate financial records for each resident for which
the licensee or employee is the representative payee or assists with general
money management for the entire period of time the licensee or employee acts in
that capacity and continue to maintain the resident's records for one year past
the last calendar day the licensee or employee is the resident's representative
payee or assists with money management.
         (B)   Include in the records an itemized list of expenditures that the
licensee or employee has made on behalf of the resident, including the charges
that are assessed by the licensee or employee.
         (C)   Maintain receipts for all expenditures in addition to the
itemized documentation.
         (D)   Develop a budget with the resident outlining routine
expenditures and ensure that expenditures that are not routine are discussed
with the resident before the resident's funds are expended.
         (E)   Within one business day after receiving a request, allow the
resident, the resident's guardian, the resident's legally authorized
representative, or a family member designated by the resident, the legal
guardian, or the legally authorized representative access to the resident's
financial records that are maintained by the licensee or employee.
         (F)   Furnish the director a surety bond.
            (i)   The bond must be in an amount that is enough to cover the
average monthly amount of money the licensee or employee manages or handles for
all residents based on the following:
 
Amount of Resident Money Managed/Handled Per Month       Amount of Bond
$750 or less                                             $1,000
$751 to $1,500                                           $2,000
$1,501 to $2,500                                         $3,000
Every additional increment of $1,000 or fraction thereof Additional $1,000
 
            (ii)    The bond must be issued by a bank or bonding company
authorized to do business in the State of Texas.
            (iii)   The bond must provide that all residents, residents'
guardians, residents' legally authorized representatives, or family members
designated by the resident, the legal guardian, or the legally authorized
representative have the right to directly sue upon the surety bond until the
amount of the bond has been exhausted.
            (iv)   The bond must cover embezzlement or theft by the licensee or
employee.
         (G)   Immediately cease acting as a representative payee once a
resident moves out of a boarding home facility or no longer wants the licensee
or employee to be his representative payee.
         (H)   Document the termination of the licensee's or employee's role as
representative payee for a resident or former resident and the actions taken by
the licensee or employee to ensure that the Social Security Administration
recognizes this termination.
      (5)   A licensee or employee who employs a resident or requires a
resident to perform any kind of work for any person or entity pursuant to
Sections
8A-34(j)(2)(B) or (C) must maintain documentation of the dates and hours worked
by each resident, the type and amount of compensation received by each
resident, and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or entity
for whom each resident worked. At least monthly, the licensee or employee must
also give a signed copy of this documentation to the resident, the resident's
guardian, or the resident's legally authorized representative.
   (k)   Service agreement.
      (1)   A licensee shall develop a service agreement with each resident and
maintain a copy of the agreement signed by the resident, the resident’s
guardian, or the resident’s legally authorized representative. The licensee
shall give a copy of the signed agreement to the resident, the resident’s
guardian, or the resident’s legally authorized representative.
      (2)   The service agreement must specify the following:
         (A)   The length of the contract.
         (B)   The amount of rent charged and the date upon which rent is due.
         (C)   If service is accepted in lieu of rent, the dollar amount the
rent is reduced per hour of service.
         (D)   The amounts of other fees or fines charged, an explanation of
what those fees and fines are for, when they are charged, and why.
         (E)   The party responsible for paying the monthly rent and other
fees.
         (F)   Any services to be provided or that could be provided by the
boarding home facility.
         (G)   If the resident has a guardian, legally authorized
representative, or a family member designated by the resident, the legal
guardian, or the legally authorized representative, that person’s name,
address, e-mail address, and telephone number.
         (H)   The rules and regulations of the boarding home facility.
         (I)   That a resident will be expelled if the owner or operator
determines that the resident:
            (i)   has used a controlled substance within the past 30 days
without a valid prescription;
            (ii)   has violated the rules of the boarding home facility if
those rules require the expulsion for the violation;
            (iii)   poses a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals; or
            (iv)   poses a direct threat of substantial damage to the property
of others.
         (J)   If the resident earns any income from the licensee or an
employee of the boarding home facility that exceeds the monthly rent owed, the
licensee or employee’s plan to allocate the income or system of disbursement of
that income.
   (l)   Disclosure of charges and fees to resident. No licensee or employee
may charge a resident for a service or item unless the licensee or employee has
previously disclosed in writing that providing the service or item will incur
an additional fee and the amount of that fee.
   (m)   Visitors. Operators, employees, and volunteers of the boarding home
facility shall not have visitors on the premises, except for visitation
necessary for the operation of the facility, for emergencies, or by family
members of an operator, employee, or a volunteer.
   (n)   Privacy policy. Each boarding home facility must adopt a privacy
policy to ensure the confidentiality of residents' financial, health, and
medical information. The owner, operator, or licensee shall give a copy of the
privacy policy to the resident, the resident's guardian, or the resident's
legally authorized representative. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-35.   ASSISTANCE WITH SELF- ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION.
   (a)   Assistance with self-administration of medication may be provided to
an adult resident who can identify his or her medication and knows when the
medication should be taken but requires assistance with self-administration.
Assistance with self-administration of medication may not be provided to a
minor.
   (b)   Assistance with self-administration of medication is limited to:
      (1)   reminding the resident to take medication;
      (2)   opening a container, removing medication from a container, and
placing medication in a resident’s hand or in or on a clean surface, such as a
pill cup or medication reminder box, for the resident’s self-administration;
and
      (3)   reminding the resident when a prescription needs to be refilled.
   (c)   The licensee shall remind a resident to take medication if the
licensee knows that the resident is required to take medication and needs
assistance with remembering to take the medication.
   (d)   The licensee shall store all residents’ medication in a locked area.
The licensee shall provide a central locked storage area or individual locked
storage areas at the boarding home facility for each resident’s medication.
      (1)   If the boarding home facility uses a central medication storage
area, a boarding home employee must be available to provide access at all times
and each resident’s medication must be stored separately from other residents’
medications within the storage area.
      (2)   If a resident’s medication requires refrigeration, the licensee
shall provide a refrigerator with a designated and locked storage area or a
refrigerator inside a locked medication room.
      (3)   The licensee shall store medications labeled for “external use
only” separately within the locked area.
   (e)   The licensee shall ensure that poisonous substances are labeled and
safely stored within a locked area separately from medications.
   (f)   If a boarding home facility stores medications, the licensee shall
adopt and enforce a written policy for preventing the diversion of the
medications.
   (g)   After a resident ceases to reside in the boarding home facility, the
licensee shall properly dispose of any of the resident’s remaining medication
in accordance with applicable laws. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-36.   REQUIREMENTS FOR IN-SERVICE EDUCATION OF BOARDING HOME FACILITY
STAFF.
   (a)   Each licensee and employee of a boarding home facility must be trained
on the following subjects prior to contact with residents or within five days
of beginning work, ownership, or management of the facility, whichever is
later:
      (1)   Employer rules and policies.
      (2)   Preventing, recognizing, and reporting abuse, neglect, and
exploitation of residents.
      (3)   Residents' rights, including all applicable rights from the
following:
         (A)   Chapter 102 (Rights of the Elderly) of the Texas Human Resource
Code, as amended.
         (B)   Chapter 112 (Developmental Disabilities) of the Texas Human
Resource Code, as amended.
         (C)   Chapter 301 (Fair Housing Practices) of the Texas Property Code,
as amended.
         (D)   Chapter 92 (Residential Tenancies) of the Texas Property Code,
as amended.
      (4)   Policies and procedures for contacting emergency personnel when
health or safety of a resident or another individual is at risk.
      (5)   Complaint process specific to the city and the boarding home
facility.
      (6)   Prevention, recognition, and reporting of injuries, incidents, and
unusual accidents to residents and others in the boarding home facility.
      (7)   Emergency, evacuation, and disaster plans.
      (8)   Assisting residents with obtaining health and social services.
      (9)   Services provided by the boarding home facility, including:
         (A)   nutrition, meal preparation, and dietary needs, if the boarding
home facility provides meal preparation;
         (B)   sanitation;
         (C)   laundry, if the boarding home facility provides laundry
services;
         (D)   house work, if the boarding home facility provides house work;
and
         (E)   assistance with self-administration of medication, if the
boarding home facility provides assistance with self-administration of
medication.
   (b)   Each licensee and employee of a boarding home facility must be trained
on the following subjects:
      (1)   Updates and changes in any policies and procedures within 10 days
after the licensee or employee becomes aware of the change.
      (2)   Orientation specific to the needs of each new resident within three
business days of the resident moving into the facility.
      (3)   Orientation specific to the needs of a resident whose needs have
changed due to injury, illness, hospitalization, or other circumstances that
affect the resident's needs within one day after licensee or employee becoming
aware of the change. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-37.   CRIMINAL HISTORY.
   (a)   A person may not own or operate a boarding home facility or be
employed or volunteer in a position the duties of which involve direct contact
with a resident in a boarding home facility before the 10th anniversary of the
date the person is convicted of any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Sections 481.112, 481.1121, 481.1122, 481.113, 481.114, 481.122,
Texas Health and Safety Code (illegal manufacture or delivery of a controlled
substance), as amended.
      (2)   Section 481.120, Texas Health and Safety Code (delivery of
marijuana), as amended, that is punishable as a felony.
      (3)   Section 481.124, Texas Health and Safety Code (possession or
transport of certain chemicals with intent to manufacture controlled
substances), as amended, that is punishable as a felony.
      (4)   Chapter 19, Texas Penal Code (criminal homicide), as amended.
      (5)   Chapter 20, Texas Penal Code (kidnapping and unlawful restraint),
as amended.
      (6)   Chapter 20A, Texas Penal Code (trafficking of persons), as amended.
      (7)   Section 21.02, Texas Penal Code (continuous sexual abuse of young
child or children), as amended, or Section 21.11, Texas Penal Code (indecency
with a child), as amended.
      (8)   Section 22.01, Texas Penal Code (assault on a public servant), as
amended.
      (9)   Section 22.011, Texas Penal Code (sexual assault), as amended.
      (10)   Section 22.02, Texas Penal Code (aggravated assault), as amended.
      (11)   Section 22.04, Texas Penal Code (injury to a child, elderly
individual, or disabled individual), as amended.
      (12)   Section 22.041, Texas Penal Code (abandoning or endangering
child), as amended.
      (13)   Section 22.08, Texas Penal Code (aiding suicide), as amended.
      (14)   Section 25.031, Texas Penal Code (agreement to abduct from
custody), as amended.
      (15)   Section 25.08, Texas Penal Code (sale or purchase of a child), as
amended.
      (16)   Section 28.02, Texas Penal Code (arson), as amended.
      (17)   Section 29.02, Texas Penal Code (robbery), as amended.
      (18)   Section 29.03, Texas Penal Code (aggravated robbery), as amended.
      (19)   Section 21.08, Texas Penal Code (indecent exposure), as amended.
      (20)   Section 21.12, Texas Penal Code (improper relationship between
educator and student), as amended.
      (21)   Section 21.15, Texas Penal Code (improper photography or visual
recording), as amended.
      (22)   Section 22.05, Texas Penal Code (deadly conduct), as amended.
      (23)   Section 22.021, Texas Penal Code (aggravated sexual assault), as
amended.
      (24)   Section 22.07, Texas Penal Code (terroristic threat), as amended.
      (25)   Section 33.021, Texas Penal Code (online solicitation of a minor),
as amended.
      (26)   Section 34.02, Texas Penal Code (money laundering), as amended.
      (27)   Section 35A.02, Texas Penal Code (Medicaid fraud), as amended.
      (28)   Section 42.09, Texas Penal Code (cruelty to animals), as amended.
      (29)   Chapter 31, Texas Penal Code (theft), as amended, that is
punishable as a felony.
      (30)   Section 30.02, Texas Penal Code (burglary), as amended.
      (31)   The laws of another state, federal law, or the Uniform Code of
Military Justice for an offense containing elements that are substantially
similar to the elements of an offense listed in this subsection.
   (b)   A person may not own or operate a boarding home facility or be
employed or volunteer in a position the duties of which involve direct contact
with a resident in a boarding home facility before the fifth anniversary of the
date the person is convicted of attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation of an
offense listed in Subsection (a), any felony offense not listed in Subsection
(a), or any of the following non-felony offenses:
      (1)   Section 48.052, Texas Human Resources Code (failure to report
abuse, neglect, or exploitation), as amended or Section 260A.012, Texas Health
and Safety Code (failure to report abuse, neglect, or exploitation), as
amended.
      (2)   Section 22.01, Texas Penal Code (assault), as amended, that is
punishable as a Class A misdemeanor.
      (3)   Chapter 31, Texas Penal Code (theft), as amended, that is
punishable as a Class A misdemeanor or felony.
      (4)   Section 32.45, Texas Penal Code (misapplication of fiduciary
property or property of a financial institution), as amended, that is
punishable as a Class A misdemeanor or a felony.
      (5)   Section 32.46, Texas Penal Code (securing execution of a document
by deception), as amended, that is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor or a
felony.
      (6)   Section 37.12, Texas Penal Code (false identification as peace
officer), as amended.
      (7)   Section 42.01(a)(7), (8), or (9), Texas Penal Code (disorderly
conduct involving a firearm), as amended.
      (8)   Section 42.062, Texas Penal Code (interference with emergency
request for assistance), as amended, that is punishable as a Class A
misdemeanor or felony.
      (9)   Section 42.07, Texas Penal Code (harassment), as amended that is
punishable as a Class A misdemeanor.
      (10)   Chapter 49, Texas Penal Code (driving while intoxicated), as
amended, that is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor, Class A misdemeanor, or
felony, if the boarding home facility provides transportation services.
      (11)   The laws of another state, federal law, or the Uniform Code of
Military Justice for an offense containing elements that are substantially
similar to the elements of an offense listed in this subsection.
   (c)   The licensee shall ensure that all employees and volunteers have had a
background check of conviction records, pending charges, and disciplinary board
decisions completed within the past 12 months, and is repeated every year
thereafter, and that the individual is not disqualified under this section. The
owner or operator shall immediately discharge any employee or volunteer whose
criminal history reveals conviction of a crime that bars employment or
volunteer service at a boarding home facility. A pending appeal of a criminal
conviction has no effect on disqualification under this section. (Ord. Nos.
28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-38.   QUALIFICATIONS TO OWN, OPERATE, OR WORK IN FACILITIES WITH
PERSONS RECOVERING FROM SUBSTANCE OR ALCOHOL ABUSE.
   (a)   If a boarding home facility allows an individual who has an impairment
due to the illegal abuse of or addiction to a controlled substance to be a
resident, the licensee and all employees and volunteers (other than residents)
shall not have used a controlled substance within the previous year without a
prescription from a licensed professional.
   (b)   All operators, employees, and volunteers of a boarding home facility
shall completely abstain from illegally using controlled substances. The
licensee shall immediately remove from the premises of the boarding home
facility any non-resident owner, operator, employee, or volunteer who illegally
uses a controlled substance, whether on or off the premises, and shall not
allow that person to enter the premises of any boarding home facility under the
control of the owner or operator for a period of at least one year following
the violation. The licensee shall remove from the premises of the boarding home
facility, as promptly as possible under state law, any owner, operator,
employee, or volunteer who resides at the boarding home facility and who
illegally uses a controlled substance whether on or off the premises, and shall
not allow that person to enter the premises of any boarding home facility under
the control of the owner or operator for a period of at least one year
following the violation. However, nothing contained in this subsection shall be
construed to prohibit an operator, employee, or volunteer from taking a
prescription drug for which that person has a valid and current prescription.
   (c)   The licensee shall immediately remove from the premises of a boarding
home facility any non-resident owner, operator, employee, or volunteer who
currently abuses alcohol, whether on or off the premises, such that the abuse
of alcohol prevents that person from performing his or her job duties, if any,
at the boarding home facility or who, by reason of such current alcohol abuse,
constitutes a direct threat to the property or safety of others. The licensee
shall remove from the premises of a boarding home facility, as promptly as
possible under state law, any owner, operator, employee, or volunteer who
resides at the boarding home facility and who currently abuses alcohol, whether
on or off the premises, such that the abuse of alcohol prevents that person
from performing his or her job duties, if any, at the boarding home facility or
who, by reason of such current alcohol abuse, constitutes a direct threat to
the property or safety of others.
   (d)   If the licensee removes a person from the premises of a boarding home
facility under Subsection (c), the licensee shall not allow that person to re-
enter the premises of any boarding home facility under the control of the owner
or operator until that person is able to perform his or her job duties, if any,
at a boarding home facility and does not constitute a direct threat to the
property or safety of others. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
SEC. 8A-39.   ASSESSMENT AND PERIODIC MONITORING OF RESIDENTS.
   (a)   For any resident with dementia or who has been prescribed a controlled
substance or psychotropic medication, the licensee, or a designee of the
licensee, shall complete and document an annual assessment and conduct periodic
monitoring to ensure that each resident is capable of self-administering
medication and completing basic elements of personal care as listed in
Subsections (b) and (c). The assessment will be used as a tool to determine if
the needs of the resident can be provided by a boarding home facility or if the
resident needs personal care services or medication administration that cannot
be provided by the boarding home facility. The initial assessment of a resident
must be completed within 30 days after the date the resident began residing at
the facility.
   (b)   Elements of the self-administration of medication to be assessed
include the ability to perform each of the following tasks with little or no
assistance:
      (1)   Identifying the name of the medication.
      (2)   Providing a reason for the medication (the owner or operator cannot
force the resident to disclose a health condition that is the basis for the
medication if the resident refuses).
      (3)   Distinguishing color or shape.
      (4)   Preparing the correct number of pills (dosage).
      (5)   Confirming the time to take medications.
      (6)   Reading labels.
   (c)   Elements of personal care to be assessed by the licensee include but
are not limited to the resident’s ability to do the following:
      (1)   Eat independently.
      (2)   Bathe without assistance.
      (3)   Dress without assistance.
      (4)   Move and transfer independently.
   (d)   As a result of an assessment, if a licensee finds that a resident is
in a state of possible self-neglect due to no longer being able to perform
basic elements of personal care as listed in Subsection (c) and believes that a
higher level of care is needed, the owner or operator shall:
      (1)   contact the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services by
phoning the state-wide intake division at 1-800-252-5400;
      (2)   notify the resident’s guardian or legally authorized
representative;
      (3)   notify a family member designated by the resident, the legal
guardian, or the legally authorized representative; and
      (4)   contact the appropriate health or human services authority to
advise that the resident requires services beyond what can be provided by the
boarding home facility.
   (e)   A state of self-neglect does not exist if the resident receives
outside professional services that meet the resident’s need for personal care
or self- administration of medication. In these cases, the resident can remain
in the boarding home facility provided that all needs for personal care and
self- administration of medication are met. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753)
ARTICLE V.
ENFORCEMENT.
SEC. 8A-40.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   Regardless of a boarding home facility's licensing status, a person
who violates any provision of this chapter, or who fails to perform a duty
required by this chapter, commits an offense.
   (b)   A licensee, owner, operator, employee, or other person in control of a
licensed or unlicensed boarding home facility commits an offense if he or she
knowingly operates an unsafe facility that represents an immediate threat to
the health or safety of a resident, including a situation that has caused, or
is likely to cause, serious injury, harm, impairment, or death to a resident.
   (c)   A licensee, owner, operator, employee, or volunteer shall not operate
a boarding home facility in a manner that results in illegal or nuisance
activities including, but not limited to, disturbance of the peace, illegal
drug activity, harassment of passers-by, public urination, theft, assault,
vandalism, littering, illegal parking, loud noise, disorderly conduct, lewd
conduct, or police detention or arrests.
   (d)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed:
      (1)   $2,000 and/or up to 180 days in jail in accordance with Section
260.0051 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, if a person operates
a boarding home facility in the city without a valid license in violation of
Section
8A-4;
      (2)   $2,000 if the provision violated governs fire safety, public
health, or sanitation; or
      (3)   $500 for all other offenses.
   (e)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than
$250 for a first conviction of a violation of this chapter.
   (f)   The minimum fine established in Subsection (e) will double for the
second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and treble for
the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any 24-month
period. At no time may the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine established in
Subsection (d).
   (g)   A separate offense occurs each day or part of a day the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted.
   (h)   Emergency closing order.
      (1)   If the director finds a licensed or unlicensed boarding home
facility operating in violation of the standards prescribed by this chapter and
the violations create an immediate threat to the health and safety of a
resident in the facility, the director may order the immediate closing of all
or part of the facility.
      (2)   The order of immediate closure under Paragraph (1) is effective
immediately on providing written notice of the order to the owner or operator
by facsimile, e-mail, or hand-delivery.
      (3)   The order of closure of all or part of a boarding home facility is
valid for 10 days after its effective date.
      (4)   If the licensee, owner, or operator does not promptly relocate the
residents of the boarding home facility upon receiving the order of closure for
that facility, the city shall provide for the relocation of those residents. If
possible, the city will relocate those residents to a boarding home facility in
the city for which there is a current valid license. The relocation may not be
to a facility with a more restrictive environment unless all other reasonable
alternatives are exhausted. The director is authorized to seek to recover the
cost of relocating the residents from the owner and operator of the closed
facility.
      (5)   An emergency closing order may be appealed to the permit and
license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 as if it were a permit. The director and the permit and license appeal
board shall expedite any hearing or decision involving an emergency closing
order issued under this section. An appeal to the permit and license appeal
board does not stay enforcement of an emergency closing order.
   (i)   The city attorney may petition a district court or a county court at
law for civil penalties and for injunctive relief to restrain a continuing
violation of the standards or licensing requirements for a boarding home
facility under this chapter if the violation creates an immediate threat to the
health or safety of the facility residents.
   (j)   The remedies and procedures in this section and in other laws are
cumulative law, and the use of any particular remedy or procedure does not
prevent the enforcement of any other law.
   (k)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that
the person is not an owner, operator, or employee of a boarding home facility
as defined by this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 28706; 29753; 32168; 32397)
SEC. 8A-41.   RETALIATION AGAINST RESIDENTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   An operator commits an offense if the operator raises a resident's
rent, diminishes services to a resident, or attempts eviction of a resident
within six months after:
      (1)   the resident files a valid complaint with the director complaining
of a violation of this chapter on property occupied by the resident; a
complaint is considered valid if it results in an action described in
Paragraphs (2), (3), or (4) of this subsection;
      (2)   the director issues to the operator or the operator's agent a
written notice or citation listing any violation of this chapter that exists on
property occupied by the resident;
      (3)   the city attorney files an action under Article V of this chapter,
Chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code, or Chapter 260 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code relating to any violation of this chapter that exists on
property occupied by the resident;
      (4)   the resident, after filing a complaint with the director and the
operator or the operator's agent, files a written complaint with the city
attorney complaining of a violation of this chapter on property occupied by the
resident, unless the complaint is later withdrawn by the resident or dismissed
on the merits; or
      (5)   repairs are completed on property occupied by the resident in
compliance with either a written notice or citation issued by the director or a
court order.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   rent was increased pursuant to an escalation clause in a written
lease which provided for changes in costs of utilities, taxes, and insurance;
      (2)   rent was increased, services were reduced, or notices to vacate
were issued as part of a pattern of rent increases, service reductions, or
evictions for an entire boarding home facility;
      (3)   the resident was delinquent in rent when the operator gave notice
to vacate or filed an eviction action;
      (4)   the resident was responsible for or caused a violation of this
chapter that existed on property occupied by the resident;
      (5)   the resident's written lease fixing the rent, services, or term of
occupancy had expired, unless, at the time an action described in Subsection
(a)(1), (2), or (3) occurred, a violation of this chapter that was reasonably
dangerous to the physical health or safety of the resident or another person
existed on property occupied by the resident;
      (6)   the resident holds over after giving notice of termination or
intent to vacate;
      (7)   the resident holds over after the operator gives notice of
termination at the end of the rental term and, at the time the notice of
termination was given, the operator or the operator's agent had not received
actual notice that a valid complaint had been filed with the city complaining
of violations of this chapter on property occupied by the resident;
      (8)   before filing a complaint with the city complaining of a violation
of this chapter on property occupied by the resident, other than a violation
that is reasonably dangerous to the physical health or safety of the resident
or another person, the resident fails to comply with a written lease provision
requiring the resident to:
         (A)   notify the operator or the operator's agent, in writing, of the
violation; and
         (B)   allow the operator 15 days to correct the violation; or
      (9)   the operator proves that the rent increase, service reduction, or
attempted eviction was for good cause and not for purposes of retaliation
against the resident.
   (c)   An offense under this section may be prosecuted upon the filing of a
written complaint by the resident with the city attorney. (Ord. 32397)
CHAPTER 9
BICYCLES
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
Sec.
9-1.   Applicability of traffic regulations to bicycle and electric bicycle
riders.
Sec.
9-2.   [Reserved.]
Sec.
9-3.   [Reserved.]
Sec.
9-4.   Removal, etc., of serial numbers on bicycles; authorizing the chief of
police to confiscate same.
Sec.
9-5.   Responsibility of parent or guardian.
Sec.
9-6.   Bicycles prohibited on enumerated streets.
ARTICLE II.
BICYCLE HELMETS.
Sec.
9-7.   Definitions.
Sec.
9-8.   Bicycle helmet required.
Sec.
9-9.   Sale or lease of bicycles.
Sec.
9-10.   Penalty.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
(Title - Ord. 22764, eff. 9/1/96)
SEC. 9-1.   APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS TO BICYCLE AND ELECTRIC
BICYCLE RIDERS.
   (a)   In this section, ELECTRIC BICYCLE has the same meaning as it does in
Section 664.001 of the Texas Transportation Code.
   (b)   Every person riding a bicycle and an electric bicycle upon the streets
of the city shall be subject to provisions of all laws and ordinances
applicable to the driver of any other vehicle, except those provisions of laws
and ordinances which, by their very nature, can have no application; provided,
however, it shall not be unlawful to ride a bicycle or an electric bicycle on a
public sidewalk anywhere in the city outside of the central business district;
said district being formed by the following street lines:
   The south line of Young Street from Houston Street to Hawkins Street.
   The west line of Hawkins Street from Young Street to Pacific Avenue.
   The north line of Pacific Avenue from Hawkins Street to Pearl Street.
   The east line of Pearl Street from Pacific Avenue to Ross Avenue.
   The north line of Ross Avenue from Pearl Street to Austin Street.
   The west line of Austin Street from Ross Avenue to Pacific Avenue.
   The north line of Pacific Avenue from Austin Street to Houston Street.
   The west line of Houston Street from Pacific Avenue to Young Street.
   This provision which permits bicycles and electric bicycles to be operated
on public sidewalks is not meant to apply to any motor propelled vehicle of any
other type, but shall apply only to bicycles and electric bicycles. Any person
riding a bicycle or an electric bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-
of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and
passing such pedestrian. (Ord. Nos. 13686; 31403)
SEC. 9-2.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 29373)
SEC. 9-3.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 29373)
SEC. 9-4.   REMOVAL, ETC., OF SERIAL NUMBERS ON BICYCLES; AUTHORIZING THE CHIEF
OF POLICE TO CONFISCATE SAME.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number on the frame of a bicycle. The
chief of police is hereby authorized to confiscate any bicycle found to have a
serial number on the frame which has been removed, altered or mutilated and he
is further authorized to stamp new serial numbers on the frames of those
bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which the number is
illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. (Ord. 13686)
SEC. 9-5.   RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.
   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward who would not be subject to prosecution
in the municipal court to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
13686)
SEC. 9-6.   BICYCLES PROHIBITED ON ENUMERATED STREETS.
   No person shall operate, ride, push, pull, or walk a bicycle, other than an
electric bicycle, as defined in Section 664.001 of the Texas Transportation
Code, on any of the following freeways or expressways:
STREET LIMITS
STREET                    LIMITS
Central Expressway        Live Oak north to city limits
Central Expressway        Grand south to city limits
C. F. Hawn Freeway        All portions within the city limits
John W. Carpenter Freeway All portions within the city limits
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway All portions within the city limits
Marvin D. Love Freeway    All portions within the city limits
R. L. Thornton Freeway    All portions within the city limits
Stemmons Freeway          All portions within the city limits
Walton Walker Boulevard   All portions within the city limits
Interstate 345            All portions within the city limits
 
(Ord. Nos. 13875; 31403)
ARTICLE II.
BICYCLE HELMETS.
SEC. 9-7.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this article:
      (1)   DEALER means any commercial establishment that sells or leases new
or used bicycles, whether as its principal business activity or in connection
with the selling or leasing of other merchandise, from a place of business
within the city.
      (2)   GUARDIAN means:
         (A)   a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (B)   a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      (3)   HELMET means a properly-fitted bicycle helmet that:
         (A)   is not structurally damaged; and
         (B)   conforms to current standards of the American National Standards
Institute, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the Snell Memorial
Foundation, or any federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction over bicycle
helmets.
      (4)   MINOR means any person under 18 years of age.
      (5)   PARENT means a person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent,
or step-parent of another person.
      (6)   PUBLIC WAY means any property located within the city that is
publicly owned or maintained, including but not limited to a publicly owned or
maintained street, highway, alley, sidewalk, trail, or park facility.
      (7)   WEARING A HELMET means that a helmet is properly attached to a
person’s head with the chin straps of the helmet securely fastened and
tightened. (Ord. Nos. 22764; 29373)
SEC. 9-8.   BICYCLE HELMET REQUIRED.
   (a)   A minor commits an offense if he operates or rides upon a bicycle or
any side car, trailer, child carrier, seat, or other device attached to a
bicycle without wearing a helmet.
   (b)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
causes or permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to operate or
ride upon a bicycle or any side car, trailer, child carrier, seat, or other
device attached to a bicycle, without the minor wearing a helmet.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he transports a minor upon a bicycle or
any side car, trailer, child carrier, seat, or other device attached to a
bicycle, without the minor wearing a helmet.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a), (b), or (c) that:
      (1)   the bicycle was not being operated upon a public way at the time of
the alleged offense; or
      (2)   for a first offense only, the person owns or has acquired a helmet
for himself or his passenger, whichever is applicable, prior to appearance in
municipal court. (Ord. Nos. 22764; 29373)
SEC. 9-9.   SALE OR LEASE OF BICYCLES.
   (a)   A dealer commits an offense if he sells a bicycle or any bicycle side
car, trailer, or child carrier without having a sign conspicuously posted on
the dealer’s premises, in the form, location, and manner approved by the chief
of police, notifying all customers that it is a city ordinance violation for a
minor to operate or ride upon a bicycle without a helmet.
   (b)   A dealer commits an offense if he leases a bicycle or any bicycle side
car, trailer, or child carrier without:
      (1)   providing a helmet to each minor who will operate or ride upon the
bicycle or bicycle side car, trailer, or child carrier; or
      (2)   determining through physical observation that a helmet is in the
possession of each minor who will operate or ride upon the bicycle or bicycle
side car, trailer, or child carrier. (Ord. Nos. 22764; 29373)
SEC. 9-10.   PENALTY.
   An offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed:
      (1)   $10 for the first offense;
      (2)   $25 for the second offense; and
      (3)   $50 for the third and each subsequent offense. (Ord. 22764)
CHAPTER 9A
BILLIARD HALLS
Sec.
9A-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
9A-2.   License required.
Sec.
9A-3.   Issuance of license; posting.
Sec.
9A-4.   Fees.
Sec.
9A-5.   Hours of operation.
Sec.
9A-6.   Expiration of license; denial of renewal application.
Sec.
9A-7.   Suspension.
Sec.
9A-8.   Revocation.
Sec.
9A-9.   Appeal.
Sec.
9A-10.   Transfer of license.
Sec.
9A-11.   Persons under 17 prohibited.
Sec.
9A-12.   Inspection.
Sec.
9A-13.   Occupation tax.
SEC. 9A-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   BILLIARDS means any game played on a table with balls and cue
sticks where the balls are struck by the sticks and the balls strike against
one another.
      (2)   BILLIARD HALL means any place operated for profit where billiards
are played, except those places operated by religious, charitable, and
educational organizations.
      (3)   LICENSEE means the person in whose name a license to operate a
billiard hall has been issued, as well as the individual(s) listed as applicant
(s) on the application for a billiard hall license.
      (4)   PERSON means an individual, partnership, company, corporation,
association, firm, organization, institution, or similar entity. (Ord. 15552)
SEC. 9A-2.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person shall not operate a billiard hall without a billiard hall
license. A person who holds a license shall operate a billiard hall in
conformance with the restrictions in Section
9A-5.
   (b)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
chief of police. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter and the applicant’s premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with the law by the department of code compliance, the fire
department, and the building official.
   (c)   If a person who wishes to operate a billiard hall is an individual he
must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to
operate a billiard hall is other than an individual, each individual who has a
20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a
license as applicant. Each applicant must meet the requirements of Section
9A-3(a) and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted. (Ord. Nos. 15552; 22026; 27697)
SEC. 9A-3.   ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; POSTING.
   (a)   The chief of police shall issue a license to an applicant within 30
days after receipt of an application unless the chief finds one or more of the
following to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or the applicant’s spouse.
      (4)   Reserved.
      (5)   An applicant is physically or mentally incapacitated to an extent
that the applicant cannot operate a billiard hall.
      (6)   An applicant has failed to answer or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form provided.
      (7)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter within two years immediately preceding
the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect.
      (8)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
license by the city to operate a billiard hall within the preceding 12 months,
or residing with a person whose license to operate a billiard hall has been
revoked within the preceding 12 months.
      (9)   An applicant’s premises have not been approved by the department of
code compliance, the fire department, and the building official.
      (10)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
      (11)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of:
         (A)   a felony; or
         (B)   a misdemeanor involving an offense of:
            (i)   prostitution;
            (ii)   promotion of prostitution;
            (iii)   public lewdness;
            (iv)   gambling;
            (v)   violation of the Texas Controlled Substances and Dangerous
Drugs Act; or
            (vi)   unlawfully carrying a weapon;
and five years have not elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole,
or probation. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect.
      (12)   An applicant has been employed in a billiard hall in a managerial
capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated that he is unable
to operate or manage a billiard hall premises in a peaceful and law-abiding
manner.
      (13)   An applicant has been operating the proposed business as a
billiard hall without a valid license issued under this chapter.
   (b)   The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person
to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the billiard
hall. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance
to the billiard hall so that it may be easily read at any time. (Ord. Nos.
15222; 16066; 22026; 25424; 27697)
SEC. 9A-4.   FEES.
   A nonrefundable fee of $46 per billiard table will be charged annually.
(Ord. Nos. 15552; 22206; 29477; 30653; 32003; 33232)
SEC. 9A-5.   HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a billiard hall between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12 noon on Sunday, unless authority to operate on a 24
hour basis has been granted by the chief of police and the letter so stating is
displayed in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the billiard hall.
   (b)   A person who holds a billiard hall license may apply to operate 24
hours each day. Authority to operate 24 hours each day shall not be granted if
the sale or service of alcoholic beverages on the billiard hall premises
provides more than 50 percent of the gross revenue derived from all business
activities conducted on the premises. Approval to operate on a 24 hour basis
will be by a letter signed by the chief of police or his designated
representative, and will show the name of the license holder and the address of
the billiard hall. The letter will be displayed in the same location and manner
as the billiard hall license and shall be valid for the same period of time as
the billiard hall license. (Ord. 15552)
SEC. 9A-6.   EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; DENIAL OF RENEWAL APPLICATION.
   (a)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may
be renewed only by making application as provided in Section
9A-2. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date the
expiration of the license will not be affected.
   (b)   When the chief of police denies renewal of a license, the applicant
shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial unless the
chief of police finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been
corrected or abated, in which case the applicant may be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became effective. (Ord. 15552)
SEC. 9A-7.   SUSPENSION.
   The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not exceeding 30
days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
      (1)   violated Section
9A-3(b), Section
9A-5, Section
9A-10, or Section
9A-11(b) of this chapter;
      (2)   engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the
billiard hall premises;
      (3)   refused to allow an inspection of the billiard hall premises as
authorized by this chapter;
      (4)   knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the billiard hall
premises;
      (5)   knowingly permitted an intoxicated person to remain on the
premises; or
      (6)   demonstrated inability to operate or manage a billiard hall
premises in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers. (Ord. 15552)
SEC. 9A-8.   REVOCATION.
   (a)   The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in
Section
9A-7 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
   (b)   The chief of police shall revoke a license upon determining that:
      (1)   a licensee has given false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the chief of police during the application process;
      (2)   a licensee or an employee is unable to lawfully operate the
billiard hall because of physical or mental impairment;
      (3)   a licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (4)   a licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
      (5)   a licensee or an employee knowingly permitted a customer to play
billiards during a period of time when the billiard hall license was suspended;
or
      (6)   a licensee has been convicted of:
         (A)   a felony; or
         (B)   a misdemeanor involving an offense of:
            (i)   prostitution;
            (ii)   promotion of prostitution;
            (iii)   public lewdness;
            (iv)   gambling;
            (v)   violation of the Texas Controlled Substances and Dangerous
Drugs Act; or
            (vi)   unlawfully carrying a weapon;
and five years have not elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole,
or probation. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect.
   (c)   When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation will
continue for one year and the licensee may not be issued a billiard hall
license for one year from the date revocation became final. If, subsequent to
revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation action
has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became final. If the
license was revoked under Subsection (b)(6), an applicant may not apply for or
be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under
that subsection have elapsed. (Ord. Nos. 15552; 16066; 25424)
SEC. 9A-9.   APPEAL.
   If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or
revokes a license, or denies authority to operate on a 24 hour basis, he shall
send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, written notice of his action and the right to an appeal. The
aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief of police to a permit and
license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of
police in suspending or revoking a license until the permit and license appeal
board makes a final decision. (Ord. Nos. 15552; 16066; 18200)
SEC. 9A-10.   TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, not shall a licensee
operate a billiard hall under the authority of a license at any place other
than the address designated in the application. (Ord. 15552)
SEC. 9A-11.   PERSONS UNDER 17 PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person under the age of 17 years may enter a billiard hall unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian. A person commits an offense if he falsely
represents himself to be either a parent or guardian of a person under the age
of 17 years for the purpose of gaining the person’s admittance into a billiard
hall.
   (b)   A licensee or an employee of a licensee commits an offense if he
knowingly allows a person under the age of 17 years to enter or remain upon the
premises of a billiard hall unless the person is accompanied by a parent or
guardian.
   (c)   A licensee shall post at or near each entrance to a billiard hall a
conspicuous sign containing the words “Persons under 17 Prohibited without
Parent or Guardian, City of Dallas Ordinance,” or other language that clearly
prohibits a person under the age of 17 years from entering the billiard hall
unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. (Ord. Nos. 15552; 20199)
SEC. 9A-12.   INSPECTION.
   Representatives of the department of code compliance, the fire department,
the police department, and the building official may inspect the premises of a
billiard hall, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time
it is open for business. (Ord. Nos. 15552; 22026; 27697)
SEC. 9A-13.   OCCUPATION TAX.
   In addition to the license fees imposed by this article, an occupation tax
of one-half the amount levied by the state is levied on every billiard table
(whether coin operated or not) on which the state levies such tax. (Ord. 15552)
CHAPTER 9B
BUILDING SECURITY
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
9B-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
9B-2.   Areas permanently closed to the public.
Sec.
9B-3.   Hours buildings are closed to the public.
Sec.
9B-4.   Unlawful to enter closed sections.
Sec.
9B-5.   Authority to post signs.
ARTICLE II.
DALLAS SECURITY OFFICERS.
Sec.
9B-6.   Created; duties.
Sec.
9B-7.   Authority.
Sec.
9B-8.   Retirement eligibility.
Sec.
9B-9.   Survivor’s assistance.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 9B-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
   (1)   CITY HALL means the building containing administrative offices of the
city located at 1500 Marilla Street, Dallas, Texas, including, but not limited
to, the two underground levels, and the surrounding grounds bounded by Young
Street, Canton Street, South Ervay Street, and South Akard Street.
   (2)   MUNICIPAL BUILDING means the building containing administrative
offices of the city, located at 2014 Main Street, Dallas, Texas, including but
not limited to, the basement, sub-basement, the parking areas adjacent to the
building, and the alleys and sidewalks adjacent to the building.
   (3)   POLICE AND COURTS BUILDING means the building containing the municipal
courts, jail, and administrative offices of the police department of the city
located at 106 South Harwood Street, Dallas, Texas, including but not limited
to, the basement, sub-basement, and sidewalks adjacent to the building. (Ord.
16157)
SEC. 9B-2.   AREAS PERMANENTLY CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC.
   (a)   The following areas of city hall are permanently closed to the public:
      (1)   Police and fire dispatch center on the L1 basement level in module
A North.
      (2)   The water utilities accounting area on the first floor in module A
North.
      (3)   The tax accounting area on the second floor in module D South.
      (4)   Information services computer room and tape library on the third
floor in modules B, C, and D South.
      (5)   The city attorney’s copy center, record storage room, and word
processing center on the seventh floor in module C North.
      (6)   The building mechanical room on the seventh floor South.
      (7)   The building mechanical room on the eighth floor.
      (8)   The electrical, mechanical, and telephone closets throughout the
building.
      (9)   The municipal archives and records center operated by the city
secretary on the L2 basement level in module D North.
   (b)   The following areas of the municipal building and police and courts
building are permanently closed to the public:
      (1)   The sub-basements of the municipal building and police and courts
building;
      (2)   The employee working areas of the fines and docket record room on
the first floor of the municipal building;
      (3)   The city jail on the fourth and fifth floors of the police and
courts building;
      (4)   Penthouse and elevator machine room on the fifth floor of the
municipal building;
      (5)   The police locker room in the police and courts building;
      (6)   The record and identification sections of the police department in
the basement of the police and courts building.
   (c)   The areas listed in Subsections (a) and (b) are not closed to an
officer or employee of the city engaged in the performance of his official
duties who complies with procedures set forth in official administrative
directives and regulations regarding security. (Ord. Nos. 16157; 19312; 20211)
SEC. 9B-3.   HOURS BUILDINGS ARE CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC.
   (a)   All portions of the city hall that are not permanently closed to the
public, are closed to the public from 6:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and
are closed to the public from 6:00 p.m. Friday until 6:00 a.m. the following
Monday and on all employee holidays authorized by the city council; provided,
that the exterior grounds and parking facilities at the city hall shall at all
times be open to the public as prescribed by building regulations.
   (b)   All portions of the police and courts building and the municipal
building that are not permanently closed to the public, are closed to the
public from 11:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and are closed to the public
on weekends from 11:00 p.m. Friday until 7:00 a.m. the following Monday and on
all employee holidays authorized by the city council; provided, that the
basement, first floor, second floor, and the visiting room on the fourth floor
of the police and courts building shall at all times be open to the public for
the purpose of attending court sessions, paying fines, posting bond, and
visiting prisoners at times prescribed by the police department; and provided
further, that the sidewalks and alleys shall at all times be open to the
public.
   (c)   This section does not apply to an officer or employee of the city who
enters those portions of the city hall, the police and courts building, or the
municipal building, not permanently closed to the public, during closed hours
when the person is engaged in the performance of official duties and complies
with the procedures set forth in official administrative directives and
regulations regarding security.
   (d)   This section does not apply to a member of the general public who is
attending an authorized public meeting, a prescribed class of instruction, or
an authorized event, with respect to those portions of the premises where the
meeting, class, or event is being held and those portions of the premises
necessary to gain access to the meeting, class, or event. (Ord. 16157)
SEC. 9B-4.   UNLAWFUL TO ENTER CLOSED SECTIONS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   enters the city hall, municipal building, or police and courts
building during closed hours; or
      (2)   enters a portion of the city hall, municipal building, or police
and courts building that is permanently closed to the public.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person is
an officer or employee of the city, is engaged in the performance of official
duties, and has complied with procedures set forth in official administrative
directives and regulations regarding security.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(1) that the person
was attending an authorized public meeting, class, or event and did not go
beyond those portions of the building necessary to gain access to the meeting,
class, or event. (Ord. 16157)
SEC. 9B-5.   AUTHORITY TO POST SIGNS.
   The chief of police, or his designated representative, is authorized to
place and maintain signs at those areas that are permanently closed to the
public. The signs shall state that each area is permanently closed to the
public, specifically mention this chapter, state the maximum penalty for
violation, and be posted so as to afford adequate notice to the public of the
restricted status of each area. (Ord. Nos. 16157; 19679)
ARTICLE II.
DALLAS SECURITY OFFICERS.
SEC. 9B-6.   CREATED; DUTIES.
   (a)   There is hereby created in the office of the city marshal personnel
known as Dallas security officers.
   (b)   Dallas security officers shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   maintain security and protection for premises and lawful occupants
of premises that are owned, occupied, or managed by the city and ensure orderly
and lawful conduct and activities on those premises; and
      (2)   perform such other duties as may be required by the city marshal.
(Ord. Nos. 16157; 17151; 19312; 19679; 22026; 23694; 30994; 32557)
SEC. 9B-7.   AUTHORITY.
   While at an assigned place of duty, a person employed as a Dallas security
officer:
      (1)   is vested with the power of arrest for misdemeanor breaches of the
peace, to prevent the consequences of theft and felonies in the officer's
presence, limited to situations arising out of enforcement of the officer's
specific duties and further limited to the specific authority contained in the
officer's warrant of appointment;
      (2)   may carry and use a firearm when authorized by the city marshal;
and
      (3)   must be identified by uniform and badge. (Ord. Nos. 16157; 19679;
22026; 23694; 30994; 32557)
SEC. 9B-8.   RETIREMENT ELIGIBILITY.
   Dallas security officers shall not be eligible for membership in the
firemen, policemen and fire alarm operator's pension fund created pursuant to
Article 6243a, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes; however, they shall be eligible
for membership in the employee's retirement fund of the city of Dallas. (Ord.
Nos. 16157; 19679; 30994)
SEC. 9B-9.   SURVIVOR’S ASSISTANCE.
   Dallas security officers shall be deemed members of an auxiliary unit with
powers to make arrests, for the purpose of qualifying for survivor's assistance
benefits under the provisions of Article 6228f, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes.
(Ord. Nos. 16157; 16218; 19679; 30994)
CHAPTER 9C
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. 29754)
CHAPTER 10
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. 29596)
CHAPTER 10A
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. 29596)
CHAPTER 10B
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. 29596)
CHAPTER 11
CEMETERIES AND BURIALS
Sec.
11-1.   Establishment of new cemeteries prohibited; exception.
Sec.
11-2.   Recognition and authorization of existing cemeteries.
Sec.
11-3.   Extension of cemetery limits.
Sec.
11-4.   Sexton - Required; approval by council.
Sec.
11-5.   Same - Report of state law violators.
Sec.
11-6.   Depth of grave; exception for burial vaults.
Sec.
11-7.   Orders for immediate interment.
Sec.
11-8.   Burial of paupers - Use of public pauper cemetery generally.
Sec.
11-9.   Same - City contract for interment.
Sec.
11-10.   Burial generally - Outside authorized cemetery.
Sec.
11-11.   Same - On private property; director of public health authorized to
disinter; exception.
Sec.
11-12.   Burial-transit permit.
Sec.
11-13.   Report of death required.
Sec.
11-14.   Unlawful delivery and receipt of body.
Sec. 11-15.   Reserved.
Sec. 11-16.   Reserved.
Sec. 11-17.   Reserved.
Sec. 11-18.   Reserved.
Sec.
11-19.   Official visiting hours; regulations generally.
SEC. 11-1.   ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW CEMETERIES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any
person to lay out or establish a public or private burying ground within the
city.
   (b)   Subsection (a) does not apply to the establishment of a national
cemetery for veterans pursuant to Chapter 24, Title 38 of the United States
Code Annotated, as amended.
   (c)   Subsection (a) does not apply to a cemetery established through a
specific use permit or planned development district granted in compliance with
Chapter 51 or Chapter 51A of this code. (Code 1941, Art. 15-3; Ord. Nos. 22368;
33224)
SEC. 11-2.   RECOGNITION AND AUTHORIZATION OF EXISTING CEMETERIES.
   (a)   The following named cemeteries now established within the city or
subject to the jurisdiction of the city are hereby recognized and authorized as
legal and proper places for the interment of persons who may die in the city or
who may be brought to the city for burial:
      Calvary Hill Cemetery, 3235 Lombardy Lane.
      Calvary Cemetery, Campbell N.E.
      Corner Hall Street.
      Crown Hill Memorial Park and Mausoleum, 9718 Webb Chapel Road.
      Emanuel Cemetery, Lemmon Avenue Corner Campbell Street.
      Forest Lawn Cemetery, 10977 Harry Hines Boulevard.
      Grove Hill Cemetery, 4118 Samuell Boulevard.
      Greenwood Cemetery, Campbell Street and Lemmon Avenue.
      Hillcrest Memorial Park, 7403 Northwest Highway.
      Hillcrest Mausoleum, 7407 Northwest Highway.
      Laurel Land Memorial Park, 6000 South Beckley.
      Lincoln Memorial Park, 1621 North Haskell Lisbon Cemetery, 4315 Denley
Drive.
      Oak Cliff Cemetery, 1300 East Eighth Street.
      Oakland Cemetery, 3808 Oakland Avenue.
      Pleasant Mound Cemetery, Scyene Road and Buckner Boulevard.
      Restland Memorial Park, Greenville Avenue and Valley View Lane.
      Shearith Israel Cemetery, 4600 Block Dolphin Road.
   (b)   A cemetery established through a specific use permit or planned
development district granted under Chapter 51 or Chapter 51A of this code is
recognized and authorized as a legal and proper place for the interment of
persons who may die in the city or who may be brought to the city for burial.
(Code 1941, Art. 15-1; Ord. Nos. 4974; 7799; 33224)
SEC. 11-3.   EXTENSION OF CEMETERY LIMITS.
   The limits of any cemetery in the city shall never be extended, unless
authority has been granted by the city council. (Code 1941, Art. 15-2.)
SEC. 11-4.   SEXTON - REQUIRED; APPROVAL BY COUNCIL.
   There shall be a sexton in charge of every cemetery and burying ground
authorized and established by law, and the name of such sexton shall be
certified to the director of public health by the person owning or controlling
such cemetery or burying ground. The appointment of sextons shall be subject to
the approval of the city council. Sextons will be entrusted to keep cemetery
records and plot maps as directed by the director of public health. (Code 1941,
Art. 15-4; Ord. 7799)
SEC. 11-5.   SAME - REPORT OF STATE LAW VIOLATORS.
   It shall be the duty of every sexton to report to the director of public
health any violation of Articles 528 and 529 of the Penal Code of the state.
(Code 1941, Art. 15-12.)
SEC. 11-6.   DEPTH OF GRAVE; EXCEPTION FOR BURIAL VAULTS.
   No body of any deceased person shall be buried in any cemetery in the city
at a less depth than five feet below the surface of the ground; provided, that
the provisions of this section shall not apply to cases where burial vaults or
tombs have been or may be erected for the reception of the bodies of deceased
persons. (Code 1941, Art. 15-8.)
SEC. 11-7.   ORDERS FOR IMMEDIATE INTERMENT.
   Whenever the interment of the body of any deceased person has, in the
opinion of the director of public health, been unnecessarily delayed or
whenever the interment of the body of a deceased person, for sanitary reasons
or for the protection of public health, should take place forthwith, it shall
be the duty of the director of public health to issue an order directing such
interment immediately. The order shall be directed to the person in charge of
the body and a failure to comply with the order shall render the person guilty
of an offense. Directors of all authorized funeral homes shall report to the
director of public health the name of any deceased in their charge that has
awaited burial, cremation, or entombment for a period of more than two weeks.
(Code 1941, Art. 15-10; Ord. Nos. 7799; 19963)
SEC. 11-8.   BURIAL OF PAUPERS - USE OF PUBLIC PAUPER CEMETERY GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any human body in the public
pauper cemetery except the body of a pauper or the body of any person for whose
burial no means, financial or otherwise, can be found or furnished. It shall be
unlawful for any person to bury any body in the public pauper cemetery until
and unless such person has theretofore filed with the director of public health
a sworn statement to the effect that no means, financial or otherwise, has been
found for the burial. (Code 1941, Art. 15-5)
SEC. 11-9.   SAME - CITY CONTRACT FOR INTERMENT.
   All dead bodies shall be properly interred in some authorized cemetery or
burying ground, except as herein otherwise provided. The city council is hereby
authorized to cause a contract or contracts to be executed by the city with
some competent undertaker or undertakers, on such terms and conditions as may
be satisfactory to the city council, binding such undertaker or undertakers to
properly and legally bury and inter all human dead bodies of paupers which are
identified or for the expense of the burial of which no means, financial or
otherwise, can be found or furnished, and to bury and inter such bodies under
the direction of the city council and of the director of public health and to
their satisfaction.
   Such contract shall, among other things, provide that:
   (a)   All work shall be handled in a sanitary manner and in strict
compliance with the rules as set forth by the board of health of the state and
the city.
   (b)   All bodies shall be washed and arterially embalmed, and males shall be
shaved.
   (c)   All bodies shall be clothed in a complete suit of underwear, hose and
burial shroud.
   (d)   For adults, the contractor shall furnish a casket covered with black
cloth upholstered with a good grade of domestic wood and wool and lined with a
good grade of embossed lining. The casket shall be trimmed and ornamented with
six handles, name plate, crucifix or lodge emblem.
   (e)   For children, the contractor shall furnish a casket covered with white
plush and trimmed as set out above.
   (f)   The contractor shall furnish with each casket an outside box.
   (g)   In case of death from a contagious disease, there must be compliance
with the rules and regulations of the board of health of the state and the
city.
   (h)   The contractor shall use every effort possible to locate relatives and
friends of the deceased and shall hold unknown bodies until they are satisfied
that identification of such body is impossible.
   (i)   The contractor shall keep a complete record of all cases handled by
him, for the information of the police department, or any person seeking to
locate lost relatives or friends. (Code 1941, Art. 15-17)
SEC. 11-10.   BURIAL GENERALLY - OUTSIDE AUTHORIZED CEMETERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of any deceased person
anywhere within the city other than in a cemetery duly authorized and
recognized as a public burying ground under the terms of this chapter, except
by special permission granted by the director of public health. If the body of
any deceased person is buried anywhere within the city except in a legally
authorized cemetery or burying ground without such permission, then the
director of public health may require the person so burying such body to
disinter such body and bury the same in a duly authorized cemetery or burying
ground. The failure of any such person to comply with such order of the
director of public health shall subject such person to the penalty prescribed
by Section
13-1. (Code 1941, Art. 15-6; Ord. 11282)
SEC. 11-11.   SAME - ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH AUTHORIZED
TO DISINTER; EXCEPTION.
   If the body of any deceased person be found buried on any lot or ground in
the city, the owner or agent of which lot or ground cannot be found, it shall
be lawful and is hereby made the duty of the director of public health of the
city to cause such body to be disinterred and buried in a cemetery established
by this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall
not apply to the remains of deceased persons which have been interred prior to
the passage of this chapter. (Code 1941, Art. 15-7)
SEC. 11-12.   BURIAL - TRANSIT PERMIT.
   If a dead body or fetus is to be removed from this state, transported by
common carrier within this state, or cremated, or if a disinterred body is to
be removed from the cemetery where it was interred, the funeral director, or
person acting as funeral director, shall obtain a burial-transit permit from
the director of public health. (Code 1941, Art. 15-11; Ord. 14351)
SEC. 11-13.   REPORT OF DEATH REQUIRED.
   Before the sexton of a cemetery permits the body of a deceased person who
has died within this state to be interred in the cemetery, he shall require to
be delivered to him from the person seeking to bury the body, a copy of the
state department of health report of death form which has been filed by the
funeral director with the local registrar within whose jurisdiction the death
occurred. If the body is transported from outside the state, before the sexton
permits the body of the deceased person to be interred in the cemetery, he
shall require to be delivered to him from the person seeking to bury the body,
a copy of the burial-transit permit issued in accordance with the law and
regulations of the jurisdiction where the death occurred. (Code 1941, Art. 15-
14; Ord. 7799, Ord. 14351)
SEC. 11-14.   UNLAWFUL DELIVERY AND RECEIPT OF BODY.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to convey or deliver the body of a
deceased person to a cemetery in the city or for a sexton of a cemetery to
receive the body of a deceased person, unless the body is accompanied by either
a valid state department of health report of death form which has been filed by
the funeral director with the local registrar within whose jurisdiction the
death occurred or a valid burial-transit permit. (Code 1941, Art. 15-13; Ord.
14351)
SECS. 11-15 THRU 11-17.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 14351)
SEC. 11-18.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 11-19.   OFFICIAL VISITING HOURS; REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   (a)   All cemeteries and burying grounds within the city, including those
that are no longer used for interment purposes, regardless of whether they are
listed or not under Section
11-2, whether public or private, shall be officially open for any authorized
use, such as visiting, care of graves, services for the burial of the dead and
other appropriate uses from one-half hour before official sunrise, Central
Standard Time, until one-half hour after official sundown, Central Standard
Time, daily. It shall be unlawful for anyperson to loiter in, enter into, make
use of, attempt to gain access to or otherwise be present in any such cemetery
before or after such official visiting hours, except as provided in Subsection
(c).
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter outside any cemetery
after the official closing hour or prior to the official opening hour;
provided, that the area outside the cemetery within which such loitering is
prohibited shall be deemed to be the same side of the street as the cemetery
where such cemetery or a part thereof fronts upon a street or within 100 feet
of the boundary of all or a portion of such cemetery where the same does not
front upon or border upon a street.
   (c)   If any person wishes to gain access to any cemetery after the official
closing hour, as designated in Subsection (a), for the purpose of conducting
burial or religious ceremonies, then the funeral director or the head of the
religious order, as the case may be, shall obtain permission from the sexton of
the cemetery in question. (Ord. Nos. 9623; 33224)
CHAPTER 12
CITY YOUTH PROGRAM STANDARDS OF CARE
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
Sec.
12-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
12-2.   Expiration date.
Sec.
12-3.   Definitions.
Sec.
12-4.   Administration.
Sec.
12-5.   Inspection; monitoring; enforcement.
Sec.
12-6.   Enrollment.
Sec.
12-7.   Suspected abuse.
ARTICLE II.
STAFFING: RESPONSIBILITIES AND TRAINING.
Sec.
12-8.   Youth program coordinator: qualifications and responsibilities.
Sec.
12-9.   Youth program leaders: qualifications and responsibilities.
Sec.
12-10.   Training and orientation.
ARTICLE III.
OPERATIONS.
Sec.
12-11.   Staff-participant ratio.
Sec.
12-12.   Discipline.
Sec.
12-13.   Programming.
Sec.
12-14.   Communication.
Sec.
12-15.   Transportation.
Sec.
12-16.   Release of participants.
ARTICLE IV.
FACILITY STANDARDS.
Sec.
12-17.   Safety.
Sec.
12-18.   Fire.
Sec.
12-19.   Health.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
SEC. 12-1.   PURPOSE.
   This chapter and the standards of care established by this chapter are
adopted by the city council of the city of Dallas, Texas in compliance with
Section 42.041(b)(14) of the Texas Human Resources Code, as amended, in order
to exempt city youth programs from state child-care licensing requirements.
These standards of care are intended to be minimum standards by which the city
will operate its youth programs. The programs operated by the city are
recreational in nature and are not child-care facilities. Although this chapter
establishes standards of care for city youth programs for children of ages five
through 13 years, nothing in this chapter requires the city to provide any
youth programs, or prevents the city from limiting youth programs to specific
age groups within the five- through 13-year-old range. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534;
23907; 24281; 24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565;
27911; 28217; 28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
SEC. 12-2.   EXPIRATION DATE.
   This chapter and the youth program standards of care established in this
chapter expire on September 17, 2026, unless sooner terminated or extended by
ordinance of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281; 24611;
24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217; 28670;
29036; 29358; 30106; 30650; 30976; 31647; 31994; 33229)
SEC. 12-3.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   ADMINISTRATION CENTER means the main administrative site for a city
youth program.
      (2)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (3)   CITY COUNCIL means the city council of the city of Dallas.
      (4)   DEPARTMENT means the park and recreation department of the city.
      (5)   DIRECTOR means the director of the park and recreation department
or the director’s authorized representative.
      (6)   INTER-SESSION means the periods of time when a year-round school is
not in session.
      (7)   PARENT means a person who:
         (A)   is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, or a step-parent of a
youth;
         (B)   is, under court order, the guardian of the person of a youth or
is a public or private agency with whom a youth has been placed by a court; or
         (C)   otherwise has legal custody and authority to enroll a youth in a
city youth program.
      (8)   PARTICIPANT means a youth whose parent has completed all required
registration procedures and who is determined by the director to be eligible to
participate in a city youth program.
      (9)   PROGRAM COORDINATOR or COORDINATOR means a full-time professional
employee of the department who is responsible for:
         (A)   managing a recreational facility where a youth program is
conducted; or
         (B)   overseeing the planning, administration, and implementation of a
particular city youth program.
      (10)   PROGRAM EMPLOYEE or EMPLOYEE means any person hired to work for
the department who is assigned responsibility for managing, administering, or
implementing some portion of a youth program. The term includes program
coordinators and program leaders.
      (11)   PROGRAM LEADER or LEADER means a full-time, part-time, permanent,
or temporary employee of the department, or an independent contractor or
volunteer of the city, who is assigned responsibility for implementing or
conducting some portion of a youth program.
      (12)   PROGRAM MANUAL means a notebook of policies, procedures, required
forms, and organizational and programming information relevant to the city’s
youth programs, as promulgated or otherwise approved by the director.
      (13)   PROGRAM SITE means any area or facility where any portion of a
city youth program is conducted.
      (14)   STANDARDS OF CARE means all provisions contained in this chapter.
      (15)   YOUTH means a person who is not less than five years nor more than
13 years of age.
      (16)   YOUTH PROGRAM or PROGRAM means a city-sponsored recreational
program for youth that may be offered by the park and recreation department
after school, during the summer, during holidays, or during inter-session. The
term does not include any program or activity to which attendees are free to
come and go at will without regard to the presence of a parent or other
responsible adult to care for them. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281;
24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217;
28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
SEC. 12-4.   ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The director shall implement, administer, and enforce the youth
program standards of care. The director may by written order establish such
rules, regulations, and policies, not inconsistent with this chapter, as the
director determines are necessary to discharge any duty under or to effect the
policy of this chapter.
   (b)   No city youth program may be advertised as a child-care facility.
   (c)   The standards of care apply to all youth programs sponsored by the
city, whether offered after school, during the summer, during holidays, or
during inter-session.
   (d)   When registering for a youth program, each participant’s parent will
be provided a current copy of the standards of care and will be informed that
the youth program is not licensed by the State of Texas. A current copy of the
standards of care will also be maintained at each youth program site for
inspection and review by the public and by program employees.
   (e)   The director shall cause a criminal background check to be conducted
on each prospective youth program employee. If results of that criminal check
indicate that an applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses,
the applicant will not be considered for employment:
      (1)   a felony or a misdemeanor classified as an offense against a person
or family;
      (2)   a felony or misdemeanor classified as public indecency;
      (3)   a felony or misdemeanor violation of any law intended to control
the possession or distribution of any controlled substance;
      (4)   any offense involving moral turpitude; or
      (5)   any offense that would potentially put youth participants or the
city of Dallas at risk.
   (f)   The provisions of this chapter are administrative in nature and are
not subject to criminal penalties. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281;
24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217;
28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
SEC. 12-5.   INSPECTION; MONITORING; ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   A coordinator shall initiate an inspection report for each youth
program to confirm that standards of care are being met. Each inspection report
will be sent to the director for review and kept on record for at least two
years. The director shall review each report and establish deadlines and
criteria for program compliance with the standards of care.
   (b)   The director shall make visual inspections of each youth program site
based on the following schedule:
      (1)   Each after school program site will be inspected bimonthly.
      (2)    Each summer program site will be inspected twice during its summer
schedule.
      (3)   Each holiday program site will be inspected once during the winter
break and once during the spring break.
      (4)   Each inter-session program site will be inspected once during each
inter-session.
   (c)   Any complaint regarding enforcement of the standards of care at a
youth program must be directed to the program site coordinator. The coordinator
shall take necessary steps to resolve each problem. The complaint and its
resolution must be recorded by the coordinator. The director shall address any
serious complaint regarding enforcement of the standards of care and record the
complaint and its resolution.
   (d)   The director shall make an annual report to the city council on the
overall status of the youth programs and their operation relative to compliance
with the standards of care. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281; 24611;
24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217; 28670;
29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
SEC. 12-6.   ENROLLMENT.
   Before a youth may be enrolled in a youth program, a parent must sign
registration forms that contain the following information:
      (1)   the child’s name, age, address, and home telephone number;
       (2)   the name and address of each parent and a telephone number for
each parent during program hours;
      (3)   the name and telephone number of each person to whom the child may
be released;
      (4)   a statement of the child’s special problems or needs;
      (5)   an emergency medical authorization;
      (6)   proof of residency, when appropriate;
      (7)   a liability waiver; and
      (8)   an acknowledgement that the parent has been informed and
understands that the program is not licensed by the State of Texas. (Ord. Nos.
23159; 23534; 23907; 24281; 24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800;
27222; 27565; 27911; 28217; 28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
SEC. 12-7.   SUSPECTED ABUSE.
   Every program employee shall report suspected child abuse or neglect in
accordance with the Texas Family Code. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281;
24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217;
28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
ARTICLE II.
STAFFING: RESPONSIBILITIES AND TRAINING.
SEC. 12-8.   YOUTH PROGRAM COORDINATOR: QUALIFICATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   Each coordinator must meet all of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Be at least 21 years of age.
      (2)   Have two years of experience planning and implementing recreational
activities.
      (3)   Pass a background investigation, including, but not limited to,
testing for illegal substances.
      (4)   Have successfully completed a course in first aid and cardio
pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) based on either American Heart Association or
American Red Cross standards.
   (b)   A coordinator is responsible for:
      (1)   administering the daily operations of a youth program in compliance
with the standards of care;
      (2)   recommending for hire, supervising, and evaluating leaders for a
youth program; and
      (3)   planning, implementing, and evaluating a youth program. (Ord. Nos.
23159; 23534; 23907; 24281; 24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800;
27222; 27565; 27911; 28217; 28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
SEC. 12-9.   YOUTH PROGRAM LEADERS: QUALIFICATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   Each leader must meet all of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Be age 18 years of age or older, if working with children.
      (2)   Be able to consistently exhibit competency, good judgment, and
self-control when working with children.
      (3)   Relate to children with courtesy, respect, tolerance, and patience.
      (4)   Have successfully completed a course in first aid and cardio
pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) based on either American Heart Association or
American Red Cross standards.
      (5)   Pass a background investigation, including, but not limited to,
testing for illegal substances.
   (b)   A leader is responsible for:
      (1)   providing participants with an environment in which they can feel
safe, enjoy wholesome recreation activities, and participate in appropriate
social opportunities with their peers;
      (2)   knowing and following all city, departmental, and program
standards, policies, and procedures that apply to the youth programs; and
      (3)   ensuring that participants are released only to a parent or a
person designated by a parent and complying with the department- approved plan
for verifying the identity of a person authorized to pick up a participant when
that person is not known to the leader. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281;
24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217;
28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
SEC. 12-10.   TRAINING AND ORIENTATION.
   (a)   The department shall provide training and orientation to program
employees relating to working with children in general and relating to the
specific job responsibilities of each employee. A coordinator shall provide
each leader with a program manual specific to each youth program.
   (b)   Each program employee will be trained in appropriate procedures for
handling emergencies and in other areas, including, but not limited to, city,
departmental, and program policies and procedures, provision of recreational
activities, safety issues, child psychology, and organization.
   (c)   Each program employee shall be familiar with the standards of care for
the youth programs and with all program policies, including the discipline,
guidance, and release of participants, as outlined in the program manual.
   (d)   Each program employee will be required to sign an acknowledgement that
the employee received the training required under this chapter. (Ord. Nos.
23159; 23534; 23907; 24281; 24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800;
27222; 27565; 27911; 28217; 28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
ARTICLE III.
OPERATIONS.
SEC. 12-11.   STAFF-PARTICIPANT RATIO.
   (a)   In each city youth program, the standard ratio of participants to
leaders will be 20 to 1.
   (b)   Each participant will be assigned a program employee who is
responsible for the participant and who is aware of the participant's habits,
interests, and special needs, as identified by the participant's parent during
registration for a youth program.
   (c)   At all times, at least one employee who is 18 years of age or older
must be present at each program site. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281;
24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217;
28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 31994; 33229)
SEC. 12-12.   DISCIPLINE.
   (a)   A program employee shall implement discipline and guidance in a
consistent manner based on the best interests of program participants.
   (b)   No corporal punishment or treatment may be used. A program employee
may use brief, supervised separation of a participant from the group, if
necessary.
   (c)   As necessary, program employees shall provide discipline reports to
the parents of participants. A parent will be asked to sign a participant’s
discipline report to indicate that the parent has been advised about a specific
problem or incident.
   (d)   An excessive number of discipline reports or discipline reports of a
severe nature, as described in the program manual, may result in a participant
being suspended from a program.
   (e)   Any participant who poses a danger to other participants or staff will
be removed from the program site as soon as possible. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534;
23907; 24281; 24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565;
27911; 28217; 28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
SEC. 12-13.   PROGRAMMING.
   (a)   A program employee shall attempt to provide activities for each group
according to the participants’ ages, interests, and abilities. The activities
must be appropriate to each participant’s health, safety, and well-being. The
activities also must be flexible and promote each participant’s emotional,
social, and mental growth.
   (b)   A program employee shall attempt to provide that indoor and outdoor
time periods include:
      (1)   alternating active and passive activities;
      (2)   opportunity for individual and group activities; and
      (3)   outdoor time each day, as the weather permits.
   (c)   A program employee shall be attentive and considerate of the
participants’ safety on field trips and during any transportation provided by
the program. A program employee must have a written list of all participants in
each group and shall check the roll frequently.
   (d)   During trips, each program employee who supervises participants shall
maintain immediate access to the emergency medical forms and emergency contact
information for each participant. First aid supplies and a guide to first aid
and emergency care must be readily available to each program employee on every
field trip. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281; 24611; 24943; 25269; 25628;
25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217; 28670; 29036; 30106; 30650;
33229)
SEC. 12-14.   COMMUNICATION.
   (a)   Each site must have access to a telephone for use in contacting the
administration center and making emergency calls.
   (b)   A coordinator shall post the following telephone numbers adjacent to a
telephone that is accessible to all program employees at each site;
      (1)   Dallas ambulance or emergency medical services.
      (2)   Dallas Police Department.
      (3)   Dallas Fire-Rescue Department.
      (4)   The administration center.
      (5)   Telephone numbers at which each participant's parents may be
reached.
      (6)   The telephone number for the program site. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534;
23907; 24281; 24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565;
27911; 28217; 28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 31994; 33229)
SEC. 12-15.   TRANSPORTATION.
   (a)   Before a participant may be transported to or from a city-sponsored
activity, a program registration form, completed by a parent of the
participant, must be filed with a coordinator.
   (b)   Every program vehicle used for transporting youth participants must be
equipped with:
      (1)   first aid supplies and a first aid and emergency care guide that
are easily accessible to program employees in the vehicle; and
      (2)   an operable 6-BD portable fire extinguisher that is installed in
the vehicle and that is easily accessible to program employees in the vehicle.
(Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281; 24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998;
26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217; 28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 31994;
33229)
SEC. 12-16.   RELEASE OF PARTICIPANTS.
   (a)   A participant will be released from a youth program only to a parent
or to a person designated by the parent in the registration forms.
   (b)   Each program site must have a copy of a department-approved plan to
verify the identity of a person authorized to pick up a participant if that
person is not known to a program leader. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281;
24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217;
28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
ARTICLE IV.
FACILITY STANDARDS.
SEC. 12-17.   SAFETY.
   (a)   Program employees shall inspect each program site daily to detect
sanitation and safety concerns that might affect the health and safety of the
participants. A daily inspection report must be completed by program employees
and kept on file by the coordinator.
   (b)   All buildings, grounds, and equipment at each program site must be
inspected, cleaned, repaired, and maintained to protect the health of the
participants.
   (c)   All equipment and supplies used in a program must be safe for use by
the participants.
   (d)   First aid supplies must be readily available to all program employees
at each site, during transportation to an off-site activity, and for the
duration of any off-site activity. A program employee shall maintain first aid
supplies in a designated location, readily available to staff. Each program
employee must at all times have immediate access to a guide to first aid and
emergency care.
   (e)   Air conditioners, electric fans, and heaters at each program site must
be mounted out of the participants’ reach or have safeguards that keep
participants from being injured.
   (f)   Porches and platforms at each program site that are more than 30
inches above the ground must be equipped with railings that participants can
reach.
   (g)   All swing seats at each program site must be constructed of durable,
lightweight, relatively pliable material. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907;
24281; 24611; 24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911;
28217; 28670; 29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
SEC. 12-18.   FIRE.
   (a)   In case of fire, danger of fire, explosion, or any other emergency, a
program employee’s first priority is to evacuate the participants to a
designated safe area.
   (b)   Each program site must have at least one fire extinguisher approved by
the fire marshal that is readily available to all program employees. Annually,
a coordinator shall inspect the fire extinguisher and send an inspection report
to the director, who shall keep the report on file for a minimum of two years.
Every program employee must be trained in the proper use of a fire
extinguisher.
   (c)   Fire drills will be initiated at program sites according to the
following schedule:
      (1)   After school programs. A fire drill will be conducted once every
three months. Program employees will confer with school staff to ensure that
city and school procedures do not conflict.
      (2)   Summer programs: A fire drill will be conducted twice during the
session.
      (3)   Holiday programs: A fire drill will be conducted once during the
fall and spring sessions.
      (4)   Inter-session programs: A fire drill will be conducted once during
each inter- session. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281; 24611; 24943;
25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217; 28670; 29036;
30106; 30650; 33229)
SEC. 12-19.   HEALTH.
   (a)   Illness or injury.
      (1)   A participant who is considered to be a health or safety concern to
other participants or employees will not be admitted to a program.
      (2)   Illnesses and injuries will be handled in a manner that protects
the health of all participants and employees.
      (3)   A program employee shall follow plans to provide emergency care for
injured participants with symptoms of an acute illness as specified in the
program manual.
      (4)   Each program employee shall follow the recommendation of the Texas
Department of Health concerning the admission or readmission of any participant
after a communicable disease.
   (b)   Medication. A program employee shall administer medication only in
accordance with the following conditions:
      (1)   A parent must complete and sign a medication form that provides a
current list of medications that a participant must take while in the program,
with details as to times and dosages. The form must include authorization for a
program employee to dispense the medication and an indemnification clause to
protect the city.
      (2)   Every prescription medication must be in the original container and
labeled with the child’s name, a date, directions, and the physician’s name. A
program employee shall administer the medication only as stated on the label. A
program employee may not administer medication after the expiration date.
      (3)   Every nonprescription medication must be labeled with the child’s
name and the date the medication was brought to the program. A nonprescription
medication must be in the original container and shall be administered by a
program employee only according to label direction.
      (4)   Any medication dispensed will be limited to routine oral ingestion
that requires no special knowledge or skill. No injection may be administered
by a program employee.
      (5)   A program employee shall ensure that all medications are
inaccessible to program participants and, if it is necessary to keep
medications in a refrigerator, that the medications are kept separate from
food.
   (c)   Toilet facilities.
      (1)   Each program site must have inside toilets located and equipped so
that children can use them independently and program employees can supervise as
needed.
      (2)   One flush toilet must be provided for every 30 children. Urinals
may be counted in the ratio of toilets to children, but may not exceed 50
percent of the total number of toilets.
      (3)   An appropriate and adequate number of lavatories must be provided.
   (d)   Sanitation.
      (1)   Each program facility must have adequate light, ventilation, and
heat.
      (2)   Each program must be provided with an adequate supply of water
meeting the standards of the Texas Department of Health for drinking water. A
program employee shall ensure that water is supplied to participants in a safe
and sanitary manner.
      (3)   Program employees shall ensure that garbage is removed daily from
each building at a program site. (Ord. Nos. 23159; 23534; 23907; 24281; 24611;
24943; 25269; 25628; 25998; 26376; 26800; 27222; 27565; 27911; 28217; 28670;
29036; 30106; 30650; 33229)
CHAPTER 12A
CODE OF ETHICS
ARTICLE I.
DECLARATION OF POLICY AND DEFINITIONS.
Sec.
12A-1.   Statement of purpose and principles of conduct.
Sec.
12A-2.   Definitions.
ARTICLE II.
CODE OF CONDUCT; ACTIONS OF OTHERS; AND ETHICS COMMITMENTS.
Division 1. Code of Conduct.
Sec.
12A-3.   Fiduciary duty.
Sec.
12A-4.   Standards of behavior; standards of civility.
Sec.
12A-5.   Anti-discrimination.
Sec.
12A-6.   Retaliation prohibited.
Division 2. Actions of Others.
Sec.
12A-7.   Other persons.
Sec.
12A-8.   Duty to report violations.
Division 3. Ethics Commitments.
Sec.
12A-9.   Ethics training.
Sec.
12A-10.   Dissemination of code of ethics.
Sec.
12A-11.   Ethics pledge.
ARTICLE III.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
Sec.
12A-12.   Gifts.
Sec.
12A-13.   Personal benefit to others.
Sec.
12A-13.1.   Substantial interest in business entity.
Sec.
12A-14.   Miscellaneous conflicts of interest.
Sec.
12A-15.   Donations.
Sec.
12A-16.   Nepotism.
Sec.
12A-17.   Confidential information.
Sec.
12A-18.   Representation of private interests.
Sec.
12A-19.   Conflicting outside employment.
Sec.
12A-20.   Public property and resources.
Sec.
12A-21.   Political activity.
Sec.
12A-22.   Prohibited interests in contracts.
Sec.
12A-23.   Ex parte communications.
Sec.
12A-24.   Recusal and disclosure.
ARTICLE IV.
FORMER CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.
Sec.
12A-25.   Continuing confidentiality.
Sec.
12A-26.   Subsequent representation.
Sec.
12A-27.   Discretionary contracts.
Sec.
12A-28.   Restrictions on lobbying.
ARTICLE V.
LOBBYISTS.
Sec.
12A-29.   Definitions.
Sec.
12A-30.   Persons required to register as lobbyists.
Sec.
12A-31.   Exceptions.
Sec.
12A-32.   Registration.
Sec.
12A-33.   Activity reports.
Sec.
12A-34.   Non-registrant disclosure statements.
Sec.
12A-35.   Restricted activities.
Sec.
12A-36.   Identification of clients.
Sec.
12A-37.   Timeliness of filing registrations, activity reports, and non-
registrant disclosure statements.
Sec.
12A-38.   Administration.
Sec.
12A-39.   Violations; penalty.
ARTICLE VI.
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
Sec.
12A-40.   Financial disclosure report.
Sec.
12A-41.   Short form annual report.
Sec.
12A-42.   Gift reporting.
Sec.
12A-43.   Donations.
Sec.
12A-44.   Travel reporting requirements.
Sec.
12A-45.   Violation of reporting requirements.
Sec.
12A-45.1.   Reporting requirements chart.
ARTICLE VII.
LEGAL COUNSEL.
Sec.
12A-46.   City attorney's office.
Sec.
12A-47.   Office of the inspector general.
Sec.
12A-48.   Outside legal counsel.
ARTICLE VIII.
ETHICS ADVISORY COMMISSION.
Sec.
12A-49.   Ethics advisory commission - creation; composition, terms, and
qualifications.
Sec.
12A-50.   Jurisdiction and powers.
Sec.
12A-51.    Annual report.
ARTICLE IX.
ETHICS COMPLAINTS, INVESTIGATIONS, AND EVIDENTIARY HEARINGS.
Sec.
12A-52.   Ethics complaints and investigations.
Sec.
12A-53.   Hearing procedures.
Sec.
12A-54.   Disposition of complaint.
ARTICLE X.
ENFORCEMENT, CULPABLE MENTAL STATE, AND PENALTIES.
Sec.
12A-55.   General.
Sec.
12A-56.   Violations; penalty.
Sec.
12A-57.   Culpable mental state.
Sec.
12A-58.   Disciplinary action.
Sec.
12A-59.   Sanctions.
Sec.
12A-60.   Prosecution for perjury.
Sec.
12A-61.   Interference with an investigation.
Sec.
12A-62.   Disqualification from contracting.
Sec.
12A-63.   Vexatious complainants.
ARTICLE XI.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISION.
Sec.
12A-64.   City council review.
ARTICLE I.
DECLARATION OF POLICY AND DEFINITIONS.
SEC. 12A-1.   STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND PRINCIPLES OF CONDUCT.
   (a)   Purpose. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the
proper operation of democratic government requires that:
      (1)   city officials and employees be independent, impartial, and
responsible only to the people of the city;
      (2)   governmental decisions and policy be made using the proper
procedures of the governmental structure;
      (3)   except as provided in the Dallas City Charter, no city official or
employee shall have any financial interest, direct or indirect, or engage in
any business, transaction, or professional activity; or incur any obligation of
any nature that is in conflict with the proper discharge of the city official's
or employee's duties in the public interest;
      (4)   public office not be used for personal gain; and
      (5)   the city council at all times be maintained as a nonpartisan body.
   (b)   Principles of conduct. The city council further believes that an
employee or elected or appointed official of the city assumes a public trust
and should recognize the importance of high ethical standards within the
organization they lead or support. Essential values and ethical behaviors that
an employee or elected or appointed official should exemplify include the
following:
      (1)   Commitment beyond self.
      (2)   Obedience and commitment to the law.
      (3)   Commitment to the public good.
      (4)   Respect for the value and dignity of all individuals.
      (5)   Accountability to the public.
      (6)   Truthfulness.
      (7)   Fairness.
      (8)   Responsible application of resources.
   (c)   Application.
      (1)   To implement the purpose and principles of conduct in this section,
the city council has determined that it is advisable to enact this code of
ethics for all city officials, employees, and persons doing business with the
city, to serve as a standard for official conduct and as a basis for
discipline.
      (2)   This chapter is cumulative of and supplemental to all applicable
provisions of the city charter, other city ordinances, and state and federal
laws and regulations. Compliance with this chapter does not excuse or relieve
any person from any obligation imposed by the city charter, other city
ordinances, or state or federal laws or regulations.
      (3)   Even if a city official or employee is not prohibited from taking
official action by this chapter, action may be prohibited by duly promulgated
personnel rules.
   (d)   No cause of action. This section is a statement of purpose and
principles only. Nothing in this section may be used to create a cause of
action under this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, unless the context requires otherwise:
      (1)   ACCEPT. A person "accepts" an offer of employment or a business
opportunity when the person enters into a legally binding contract or any
informal agreement or understanding that the parties expect to be carried out.
      (2)   AFFILIATED. Business entities are "affiliated" if one is the parent
or subsidiary of the other or if they are subsidiaries of the same parent
business entity.
      (3)   BEFORE THE CITY. Representation or appearance "before the city"
means before:
         (A)   the city council;
         (B)   a board, commission, or other city body or city entity; or
         (C)   a city official or employee.
      (4)   BENEFIT means anything reasonably regarded as monetary gain or
monetary advantage, including a personal benefit to any other person in whose
welfare the beneficiary has a direct and substantial interest. Monetary gain or
advantage includes, but is not limited to, gain or advantage in the form of
money, services, goods, and financial or business relationships.
      (5)   BUSINESS ENTITY means a sole proprietorship, partnership, firm,
corporation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust,
unincorporated association, or any other legal entity, except that the term
does not include a governmental entity.
      (6)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (7)   CITY COUNCIL MEMBER or MEMBER OF THE CITY COUNCIL means all members
of the Dallas city council, including the mayor.
      (8)   CLIENT.
         (A)   The term "client" includes any specialized and highly
personalized professional business relationship of an individual official or
employee. The term does not include a regular or ordinary business or vendor
relationship.
         (B)   If the official or employee does not personally represent the
client but conducts business as a member of a primary partnership or
professional corporation or conducts business through another entity, a client
of the partnership, professional corporation, or entity is deemed to be a
client of the official or employee if:
            (i)   the partnership, professional corporation, or business entity
derived two percent or more of its annual gross income within the preceding 12
months from the client; and
            (ii)   the city official or employee knows of the client's
relationship.
         (C)   This definition does not apply to the term "client" when used in
Article V (lobbyist regulations).
      (9)   CODE OF ETHICS or ETHICS CODE means this chapter.
      (10)   CONFIDENTIAL GOVERNMENT INFORMATION includes:
         (A)   all information held by the city that is not available to the
public under the Texas Public Information Act;
         (B)   any information from a meeting closed to the public pursuant to
the Texas Open Meetings Act;
         (C)   any information protected by attorney-client, attorney work
product, or other applicable legal privilege; and
         (D)   any research, opinions, work product, investigative reports,
advice, recommendations, reasoning, or conclusions in a draft document
concerning city business or city policy that has not yet been released to the
public in accordance with established city procedures.
      (11)   DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR means the head of any department or office,
including an office under the city manager, that is created by the city charter
or by ordinance of the city council.
      (12)   DISCRETIONARY CONTRACT means any contract other than one that by
law must be awarded on a competitive bid basis.
      (13)   DOING BUSINESS WITH THE CITY means any person, either individually
or on behalf of an entity, who submits a bid or proposal, or negotiates or
enters into any city contract, whether or not the contract is required by state
law to be competitively bid.
      (14)   DOMESTIC PARTNER means an individual who, on a continuous basis,
lives in the same household and shares the common resources of life in a close,
personal, intimate, committed relationship with a city official or employee. A
domestic partner may be of the same or opposite gender as the official or
employee and is not married to or related by blood to the official or employee.
      (15)   DONATION means a voluntary transfer of property (including the
payment of money) or the conferral of a benefit having monetary value (such as
the rendition of services or the forbearance of collection on a debt) to the
city, unless consideration of equal or greater value is received by the donor.
      (16)   EMPLOYEE or CITY EMPLOYEE means any person listed on the city of
Dallas payroll as an employee, whether part-time, full-time, permanent, or
temporary.
      (17)   EX PARTE COMMUNICATION means any communication not made in a
written document filed with the ethics advisory commission and not made orally
during a hearing but does not include a communication made pursuant to an
inquiry duly authorized by the commission.
      (18)   FORMER CITY OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE means a person who has left
service as a city official or employee.
      (19)   GIFT means a voluntary transfer of property (including the payment
of money) or the conferral of a benefit having monetary value (such as the
rendition of services or the forbearance of collection on a debt), unless
consideration of equal or greater value is received by the donor.
      (20)   INFORMATION means a written statement filed with the ethics
advisory commission by the inspector general alleging violation(s) of the code
of ethics and contains the name of the respondent, the city rule or city code
or city charter provision alleged to have been violated, the place where the
violation is alleged to have been committed, the date of the alleged violation,
and a description of the violation.
      (21)   KNOWINGLY or WITH KNOWLEDGE. A person acts "knowingly" or "with
knowledge" regarding his or her conduct or to circumstances surrounding his or
her conduct when the person is aware of the nature of the conduct or that the
circumstances exist or should be reasonably certain to cause the result.
      (22)   OFFICIAL or CITY OFFICIAL includes the following persons, except
when used in Article V (lobbyist regulations):
         (A)   City council members.
         (B)   Municipal judges.
         (C)   The city manager, the chief of staff, assistant city managers,
and chiefs.
         (D)   The city auditor and the first assistant city auditor.
         (E)   The city attorney and the first assistant city attorney.
         (F)   The city secretary and the first assistant city secretary.
         (G)   The inspector general.
         (H)   All department directors.
         (I)   Members of all boards, commissions, committees, and other bodies
created by the city council pursuant to city ordinance or federal or state law,
including bodies that are only advisory in nature.
         (J)   City council appointed members of boards of entities that were
not created by the city council.
         (K)   The chief financial officer.
         (L)   For purposes of
Chapter 12A only, a volunteer on committees or task forces formed by boards or
commissions.
      (23)   OFFICIAL ACTION includes:
         (A)   any affirmative act (including the making of a formal or
informal recommendation), that is within the scope of an official's or
employee's duties; and
         (B)   any failure to act, if the official or employee is under a duty
to act.
      (24)   OFFICIAL CAPACITY or OFFICIAL DUTIES means acting, or actions
relating to matters, within the scope of employment or office, or under the
official or employee's control or supervision.
      (25)   OFFICIAL INFORMATION includes information gathered pursuant to the
power or authority of city government.
      (26)   PARTNER includes any partner in a general partnership, limited
partnership, or joint venture.
      (27)   PERISHABLE FOOD OR BEVERAGES are consumable products, such as
packaged foods, delivered fresh foods, including baked goods and edible gift
baskets, sealed beverages, and floral arrangements.
      (28)   PERSONAL BENEFIT means any benefit knowingly solicited, accepted,
or agreed to be accepted by another for the purpose of influencing how a city
official or employee performs or refrains from performing an official action.
      (29)   PERSONALLY PARTICIPATED. The requirement of having "personally
participated" in a matter is met only if the individual in fact exercised
discretion relating to the matter. The fact that the person had responsibility
for a matter does not by itself establish that the person "personally
participated" in the matter.
      (30)   RELATIVE means a current or former spouse, domestic partner,
child, stepchild, brother, sister, parent or stepparent, or a person claimed as
a dependent on the city official or employee's latest individual federal income
tax return.
      (31)   REPRESENTATION encompasses every form of communication or personal
appearance in which a person, not acting in performance of official duties,
formally or informally serves as an advocate for private interests. Lobbying
and service as an expert witness, even on an informal basis, are forms of
representation. "Representation" does not include appearance as a fact witness
in litigation or other official proceedings.
      (32)   SOLICITATION. "Solicitation" of subsequent employment or a
subsequent business opportunity includes any form of proposal or negotiation
relating to employment or a business opportunity. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 24485;
27748; 28020; 30391; 32072; 32472; 32924)
ARTICLE II.
CODE OF CONDUCT; ACTIONS OF OTHERS; AND ETHICS COMMITMENTS.
Division 1. Code of Conduct.
SEC. 12A-3.   FIDUCIARY DUTY.
   A city official and employee, in the performance of his or her official
duties, shall fulfill his or her fiduciary duty to the city. (Ord. Nos. 32072;
32472)
SEC. 12A-4.   STANDARDS OF BEHAVIOR; STANDARDS OF CIVILITY.
   (a)   Standards of behavior. City officials and employees shall, when acting
in the performance of their official duties, comply with the following
standards of behavior:
      (1)   To conduct themselves and to operate with integrity and in a manner
that merits the trust and support of the public.
      (2)   To uphold all applicable laws and regulations to protect and
enhance the city's ability to accomplish its mission.
      (3)   To treat others with respect, doing for and to others what the
official or employee would have done for and to himself or herself in similar
circumstances.
      (4)   To responsibly manage taxpayer resources.
      (5)   To take no actions that could benefit the official or employee
personally, or his or her relative, to the detriment of the city, avoiding even
the appearance of a conflict of interest, and to always exercise good judgment.
      (6)   To carefully consider the public perception of personal and
professional actions and the effect such actions could have, positively or
negatively, on the city's reputation both in the community and elsewhere.
      (7)   To strive for personal and professional growth to improve
effectiveness at work.
   (b)   Standards of civility. City officials and employees shall, when acting
in the performance of their official duties, comply with the following
standards of civility in their interactions with city officials, city
employees, residents, and persons doing business with the city:
      (1)   City officials and employees shall accord respect and courtesy to
each other, city officials, city employees, residents, and persons doing
business with the city.
      (2)   City officials and employees shall not make comments or take
actions that are abusive; belligerent; crude; derogatory; impertinent; profane;
slanderous; threatening; or involve personal attacks upon the character,
integrity, or motives of others.
      (3)   City officials and employees shall preserve order and decorum in
meetings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order and the applicable rules of
procedure of the city council, board, or commission.
      (4)   City officials shall treat city employees as professionals and
shall not:
         (A)   interfere with the work of city employees.
         (B)   impair the ability of city employees to implement city policies.
         (C)   influence city employees in the making of recommendations or
decisions.
         (D)   berate city employees.
      (5)   City officials shall work through the city manager, city secretary,
city attorney, city auditor, or inspector general, and the applicable
department director to obtain information or request assistance with projects,
rather than contacting city employees directly. This provision does not apply
to professional and administrative assistants to the mayor and city council.
      (6)   Because independent advice from boards and commissions is essential
to the public decision-making process, city council members shall not:
         (A)   use their position to influence the deliberations or decisions
of boards and commissions.
         (B)   appoint city council office staff members to boards and
commissions.
         (C)   demand that board or commission members vote as requested by the
city council member or threaten board or commission members with removal.
This paragraph does not prohibit city council members from receiving
information from or providing information to a board or commission member,
working together with board and commission members on projects, or expressing
their opinions to board and commission members. (Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-5.   ANTI-DISCRIMINATION.
   Excluding anyone from our community based on their race, ethnicity, color,
age, religion, marital or parental status, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity and expression, genetic characteristics, national origin, disability,
military or veteran status, political opinions or affiliations, or any other
legally protected characteristic or status diminishes us and compromises our
ability to fulfill our mission. Discrimination against others based on any of
these factors, or any other legally protected classifications, is prohibited.
Discriminatory harassment and other offensive acts include any conduct, whether
verbal, visual, or physical, that creates an abusive and hostile work
environment, or that has the purpose or effect of interfering with an
employee's work performance or development. (Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-6.   RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
   A person commits an offense if he or she retaliates against another for
filing a complaint, or for testifying, assisting, or participating, in any
manner, in a proceeding or hearing under this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472)
Division 2. Actions of Others.
SEC. 12A-7.   OTHER PERSONS.
   (a)   Violations by other persons. A city official or employee shall not
knowingly assist or induce, or attempt to assist or induce, any person to
violate any provision of this chapter.
   (b)   Using others to engage in forbidden conduct. A city official or
employee shall not violate any provision of this chapter through the acts of
another.
   (c)   Participation in ethics violations. No person shall knowingly induce,
attempt to induce, conspire with, aid, or assist, or attempt to aid or assist
another person to violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 32072;
32472)
SEC. 12A-8.   DUTY TO REPORT VIOLATIONS.
   A person subject to this chapter shall immediately report any conduct that
the person knows to be a violation of this chapter to the inspector general.
Failure to report a violation of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.
Any person who knowingly fails to report a violation of this chapter shall be
subject to sanctions described in this chapter. For purposes of this section, a
report made to the inspector general's Fraud, Waste, or Abuse hotline is
considered a report under this section. (Ord. Nos.  32072; 32472)
Division 3. Ethics Commitments.
SEC. 12A-9.   ETHICS TRAINING.
   (a)   All new city officials and new city employees shall receive ethics
training within 30 days after being appointed to office or hired by the city.
All current city officials and current city employees shall receive ethics
training on an ongoing basis at least every two years.
   (b)   All city officials who are leaving city service shall receive ethics
information concerning requirements for former city officials before the city
official ends his or her city service. All city employees who are terminating
their employment shall receive ethics information concerning requirements for
former city employees before the city employee ends his or her employment with
the city.
   (c)   The inspector general shall provide all lobbying registrants with
ethics information within 30 days after registration. Each registrant shall
provide their individual lobbyists with a copy of the ethics information.
   (d)   The chief integrity officer shall draft a statement for the office of
procurement services relating to the applicability of this chapter to persons
doing business with the city and to city officials and city employees who work
with persons doing business with the city. The director of the office of
procurement services shall publish on the city's website the statement from the
chief integrity officer.
   (e)   This ethics training and information required by this section shall be
made available in a format and medium as determined by the chief integrity
officer. The chief integrity officer, in coordination with the city manager,
city auditor, and city secretary's liaisons, shall structure ethics training
and information to ensure that participants have the necessary knowledge to
accomplish the statement of purpose in this chapter and comply with all
applicable ethics laws. City officials and employees must demonstrate such
knowledge by passing any required ethics training.
   (f)   Failure to receive ethics training, documents, or notices required by
this section does not waive that person's duty to comply with this chapter or
waive enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-10.   DISSEMINATION OF CODE OF ETHICS.
   (a)   Within 30 days after starting their position, every new city official
or employee must be given a copy or a link to this chapter. The inspector
general or the city attorney shall provide a copy of this chapter to every city
official. The city manager, city attorney, city secretary, city auditor, park
and recreation director, inspector general, civil service director, and
employees' retirement fund administrator shall provide a copy of this chapter
to every city employee under their supervision. Each city official and employee
shall acknowledge, in writing, that the official or employee received a copy or
link to this chapter. Copies of this chapter must be made readily available to
the public.
   (b)   The failure of any person to receive a copy of this chapter or a link
to the chapter has no effect on that person's duty to comply with this chapter
or on the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 32072;
32472)
SEC. 12A-11.   ETHICS PLEDGE.
   All city officials, upon their appointment, shall sign the following ethics
pledge and file it with the city secretary:
   "I have received a copy of Dallas City Code
Chapter 12A, "Code of Ethics." I have read and understand the Code of Ethics. I
understand that the Code of Ethics is binding on me, and therefore I agree to
comply with the Code of Ethics. I understand that the Code of Ethics imposes
restrictions on present city officials, former city officials, lobbyists, and
persons doing business with the city. I agree to participate in periodic ethics
training. I agree to seek advice from the City Attorney's Office when necessary
to ensure compliance with the Code of Ethics. I agree that I will not violate
the Code of Ethics, participate in violations of the Code of Ethics, or fail to
report violations of the Code of Ethics. I understand that violation of the
Code of Ethics, participation in a violation of the Code of Ethics, and failure
to report a violation of the Code of Ethics may result in severe consequences."
(Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472)
ARTICLE III.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
SEC. 12A-12.   GIFTS.
   (a)   General rules.
      (1)   A city official or employee shall not solicit, accept, or agree to
accept any gift, favor, benefit, or service that:
         (A)    reasonably tends to influence or reward official conduct; or
         (B)   the city official or employee knows is intended to influence or
reward the discharge of official duties.
      (2)   A person or business entity shall not knowingly offer any gift or
benefit to a city official or employee that:
         (A)   reasonably tends to influence or reward official conduct; or
         (B)   the person or business entity knows is intended to influence or
reward the discharge of official duties.
      (3)   Except as provided in Subsection (f), a city official or employee
shall not accept cash, a cash equivalent open loop gift card (including a Visa
or Mastercard gift card), check, or negotiable instrument from any person or
representative of a person or entity who does business with or is seeking to do
business with the city. In this paragraph, OPEN LOOP means a general- purpose
charge card that can be used anywhere that brand of card is accepted and does
not include closed loop gift cards that can only be used at a specific merchant
listed on the card.
      (4)   Employees must comply with departmental rules regarding gifts, if
any. If a conflict exists between this chapter and a departmental rule, the
stricter rule or regulation controls.
      (5)   A city official or employee who receives an unsolicited benefit or
gift that he or she is not allowed to accept or does not wish to accept to
avoid any appearance of impropriety, may donate the item to the city, another
governmental entity that has the authority to accept the item, or to a tax-
exempt charitable organization formed for educational, religious, or scientific
purposes. A city official or employee who donates an unsolicited benefit or
gift may notify the inspector general on a form approved by the inspector
general that provides the city official or employee's name, the gift donated,
and the entity to which the city official or employee donated the unsolicited
benefit or gift.
   (b)   Exceptions. For purposes of this chapter, the following are not
considered reportable gifts:
      (1)   reimbursement of reasonable expenses for travel in accordance with
the city's ordinances, administrative directives, and this section;
      (2)   a public award or reward in recognition of public service or
professional achievement, if the award or reward is reasonable in light of the
occasion;
      (3)   a loan from a lending institution made in its regular course of
business on the same terms generally available to the public;
      (4)   a scholarship or fellowship awarded on the same terms and based on
the same criteria applied to other applicants;
      (5)   admission, regardless of value, to an event that a city official or
employee is invited to, is offered tickets to, or is participating in relating
to their official duties or responsibilities, including gathering information
about a current or potential city supported program;
      (6)   tickets, meals, travel, lodging, and entertainment accepted by a
city official or employee in accordance with Subsections (c) and (d);
      (7)   items having a nominal value (a noncash value of less than $50.00)
accepted by a city official or employee from a resident or person or entity
doing, or seeking to do, business with the city if a city official or employee
does not receive cumulative items from a single source in a calendar year of
more than $50.00 or plaques, caps, key rings, mugs, tee shirts, fresh cut
flowers given at public appearances, or perishable food and beverages
infrequently given.
      (8)   A ceremonial or protocol gift given to a city official or employee
on behalf of the city, provided that any ceremonial or protocol gift given to:
         (A)   a city official valued over $300.00 is delivered to the city
manager as a donation to the city, or
         (B)   an employee is delivered to the city manager within 30 days
after receipt as a donation to the city.
      (9)   Gifts from a relative or a person with whom the city official or
employee has a personal, professional, or business relationship independent of
the city official or employee's status with the city.
   (c)   Honorarium, meals, travel, lodging, and entertainment.
      (1)   A city official or employee may not solicit, accept, or agree to
accept any honorarium (cash payment or in-kind gift, except a plaque) in
consideration for services that a city official or employee would not have been
requested to provide but for his or her official position or duties.
      (2)   A city official may accept meals, travel, lodging, or entertainment
if:
         (A)   the city official is a guest; and
         (B)   the donor or host is present at the meal, travel, lodging, or
entertainment.
      (3)   An employee may accept meals, travel, lodging, or entertainment
relating to a conference, seminar, trade show, or event that is related to the
employee's job duties. Attendance must be approved in accordance with the
city's Administrative Directive on travel, and costs must be reasonable.
   (d)   Tickets.
      (1)   When receiving complimentary tickets, city officials and employees
must evaluate whether the tickets are a gift in violation of Subsection (a).
      (2)   City officials and employees may receive tickets to a fundraiser or
charity event that benefits a city facility or program, subject to availability
and in the sole discretion of an event sponsor. These tickets may not be sold
or transferred, except to another city official or employee.
      (3)   Councilmembers and board and commission members may receive
complimentary
annual memberships, individual or family, to city owned facilities that are
operated or managed by a non-profit entity on behalf of the city.
      (4)   City officials may receive tickets to city owned facilities that
are operated by a non-profit entity, such as the State Fair, Arboretum, Dallas
Museum of Art, Dallas Summer Musicals, South Dallas Cultural Center, and the
Latino Cultural Center, subject to availability and in the sole discretion of
an event sponsor, and either the city official or his or her spouse, domestic
partner, or significant other must be in attendance at the event. These tickets
may not be sold or transferred, except to the city official's spouse, domestic
partner, or significant other to another city official or employee.
      (5)   Councilmembers and board and commission members may request tickets
to events at city owned facilities that are operated or managed by a for-profit
entity over which city council does not have oversight responsibilities, such
as American Airlines Center, but councilmembers and board and commission
members are required to purchase these tickets at face value.
      (6)   City officials and department directors may accept blocks of
promotional complimentary tickets to events for distribution, in accordance
with any requirements by the event sponsor, to the general public, including
constituents, to encourage attendance of the general public at city facilities,
programs, and events.
      (7)   City officials and employees may accept discount tickets if the
tickets are provided to all councilmembers, an entire department or office, or
the entire city.
   (e)   Reporting. Except as provided in this chapter, city officials and
employees must report gifts, including tickets, meals, travel, lodging, or
entertainment in accordance with applicable state law and the city's reporting
requirements in Article VI.
   (f)   Campaign contribution exception. The general rule in Subsection (a)
does not apply to a campaign contribution received and reported in compliance
with the Texas Election Code. (Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-13.   PERSONAL BENEFIT TO OTHERS.
   (a)   Personal benefits to others. To avoid the appearance and risk of a
conflict of interest, a city official or employee shall not use his or her
official position or office, to take or refrain from taking, official action
that he or she knows will result in a personal benefit for any of the following
persons or entities:
      (1)   a relative of the city official or employee;
      (2)   a person with whom the city official or employee has a financial or
business relationship, including but not limited to:
         (A)   an outside employer business of the city official, employee, or
their relative, or someone who works for such outside employer of business;
         (B)   a client or substantial customer of the city official, employee,
or their relative (SUBSTANTIAL means an amount exceeding 10 percent of the city
official, employee, or their relative's income for the previous year);
         (C)   a debtor or creditor of the city official, employee, or their
relative; or
         (D)   a person or business entity with whom the city official or
employee, has, directly or indirectly, within the past 12 months,
            (i)   engaged in negotiations pertaining to a business opportunity,
or
            (ii)   solicited an offer of employment, received, and not rejected
an offer of employment, or accepted an offer of employment.
   (b)   Recusal and disclosure. A city official or employee whose conduct
would violate Subsection (a) shall follow the recusal and disclosure
requirements in Section
12A-24 of this chapter.
   (c)   Exceptions. A personal benefit does not include:
      (1)   salaries, compensation, or employee benefits when the salaries,
compensation, or employee benefits are not given in exchange for a city
employee's or city official's official action or lack of action;
      (2)   campaign or political contributions that are made and reported in
accordance with state law;
      (3)    hospitality extended for a purpose unrelated to the official
business of the city;
      (4)    a public award or reward in recognition of public service or
professional achievement, if the award or reward is reasonable in light of the
occasion;
      (5)   gifts or other ceremonial symbols of recognition presented by
representatives of governmental bodies or political subdivisions who are acting
in their official capacities;
      (6)   a loan from a lending institution made in its regular course of
business on the same terms generally available to the public;
      (7)   complimentary copies of trade publications; and
      (8)   anything of value received as a devise, bequest, or inheritance.
   (d)   Municipal management district boards. The restrictions and
requirements of this section do not apply to a member of a municipal management
district board. (Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-13.1.   SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST IN BUSINESS ENTITY.
   (a)   If a city official or employee has a substantial interest in a
business entity or in real property, the city official or employee shall file
in accordance with Section
12A-24, before a vote or decision on any matter involving the business entity
or the real property, an affidavit stating the nature and extent of the
interest and shall abstain from further participation in the matter if:
      (1)   in the case of a substantial interest in a business entity, the
action on the matter will have a special economic effect on the business entity
that is distinguishable from the effect on the public; or
      (2)   in the case of a substantial interest in real property, it is
reasonably foreseeable that an action on the matter will have a specific
economic effect on the value of the property, distinguishable from the effect
on the public.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, a person has a substantial interest if:
      (1)   in a business entity:
         (A)   the city official or employee owns 10 percent or more of the
voting stock or shares of the business entity or owns either 10 percent or more
or $15,000 or more of the fair market value of the business entity; or
         (B)   funds received by the city official or employee from the
business entity exceed 10 percent of the person's gross income for the previous
year.
      (2)   in real property, the city official or employee's interest is an
equitable or legal ownership with a fair market value of $2,500 or more.
   (c)   A city official or employee is considered to have a substantial
interest under this section if a relative of the city official or employee has
a substantial interest under this section. (Ord. 32472)
SEC. 12A-14.   MISCELLANEOUS CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (a)   Special rules.
      (1)   Acquisition of interest in impending or decided matters. A city
official or employee shall not acquire an interest (economic or otherwise) in
any matter:
         (A)   if the official or employee knows that the interest will be
affected by upcoming official action of the city.
         (B)   affected by an official action of the city for a period of one
year after the date of the official action.
      (2)   Reciprocal favors. A city official or employee may not enter into
an agreement or understanding with any other person that official action by the
official or employee will be rewarded or reciprocated.
      (3)   Benefits to previous employers. A city official or employee may
not, within 12 months of beginning his or her employment or service with the
city, award a contract or participate in a matter benefiting a person or
business entity that formerly employed the city official or employee.
      (4)   Area of notification conflict.
         (A)   General. A city official or employee shall not take official
action on, or otherwise participate in, a matter if the city official or
employee has an ownership interest, a lease, or other economic interest in a
property within the area of notification listed in:
            (1)   Sections
51A-1.105(a) and (b) (zoning and board of adjustment applications);
            (2)   Section
51A-4.701 (authorized zoning cases);
            (3)   Sections
51A-9.201 and
51A-9.202 (thoroughfare realignments, state or county thoroughfare
improvements).
   For purposes of this paragraph, ECONOMIC INTEREST includes, but is not
limited to, legal or equitable property interests in land, chattels, and
intangibles, and contractual rights, having more than de minimis value.
         (B)   Recusal and disclosure. A city official or employee who has an
ownership interest, a lease, or other economic interest in a property within
the area of notification in Subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall follow the
recusal and disclosure requirements in Section
12A-24 of this chapter.
   (b)   Board of directors of a reinvestment zone.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a member of
the board of directors of a reinvestment zone established under the Tax
Increment Financing Act, as amended, may:
         (A)   own property within that reinvestment zone; and
         (B)   participate in discussions and voting on matters before the
board of directors that may indirectly affect the member's property within the
reinvestment zone, but must follow the recusal and disclosure requirements in
Section
12A-24 on matters before the board of directors that may directly affect the
member's property in the reinvestment zone.
      (2)   For purposes of this subsection, a matter directly affects a
member's property in the reinvestment zone if the matter involves a project in
the reinvestment zone that is:
         (A)   financed with tax increment funds; and
         (B)   located within 200 feet of the member's property.
   (c)   City officials and employees serving in policymaking positions for
business entities at the direction of the city. The restrictions and
requirements of Section
12A-24 of this chapter do not apply to a city official or employee serving as
an officer or director or in any other policymaking position for a business
entity when taking official action on behalf of the city on matters concerning
that business entity, if the city official or employee:
      (1)   was appointed by the mayor, city council, or city manager to
represent the city as an officer or director or in any other policymaking
position for the business entity; and
      (2)   has no substantial economic interest in the business entity or in
the matter on which the action is being taken as defined in Texas Local
Government Code Section 171.002, as amended.
   (d)   Municipal management district boards. The restrictions and
requirements of this section do not apply to a member of a municipal management
district board. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 24720; 27504; 27819; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-15.   DONATIONS.
   (a)   Purpose and procedures.
      (1)   Donations of money, real estate, products, and services to the city
allow residents to make valuable contributions to city programs and should be
encouraged. Persons and business entities making donations should not, however,
expect any reward, reciprocal benefit, or influence.
      (2)   Donations must be documented to ensure transparency of government,
enable measurement of the value and usefulness of the donation, and allow for
audits of donations.
      (3)   For long-term or complex projects and projects involving
professional services, an agreement must be drafted to document the scope of
goods or services to be donated and to document which party retains ownership
of intellectual property. If a donation will lead to city expenditures,
expenditures must follow the procurement process if required by city code or
state law.
   (b)   General rule.
      (1)   A city official, employee, or department shall not solicit, accept,
or agree to accept any donation to the city of money, real estate, products, or
services that:
         (A)   reasonably tends to influence or reward official conduct; or
         (B)   the city official, employee, or department knows is intended to
influence or reward the discharge of official duties.
      (2)   A person or business entity shall not knowingly offer any donation
to the city of money, real estate, products, or services that:
         (A)   reasonably tends to influence or reward official conduct; or
         (B)   the person or business entity knows is intended to influence or
reward the discharge of official duties.
   (c)   Reporting. City officials, employees, and departments receiving a
donation to the city shall report the donation in compliance with Article VI.
   (d)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to gifts made to a city
official or employee in compliance with Section
12A-12. This section does not apply to exceptions to the gift rules. (Ord. Nos.
32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-16.   NEPOTISM.
   (a)   Appointment or employment of relatives.
      (1)   A city official or employee shall not appoint, or take any action
to influence the appointment of, his or her relative to a quasi-judicial board
or commission within the city.
      (2)   A city council member shall not appoint any fellow city council
member's relative to the ethics advisory commission or to any quasi-judicial
board or commission within the city.
      (3)   A city official or employee shall not appoint or employ, or take
any action to influence the appointment or employment of, his or her relative
to any position of employment within the city.
   (b)   Supervision of relatives. In addition to the nepotism restrictions of
Section
34-5(d) of the city code for employees, no city official shall be permitted to
be the immediate supervisor of his or her relative.
   (c)   Fringe benefits. The general rule described in Subsection (a) does not
prohibit the city from granting fringe benefits to city employees as a part of
their employment contracts or as an added incentive to securing or retaining
employees. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 27504; 27819; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-17.   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   Improper access. A city official or employee shall not use his or her
position to access official information about any person or entity for any
purpose other than the performance of official responsibilities.
   (b)   Improper disclosure or use. A city official or employee shall not
knowingly disclose any confidential government information gained by reason of
the official's or employee's position. This subsection does not prohibit:
      (1)   any disclosure that is no longer confidential government
information;
      (2)   the confidential reporting of illegal or unethical conduct to
authorities designated by law; or
      (3)   any disclosure, not otherwise prohibited by law, in furtherance of
public safety.
   (c)   Disclosure of a closed meeting. A city official or employee shall not
knowingly disclose to a member of the public the certified agenda, the
recording, or the discussion had within a meeting that was lawfully closed to
the public, unless the disclosure is made with lawful authority.
   (d)   Penalty. A person commits an offense if he or she discloses
confidential information in violation of Subsections (b) or (c). (Ord. Nos.
24316; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-18.   REPRESENTATION OF PRIVATE INTERESTS.
   (a)   Representation before the city.
      (1)   General rule.
         (A)   Representation for compensation. A city official or employee
shall not represent, for compensation, any person, group, or entity (other than
themselves or the city official's or employee's relative) before the city. For
purposes of this subsection, "compensation" means money or any other thing of
value that is received or is to be received in return for or in connection with
such representation.
         (B)   Representation without compensation. A city official or employee
who is a member of a board, commission, or body shall not represent any person,
group, or entity before:
            (i)   that city official's or employee's board, commission, or
body;
            (ii)   city staff having responsibility for making recommendations
to, or taking any action on behalf of, that board, commission, or body; or
            (iii)   a board, commission, or body that has appellate
jurisdiction over the board, commission, or body of which the city official or
employee is a member, if any issue relates to the official's or employee's
duties.
      (2)   Exceptions. The restrictions in this subsection do not apply to:
         (A)   A person who is a city official only because that person is an
appointed member of a board, commission, or body, may represent for
compensation a person, group, or entity before the city so long as the
representation is not before the board, commission, or body that the person is
a member of.
         (B)   If the representation is before a board, commission, or body, of
which the city official or employee is a member, that is only advisory in
nature.
         (C)   An employee who is a duly designated representative of an
association of municipal employees may represent that association before the
city if otherwise permissible by state law.
         (D)   A member of a municipal management district board.
      (3)   Prestige of office and improper influence. In connection with the
representation of private interests before the city, a city official or
employee shall not:
         (A)   assert the prestige of the city official's or employee's
position for the purpose of advancing private interest; or
         (B)   state or imply that the city official or employee can influence
city action on any basis other than the merits.
      (4)   Campaign disclosure.
         (A)   Applicability.
            (1)   A person who was paid to participate in, or served as a
campaign treasurer in, a sitting councilmember's most recent city council
campaign and who represents themselves, their client, their employer, or
another third party at a public or private city meeting where at least one
councilmember is present must disclose that participation. A "campaign
treasurer" is the person designated as a campaign treasurer for a candidate
under the Texas Election Code.
            (2)   A person who represents at a public or private city meeting
where at least one councilmember is present the interests of a person or entity
that was paid to participate in a sitting councilmember's most recent city
council campaign must disclose that participation.
         (B)   Disclosure requirement. Campaign participation must be disclosed
verbally immediately:
            (1)   after stating his or her name and address for the record
during a public city meeting where the representation is taking place; or
            (2)   at the beginning of a private city meeting.
The most recent campaign includes both the campaign for the general election
and the runoff election, if applicable.
   (b)   Representation in litigation adverse to the city.
      (1)   Officials and employees (other than board and commission members).
A city official or employee, other than a person who is classified as an
official only because that person is an appointed member of a board,
commission, or body, shall not represent any person, group, or entity (other
than themselves or their relative) in any litigation to which the city is a
party, if the interests of that person, group, or entity are adverse to the
interests of the city. This rule does not prohibit an employee who is a duly
designated representative of an association of municipal employees from such
representation if otherwise permissible under state law.
      (2)   Board and commission members. A person who is a city official only
because that person is an appointed member of a board, commission, or body
shall not represent any person, group, or entity (other than themselves or
their relative) in any litigation to which the city is a party, if the
interests of that person, group, or entity are adverse to the interests of the
city and the matter is substantially related to the official's duties to the
city.
      (3)   Affiliates of officials and employees. Subject to applicable
professional ethical standards, the restrictions stated in Subsections (b)(1)
and (b)(2) do not apply to representation by a partner or other affiliate of a
city official or employee so long as the city official or employee does not
participate in any manner whatsoever in the partner's or affiliate's
representation.
   (c)   Representation in municipal court. No member of the city council may
engage in the practice of law in or before the municipal courts of the city.
(Ord. Nos. 24316; 27819; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-19.   CONFLICTING OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   (a)   General rule. A city official or employee shall not:
      (1)   solicit, accept, or engage in concurrent outside employment that
could reasonably be expected to impair independence of judgment in, or faithful
performance of, official duties; or
      (2)   personally provide services for compensation, directly or
indirectly, to a person or organization that is requesting an approval, an
investigation, or a determination from the body or department of which the
official or employee is a member.
   (b)   Exception. The restrictions stated in Subsection (a) do not apply to:
      (1)   outside employment of a city official if the employment is the
official's primary source of income; or
      (2)   a member of a municipal management district board.
   (c)   Other rules. The general rule stated in Subsection (a) applies in
addition to all other rules relating to outside employment of city officials
and employees, including requirements for obtaining prior approval of outside
employment as applicable.
   (d)   Public utility corporations. An employee of the city may accept
employment from a public utility corporation enjoying the grant of a franchise,
privilege, or easement from the city if the:
      (1)   employee is to perform the duties of a security guard for the
public utility corporation;
      (2)   employment is approved by the employee's department head; and
      (3)   employment does not conflict with his or her duties as an employee
of the city. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 27819; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-20.   PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RESOURCES.
   (a)   A city official or employee shall not use, request, or permit the use
of city facilities, personnel, equipment, or supplies for private purposes
(including political purposes).
   (b)   A city council member shall not use, request, or permit the use of
city facilities, personnel (including
city employees), equipment, or supplies for any campaign expenditure, campaign
contribution, political advertising, or campaign communication as defined in
Title 15, "Regulating Political Funds and Campaigns," of the Texas Election
Code, as amended, and Texas Ethics Commission rules, regulations, and opinions.
   (c)   City officials and employees may not apply for or obtain an incentive
offered by the city, including grants, loans, tax abatements, and tax credits,
unless the incentive is available to the general public, the application is
evaluated under the same criteria that apply to the general public, and the
incentive is subject to the same terms and conditions that apply to the general
public. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-21.   POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   (a)   City officials. In any election, except the city official's own, a
city official shall not:
      (1)   use the prestige of the city official's position with the city on
behalf of a candidate, political party, or political committee, except in
connection with:
         (A)   an endorsement, a city official (who is a city official only
because that person is an appointed member of a board, commission, or body) is
not prohibited from lending the city official's name so long as the office held
with the city is not mentioned;
         (B)   any election ordered by the City of Dallas on a proposition or
measure, a city council member is not prohibited from lending the city
official's name and official city title; and
         (C)   any election for public office, a city council member is not
prohibited from lending the city council member's name and office held.
      (2)   serve as the designated campaign treasurer for a candidate under
the Texas Election Code; or
      (3)   solicit or receive contributions for a candidate, political party,
or political committee, except that a city official is not prohibited from
serving on a steering committee to plan a program of solicitation and listing
the city official's name without reference to the office held when the
committee as a whole is listed.
   (b)   Employees. A city employee may become a candidate for public office. A
city employee may not be disciplined, including termination, solely because the
city employee becomes a candidate for public office. The city employee must,
however, still fulfill all the duties and responsibilities associated with his
or her city employment.
   (c)   Influencing subordinates. A city official or employee shall not,
directly or indirectly, induce or attempt to induce any city subordinate of the
official or employee to:
      (1)   participate in an election campaign, contribute to a candidate or
political committee, or engage in any other political activity relating to a
particular party, candidate, or issue; or
      (2)   refrain from engaging in any lawful political activity.
A general statement merely encouraging another person to vote does not violate
this subsection.
   (d)   Paid campaigning. A city official or employee shall not, directly or
indirectly, accept anything of value for political activity relating to an item
pending on the ballot, if the official or employee participated in, or provided
advice relating to, the exercise of discretionary authority by a city body that
contributed to the development of the ballot item. For purposes of this
subsection, "anything of value" does not include a meal or other item of
nominal value the city official or employee receives in return for providing
information on an item pending on the ballot.
   (e)   Official vehicles. A city official or employee shall not display or
fail to remove campaign materials on any city vehicle under his or her control.
   (f)   Elections. A city employee shall not use the prestige of his or her
position with the city on behalf of any candidate, political party, or
political committee.
   (g)   Charter provisions. A city official or employee shall comply with the
provisions governing political activity in
Chapter XVI, Section 16 of the city charter.
   (h)   Public property and resources. Limitations on the use of public
property and resources for political purposes are imposed by Section
12A-20 of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 25203; 29645; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-22.   PROHIBITED INTERESTS IN CONTRACTS.
   (a)   Charter restrictions relating to financial interests in city
contracts. Except as provided in Section
12A-20(c), a city official or employee shall comply with the restrictions on
financial interests in city contracts in
Chapter XXII, Section 11 of the city charter. The restrictions on financial
interests in a city contract in
Chapter XXII, Section 11 of the city charter do not apply to a nominee or
member of a city board or commission except as provided in Subsection (b) and
Section
12A-20(c).
   (b)   Additional restrictions relating to city contracts. A city official or
employee may not, while in the service or employment of the city, either
individually or as the officer or principal of an entity:
      (1)   submit a bid or proposal to make any city contract, whether or not
the contract is required by state law to be competitively bid; or
      (2)   negotiate or enter into any city contract whether or not the
contract is required by state law to be competitively bid.
   (c)   Exceptions. The restrictions in Subsections (a) and (b) do not apply
to a member of a:
      (1)   board, commission, or body that is advisory only;
      (2)   committees or task forces formed by boards or commissions;
      (3)   board of a nonprofit development corporation that acts as an
instrumentality of the city; or
      (4)   municipal management district board.
   (d)   Restrictions relating to the first year of employment. During the
first year of city service, a city official or employee shall not participate
in the making or awarding of a contract or attempt to use their official
position to influence a city decision relating to a contract if a party to the
contract is a person or entity by whom the city official or employee was
employed within one year before beginning city service. (Ord. Nos. 24316;
27504; 27819; 29645; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-23.   EX PARTE COMMUNICATIONS.
   No person shall, directly or indirectly, communicate with any city official
of any quasi- judicial city board or commission regarding any adjudicative
matter that is, or may reasonably be expected to be, pending before the board
or commission, unless a full disclosure of the communication is simultaneously
made available to every other party to the matter. This prohibition does not
apply to any communication by a city employee with the city board or commission
in the performance of the city employee's official duties. (Ord. Nos. 32072;
32472)
SEC. 12A-24.   RECUSAL AND DISCLOSURE.
   (a)   General rule. A city official or employee whose conduct or action on a
matter would violate any section in
Articles II and
III of this chapter must recuse themselves. From the time that the conflict is
recognized, the city official or employee shall:
      (1)   immediately refrain from further participation in the matter,
including discussions with any other persons likely to consider the matter; and
      (2)   promptly file with the city secretary a written statement
disclosing the conflict of interest.
   (b)   Additional recusal and disclosure requirements. In addition to the
requirements of Subsection (a):
      (1)   A supervised employee shall promptly bring that person's conflict
to the attention of a supervisor, who will then, if necessary, reassign
responsibility for handling the matter to another person;
      (2)   the park and recreation director shall promptly bring that person's
conflict to the attention of the park and recreation board;
      (3)   the civil service director shall promptly bring that person's
conflict to the attention of the civil service board;
      (4)   the employees' retirement fund administrator shall promptly bring
that person's conflict to the attention of the board of trustees of the
employees' retirement fund;
      (5)   a municipal judge shall promptly bring that person's conflict to
the attention of the administrative municipal judge;
      (6)   the city manager, city attorney, city secretary, city auditor,
inspector general and administrative municipal judge shall promptly bring that
person's conflict to the attention of the city council;
      (7)   a board or commission member shall promptly disclose that member's
conflict to the board or commission of which that person is a member and shall
not be present during any discussion or voting on the matter; and
      (8)   a city council member shall promptly disclose that member's
conflict to the city council and shall not be present during any discussion or
voting on the matter.
   (c)   Exception to the recusal requirement. If a city official is required
to file and does file a written statement disclosing a conflict of interest
under Subsection (a), the official is not required to abstain from further
participation in the matter requiring the written statement if a majority of
the members of the city council, a board or commission, or another city body of
which the official is a member is composed of persons who are likewise required
to file and who do file written statements of similar interest on the same
official action. (Ord. Nos. 30391; 32072; 32472)
ARTICLE IV.
FORMER CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.
SEC. 12A-25.   CONTINUING CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   Improper disclosure or use. A former city official or employee shall
not use or disclose confidential government information acquired during service
as a city official or employee. This rule does not prohibit:
      (1)   any disclosure that is no longer confidential government
information;
      (2)   the confidential reporting of illegal or unethical conduct to
authorities designated by law; or
      (3)   any disclosure, not otherwise prohibited by law, in furtherance of
public safety.
   (b)   Disclosure of a closed meeting. A former city official or employee
shall not knowingly disclose to a member of the public the certified agenda,
the recording, or the discussion had within a meeting that was lawfully closed
to the public, unless the disclosure is made with lawful authority. (Ord. Nos.
24316; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-26.   SUBSEQUENT REPRESENTATION.
   (a)   Representation by a former city council member or former board or
commission member. A person who was a member of the city council, a board or
commission, or another city body shall not represent any person, group, or
entity (other than himself or herself or his or her relative) for a period of
one year after the termination of his or her official duties:
      (1)   before the city council or that board, commission, or body;
      (2)   unless the board, commission, or body of which the former city
official or employee was a member is only advisory in nature:
         (A)   before city staff having responsibility for making
recommendations to, or taking any action on behalf of, the city council or that
board, commission, or body; or
         (B)   before a board, commission, or other city body that has
appellate jurisdiction over the board, commission, or body of which the former
city official or employee was a member, if any issue relates to his or her
former duties.
   (b)   Representation before the city. A former city official or employee
shall not represent for compensation any person, group, or entity (other than
himself or herself or his or her relative) before the city for a period of one
year after termination of his or her official duties. This subsection does not
apply to a person who was classified as a city official only because he or she
was an appointed member of a board, commission, or other city body. For
purposes of this subsection, "compensation" means money or any other thing of
value that is received, or is to be received, in return for or in connection
with such representation.
   (c)   Representation in litigation adverse to the city. A former city
official or employee shall not, for a duration of one year after completing his
or her service with the city, represent any person, group, or entity (other
than himself or herself or his or her relative) in any litigation to which the
city is a party, if the interests of that person, group, or entity are adverse
to the interests of the city and the matter is one in which the former city
official or employee personally participated prior to termination of his or her
official duties or is a matter substantially related to such a matter.
   (d)   Statement or implication of inappropriate influence. In connection
with the representation of private interests, a former city official or
employee shall not state or imply that he or she can influence city action on
any basis other than the merits. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-27.   DISCRETIONARY CONTRACTS.
   (a)   Impermissible financial interest in discretionary city contract or
sale. This subsection applies only to contracts or sales made on a
discretionary basis and not to contracts or sales made on a competitive bid
basis. Within one year after the termination of official duties, a former city
official or employee shall not have any financial interest, direct or indirect,
in any discretionary contract with the city, or be financially interested,
directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, materials,
supplies, or services. Any violation of this subsection, with knowledge,
express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city,
renders the contract involved voidable by the city manager or city council.
   (b)   Additional restrictions. A former city official or employee may not,
within one year after leaving the service or employment of the city, either
individually or as the officer or principal of a private business entity:
      (1)   submit a proposal, on behalf of the official or employee or on
behalf of a private business entity, to make any discretionary city contract;
or
      (2)   negotiate or enter into any discretionary city contract.
   (c)   Prior participation in negotiation or award of contract and disclosure
requirements. A former city official or employee may not, within one year after
the termination of official duties, perform work on a compensated basis
relating to a discretionary contract with the city if he or she personally
participated in the negotiation or awarding of the contract. A former city
official or employee, for one year after termination of official duties, must
disclose to the city secretary immediately upon knowing that he or she will
perform work on a compensated basis relating to any discretionary contract with
the city.
   (d)   Exceptions. The prohibitions of Subsections (a), (b), and (c) do not
apply to:
      (1)   a contract for the personal services of a former city official or
employee;
      (2)   a member of a board, commission, or body that is advisory only;
      (3)   a volunteer on a committee or task force formed by a board or
commission; or
      (4)   the provision of goods, facilities, or services by the city to a
former city official or employee pursuant to duly adopted city policies and on
nonnegotiable terms generally available to the public, including renting a
recreational space.
   (e)   Waivers. The prohibitions of Subsections (a), (b), and (c) may be
waived by the city council, after a review of the specific circumstances, for a
person who is considered a former official because he or she was a member of a
board or commission that is more than advisory in nature. (Ord. Nos. 24316;
24721; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-28.   RESTRICTIONS ON LOBBYING.
   (a)   A city council member shall be prohibited from registering as a
lobbyist and from lobbying city council members, or any city department, board,
or commission, for one year after leaving service with the city.
   (b)   A city official other than a city council member who is a member of a
board or commission shall be prohibited from registering as a lobbyist and
lobbying that board or commission for one year after the city official's
service on that board or commission has ended.
   (c)   A city employee, including city employees who are city officials,
shall be prohibited from registering as a lobbyist and from lobbying city
council members, or any city department, board, or commission, for one year
after leaving employment with the city.
   (d)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from lobbying on behalf of
another government agency if they are employed by that governmental agency.
(Ord. Nos. 30391; 32072; 32472)
ARTICLE V.
LOBBYISTS.
SEC. 12A-29.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article, unless specifically provided otherwise:
      (1)   CITY OFFICIAL means:
         (A)   The mayor and city council members.
         (B)   The city manager, assistant city managers, and chiefs.
         (C)   The city attorney and first assistant city attorney.
         (D)   The city secretary and first assistant city secretary.
         (E)   The city auditor and first assistant city auditor.
         (F)   The inspector general.
         (G)   Municipal judges.
         (H)   All department directors.
         (I)   City of Dallas appointed members to the following boards and
commissions:
            (i)   Board of adjustment and board of adjustment alternate
members.
            (ii)   Building inspection advisory, examining, and appeals board.
            (iii)   City plan commission.
            (iv)   Civil service board and civil service board adjunct members.
            (v)   Community development commission.
            (vi)   Dallas area rapid transit board.
            (vii)   Dallas-Fort Worth international airport board.
            (viii)   Ethics advisory commission.
            (ix)   Fire code advisory and appeals board.
            (x)   Housing finance corporation board.
            (xi)   Landmark commission and landmark commission alternate
members.
            (xii)   All local government corporation boards.
            (xiii)   All municipal management district boards.
            (xiv)   Park and recreation board.
            (xv)   Permit and license appeal board.
            (xvi)   All reinvestment zone boards.
      (2)   CLIENT.
         (A)   "Client" means any person on whose behalf lobbying is conducted.
If a person engages in lobbying on that person's own behalf, whether directly
or through the acts of others, the person is both a client and a lobbyist.
         (B)   In the case of a coalition or association that employs or
retains other persons to conduct lobbying activities, the client is the
coalition or association and not its individual members.
         (C)   In the case of a limited liability company, limited partnership
company, or similar entity, the client includes the managers and general
partners, but does not include the non-managing members or limited partners.
         (D)   In the case of affiliated business entities, the client includes
the parent entity and each subsidiary with a direct economic interest in a
municipal question and on whose behalf the municipal question is being lobbied
but does not include any other subsidiaries or entities whose only involvement
in the municipal question or lobbying activities is being under the common
control or ownership structure of the parent entity.
      (3)   COMPENSATION.
         (A)   "Compensation" means any money, service, facility, or other
thing of value that is received, or is to be received, in return for or in
connection with lobbying services rendered, or to be rendered, including
reimbursement of expenses incurred in lobbying.
         (B)   "Compensation" does not include:
            (i)   a payment made to any individual regularly employed by a
person if:
               (aa)   the payment ordinarily would be made regardless of
whether the individual engaged in lobbying activities; and
               (bb)    lobbying activities are not part of the individual's
regular responsibilities to the person making the payment; or
            (ii)   any amounts previously reported under Section
12A-33 of this article.
         (C)   If a lobbyist engages in both lobbying activities and other
activities on behalf of a person, compensation for lobbying includes all
amounts received from that person, if, for the purpose of evading the
obligations imposed under this article, the lobbyist has structured the receipt
of compensation in a way that unreasonably minimizes the value of the lobbying
activities.
         (D)   Compensation that has not yet been received is considered to be
received on the date that it is earned, if that date is ascertainable;
otherwise, it is received on the date on which the contract or agreement for
compensation is made, or on the date lobbying commences, whichever is first.
      (4)   EXPENDITURE.
         (A)   "Expenditure" means a payment, distribution, loan, advance,
reimbursement, deposit, or gift of money or anything of value, including a
contract, promise, or agreement to make an expenditure, regardless of whether
such contract, promise, or agreement is legally enforceable.
         (B)   "Expenditure" does not include:
            (i)   an amount paid to any individual regularly employed by a
person if:
               (aa)   the amount paid to the individual is ordinarily paid
regardless of whether the individual engages in lobbying activities; and
               (bb)    lobbying activities are not part of the individual's
regular responsibilities to the person making the payment; or
            (ii)   the cost of photocopying city documents, if those costs are
the only expenditures made by the person in question on lobbying activities.
         (C)   The date on which an expenditure is incurred is determined
according to generally accepted accounting principles.
      (5)   GIFT has the same meaning as in Section
12A-2.
      (6)   IMMEDIATE FAMILY means a spouse, a domestic partner, and dependent
children.
      (7)   LOBBYIST means a person who engages in lobbying, whether directly
or indirectly. If an agent or employee engages in lobbying for a principal or
employer, both the agent and the principal, or the employee and the employer,
are lobbyists.
      (8)   LOBBY or LOBBYING.
         (A)   "Lobby or lobbying" means any oral or written communication
(including an electronic communication) to a city official, made directly or
indirectly by any person in an effort to influence or persuade an official to
favor or oppose, recommend or not recommend, vote for or against, or take or
refrain from taking action on any municipal question.
         (B)   "Lobby or lobbying" does not include a communication:
            (i)   merely requesting information or inquiring about the facts or
status of any municipal question, matter, or procedure that does not attempt to
influence a city official;
            (ii)   made by a public official or employee (including, but not
limited to, an official or employee of the city of Dallas) acting in his or her
official capacity;
            (iii)   made by a representative of a media organization if the
purpose of the communication is gathering and disseminating news and
information to the public;
            (iv)   made in a speech, article, publication, or other material
that is distributed and made available to the public, or through radio,
television, cable television, or any other medium of mass communication;
            (v)   made at a meeting open to the public under the Texas Open
Meetings Act;
            (vi)   made in the form of a written comment filed in the course of
a public proceeding or any other communication that is made on the record in a
public proceeding;
            (vii)   made in writing as a petition for official action and
required to be a public record pursuant to established city procedures;
            (viii)   made in an oral or written response narrowly tailored to
address an oral or written request by a city official for specific information;
            (ix)   the content of which is compelled by law;
            (x)   made in response to a public notice soliciting communications
from the public and directed to the official specifically designated in the
notice to receive such communications;
            (xi)   made on behalf of an individual with regard to that
individual's employment or benefits;
            (xii)   made by a fact witness or expert witness at an official
proceeding; or
            (xiii)   made by a person solely on behalf of that individual, his
or her spouse or domestic partner, or his or her minor children.
      (9)   LOBBYING FIRM means:
         (A)   a self-employed lobbyist;
         (B)   a person who has one or more employees that are lobbyists on
behalf of a client or clients other than that person; or
         (C)   a person who has one or more employees that are lobbyists on the
person's behalf and the person is the client.
      (10)   MUNICIPAL QUESTION means a public policy issue of a discretionary
nature that is pending before, or that may be the subject of action by, the
city council or any city board or commission. The term includes, but is not
limited to, proposed actions or proposals for action in the form of ordinances,
resolutions, motions, recommendations, reports, regulations, policies,
nominations, appointments, sanctions, and bids, including the adoption of
specifications, awards, grants, or contracts. The term does not include the
day-to-day application, administration, and execution of city programs and
policies such as permitting, platting, and design approval matters related to
or in connection with a specific project or development.
      (11)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, association, firm,
partnership, committee, club, organization, or a group of persons voluntarily
acting in concert.
      (12)   PUBLIC SUBSIDY MATTER means any of the following:
         (A)   A tax abatement.
         (B)   A housing tax credit.
         (C)   An historic development tax abatement.
         (D)   Federal grant money administered by the city.
         (E)   Tax increment financing.
         (F)   An economic development grant or loan.
         (G)   The direct sale or lease of city-owned or city-controlled real
property excepted from complying with the notice and bidding requirements of
Texas Local Government Code Section 272.001(a) or other law.
      (13)   REGISTRANT means a person required to register under this article.
(Ord. Nos. 27748; 27834; 30489; 32072; 32472; 32924)
SEC. 12A-30.   PERSONS REQUIRED TO REGISTER AS LOBBYISTS.
   (a)   Except as provided by Section
12A-31, a person must register with the city secretary if the person:
      (1)   receives compensation of $200 or more in a calendar quarter for
lobbying;
      (2)   receives reimbursement of $200 or more in a calendar quarter for
lobbying; or
      (3)   lobbies as the agent or employee of a person who:
         (A)   receives compensation of $200 or more in a calendar quarter for
lobbying; or
         (B)   receives reimbursement of $200 or more in a calendar quarter for
lobbying.
   (b)   A lobbying firm that is not required to register under Subsection (a)
of this section may register as a lobbyist with the city secretary if the
lobbying firm has two or more employees who are required to register under
Subsection (a). A lobbying firm that chooses to register all of its employees
as lobbyists under this subsection, instead of having them register
individually, will be deemed a "registrant" and "a person required to register"
for all purposes of this article and will be subject to all requirements,
procedures, and penalties applicable to a "registrant" and "person required to
register," as those terms are used in this article.
   (c)   An attorney who is representing a client must register as a lobbyist
if the attorney meets the compensation or reimbursement standards of Subsection
(a). A law firm employing two or more attorneys required to register as
lobbyists under this section may register as a lobbying firm instead of
registering the individual attorneys.
   (d)   A person who is representing an association of city employees or an
association of former city employees must register as a lobbyist if the person
meets the compensation or reimbursement standards of Subsection (a) or if the
person is representing the association on a pro bono basis. (Ord. Nos. 27748;
27834; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-31.   EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   The following persons are not required to register or file an activity
report under this article:
      (1)   A person who owns, publishes, or is employed by a newspaper, any
other regularly published periodical, a radio station, a television station, a
wire service, or any other bona fide news medium that in the ordinary course of
business disseminates news, opinions, or paid advertisements that directly or
indirectly oppose or promote municipal questions or seek to influence official
action relating to municipal questions, provided that the person does not
engage in other activities that require registration under this article. This
exception does not apply if a person's relation to the news media is only
incidental to a lobbying effort or if a position taken or advocated by a media
outlet directly impacts, affects, or seeks to influence a municipal question in
which the media outlet has a direct or indirect economic interest.
      (2)   A person whose only lobbying activity is to encourage or solicit
the members, employees, or owners (including shareholders) of an entity by whom
the person is compensated to communicate directly with one or more city
officials to influence municipal questions.
      (3)   A governmental entity and its officials and employees, provided the
communications relate solely to subjects of governmental interest concerning
the governmental entity and the city.
      (4)   A person who neither knows nor has reason to know that a municipal
question is pending at the time of contact with a city official. This exception
does not apply if the existence of a municipal question is discovered during
on-going contacts with a city official and the person then engages in
additional lobbying of the same official or other city officials with respect
to that municipal question.
      (5)   A person whose contact with a city official is made solely as part
of resolving a dispute with the city, provided that the contact is solely with
city officials who do not vote on or have final authority over any municipal
question involved.
      (6)   An agent or employee of a lobbying firm or other registrant,
provided that the lobbying firm or other registrant files a registration
statement or activity report for the period in question fully disclosing all
relevant information known to the agent or employee.
      (7)   An individual who engages in lobbying, but who does not receive
compensation or reimbursement for lobbying with respect to any client.
      (8)   A neighborhood association, crime watch group, or homeowners
association or its members when lobbying on a municipal question that affects
the group or association as a whole.
   (b)   If, after notification by the city secretary that registration is
required, a person shall, within 14 days of the date of notification:
      (1)   file an affidavit with the city secretary stating the basis for an
exception under this section; or
      (2)   register as required by this article. (Ord. Nos. 27748; 30391;
32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-32.   REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Initial registration. A person required to register as a lobbyist
under this article shall file a separate registration for each client. A
registrant who makes more than one lobbying contact for the same client shall
file a single registration form covering all lobbying contacts for that client.
If the registrant is not an individual, an authorized officer or agent of the
registrant must file the form. An initial registration form relating to a
client must be filed by a person required to register under this article within
five days after the start of lobbying activity for that client, except that
initial registration of a client in a zoning case must be filed within five
days after the zoning application is filed with the city. In no event shall a
registrant knowingly fail to register, or knowingly fail to disclose such
registration to relevant city officials, prior to official city action relating
to the subject matter of the lobbying activity.
   (b)   Subsequent annual registration. Subsequent registration forms must be
filed annually by January 15 for each client for whom a registrant previously
filed or was required to file an initial registration form in the prior
registration year if lobbying activities are still being conducted or will
foreseeably be conducted for the client during the new registration year.
   (c)   Required disclosures. An initial or subsequent registration must be
filed on the form and in the manner prescribed by the city secretary and must
include, to the extent applicable, the following information:
      (1)   The full name, telephone number, permanent address, and nature of
the business of:
         (A)   the registrant;
         (B)   the client;
         (C)   any person, other than the client, on whose behalf the
registrant has been engaged by the client to lobby;
         (D)   any person, other than the client, who is known by the
registrant to contribute financially to the compensation of the registrant, or
who, in whole or in major part, plans, supervises, or controls the registrant's
lobbying activities on behalf of the client;
         (E)   any lobbying firm for which the registrant is an agent or
employee with respect to the client; and
         (F)   each employee or agent of the registrant who has acted or whom
the registrant expects to act as a lobbyist on behalf of the client.
      (2)   A statement of all municipal questions on which the registrant:
         (A)   has lobbied for the client in the calendar quarter in which the
registration is filed and in the three months preceding the filing of the
registration, including the name of each city official contacted by the
registrant on behalf of the client with regard to each municipal question and
the type of contact made with the city official (in person, telephone call,
letter, electronic mail, etc.); or
         (B)   will foreseeably lobby for the client in the calendar quarter in
which the registration is filed and in the three months following the filing of
the registration.
      (3)   If the municipal question relates to a zoning case, the name of
each city official contacted and the type of contact made (in person, telephone
call, letter, electronic mail, etc.) by the registrant on behalf of the client
from the time the registrant began lobbying activities relating to the zoning
case until the time the registrant filed a registration for the client in
compliance with this section.
      (4)   Disclosure of any employment or arrangement to lobby for the client
on a contingent fee basis.
      (5)   A list of any positions held by the registrant as a city official
or city employee, as those terms are defined in Section
12A-2, during the 24 months preceding the filing of the registration.
      (6)   A statement that, by filing the registration, the registrant swears
or affirms under penalty of perjury that, to the best of the registrant's
knowledge, all information contained in the registration is true and correct
and that the registration is complete and includes all information required to
be disclosed under this article.
      (7)   If the registrant is a former city official or employee, a
statement that, by filing the registration, the registrant swears or affirms
that, to the best of the registrant's knowledge, the registrant's lobbying
activities have not violated and will not foreseeably violate Article III of
this chapter, which governs former city officials and employees.
   (d)   Fee. At the time of filing an initial or subsequent annual
registration, a registrant shall pay to the city an annual registration fee of
$300. A separate registration fee is not required for each additional client
registered during a registration year. All lobbyist registration fees must be
deposited into a separate account within the general fund, which account must
be used to offset the costs of administering the city's lobbyist registration
program and the costs of handling disclosure filings. (Ord. Nos. 27748; 32072;
32472)
SEC. 12A-33.   ACTIVITY REPORTS.
   (a)   Required disclosures. Except as provided in Section
12A-31 of this article, each registrant shall file with the city secretary a
report concerning the registrant's lobbying activities for the prior calendar
quarter. The report for the preceding calendar quarter must be filed not
earlier than the first day or later than the 15th day of April, July, October,
or January, or on the date registration is required, whichever comes later. A
registrant must file a report for each client the registrant received
compensation from or expended monies for lobbying during the prior calendar
quarter. If the registrant is not an individual, an authorized officer or agent
of the registrant shall file the report. The report must be filed on the form
and in the manner prescribed by the city secretary and must include, with
respect to the previous calendar quarter, to the extent applicable, the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the registrant, the name of the client, and any changes
or updates in the information provided in the most recent registration
statement filed pursuant to Section
12A-32.
      (2)   A list of the specific issues upon which the registrant engaged in
lobbying activities, including, to the maximum extent practicable, a list of
specific legislative proposals and other proposed, pending, or completed
official actions.
      (3)   Disclosure of any employment or arrangement to lobby for the client
on a contingent fee basis.
      (4)   The name of each city official contacted by the registrant on
behalf of the client with regard to a municipal question and the type of
contact made with the city official (in person, telephone call, letter,
electronic mail, etc.).
      (5)   A list of the employees or agents of the registrant who acted as
lobbyists on behalf of the client.
      (6)   Cumulative lobbying expenditures of over $5,000 in a calendar
quarter, separated into the following categories:
         (A)   Advertising and publications.
         (B)   Compensation to other than full- time employees.
         (C)   Reimbursement to others.
         (D)   Personal sustenance, lodging and travel, if reimbursed.
         (E)   Other expenses.
      (7)   Gifts, benefits, and expenditures that have a cumulative value of
more than $25 that are made to, conferred upon, or incurred on behalf of a city
official or his or her immediate family by the registrant, or by anyone acting
on behalf of the registrant, in any calendar quarter must be itemized by item,
date, city official, actual cost, and circumstances of the transaction.
Pursuant to Section
12A-35(h), the total aggregate value of all gifts, benefits, and expenditures
for each city official shall not exceed $300 per lobbyist, per calendar year.
      (8)   Each exchange (itemized by date, business entity and address, city
official, amount, and nature of transaction) of money, goods, services, or
anything of value by the registrant, or by anyone acting on behalf of the
registrant, with any business entity in which the registrant knows or should
know that a city official has a financial interest, directly or indirectly. For
purposes of this paragraph, financial interest includes legal or equitable
interest in land, chattels, intangibles, and property rights having more than a
de minimum value. For purposes of this paragraph, "exchange" does not include a
routine purchase from a commercial business establishment, if the city official
in question is neither aware, nor likely to become aware, of the transaction.
      (9)   The name and position of each city official or member of a city
official's immediate family who is employed by the registrant.
      (10)   A statement that, by filing the report, the registrant swears or
affirms under penalty of perjury that, to the best of the registrant's
knowledge, all information contained in the report is true and correct and that
the report is complete and includes all information required to be reported
under this article.
   (b)   Information required to be provided to registrant. Each person about
whose activities a registrant is required to report by Subsection (a) shall
provide a full account of such activities to the registrant at least five days
before the registrant's report is due to be filed.
   (c)   Preservation of records. Each registrant shall obtain and preserve all
accounts, bills, receipts, books, papers, and documents necessary to
substantiate the activity reports required under this section for two years
after the date the report containing such items is filed.
   (d)   No activity or changes. No quarterly activity report is required if
there is no activity during the preceding calendar quarter and there are no
other changes to items required to be reported. (Ord. Nos. 27748; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-34.   NON-REGISTRANT DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS.
   (a)   Non-registrant disclosure statement required for zoning cases. Any
applicant, property owner, or purchaser with a property under contract who
lobbies a city council member or a member of the city plan commission on a
municipal question relating to a zoning case that will affect the property
shall file a non-registrant disclosure statement in accordance with this
section. An initial non-registrant disclosure statement must be filed within
five days after the applicant, property owner, or purchaser contacts a city
council member or member of the city plan commission for lobbying purposes.
This paragraph only applies to lobbying contacts made after the application for
the zoning case is filed with the city.
   (b)   Required information. A non-registrant disclosure statement must be
filed on the form and in the manner prescribed by the city secretary. If the
applicant, property owner, or purchaser with a property under contract is not
an individual, an authorized officer or agent of that person shall file the
non-registrant disclosure statement. The non-registrant disclosure statement
must include, to the extent applicable, the following information:
      (1)   The full name, telephone number, permanent address, and nature of
the business of:
         (A)   the applicant;
         (B)   the property owner; and
         (C)   the purchaser with a property under contract.
      (2)   The full name, telephone number, permanent address, and nature of
the business of the person filing the non-registrant disclosure statement, if
different from the applicant, property owner, or purchaser.
      (3)   The address of the property that is the subject of the designated
zoning case.
      (4)   A description of the designated zoning case.
      (5)   The name of each city council member or city plan commission member
contacted by the applicant, property owner, or purchaser relating to a zoning
case and the type of contact made (in person, telephone call, letter,
electronic mail, etc.).
      (6)   A statement that, by filing the non-registrant disclosure
statement, the filer swears or affirms under penalty of perjury that, to the
best of the filer's knowledge, all information contained in the non-registrant
disclosure statement is true, correct, and complete and includes all
information required to be disclosed under this section.
   (c)   Quarterly disclosure statements. Lobbying contacts on a zoning case
made after an initial non-registrant disclosure statement is filed must be
reported by the applicant, property owner, or purchaser with a property under
contract in quarterly non-registrant disclosure statements. A quarterly non-
registrant disclosure statement must be filed on the form and in the manner
prescribed by the city secretary and must include, with respect to the previous
calendar quarter, to the extent applicable, the same information required in
Subsection (b). The non-registrant disclosure statement for the preceding
calendar quarter must be filed not earlier than the first day or later than the
15th day of April, July, October, or January.
   (d)   No fee. No fee will be charged for filing a non-registrant disclosure
statement under this section.
   (e)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   an applicant, property owner, or purchaser with a property under
contract who is currently registered with the city as a lobbyist and filing
activity reports in accordance with this article; or
      (2)   a neighborhood association, crime watch group, or homeowner's
association or its members when lobbying on a municipal question that affects
the group or association as a whole. (Ord. Nos. 27748; 30489; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-35.   RESTRICTED ACTIVITIES.
   (a)   False statements. A person who lobbies or engages another person to
lobby, or any other person acting on behalf of such person, shall not
knowingly:
      (1)   make any false or misleading statement of fact to any city
official; or
      (2)   cause a copy of a document containing a false statement to be
received by a city official without notifying the official, in writing, of the
truth.
   (b)   Failure to correct erroneous statement. A registrant who learns that a
statement contained in a registration form or activity report filed by the
registrant during the past three years is false shall correct that statement by
written notification to the city secretary within 30 days of learning of the
falsehood.
   (c)   Personal obligation of city officials. A person who lobbies or engages
another person to lobby, or any other person acting on behalf of such person,
shall not do any act, or refrain from doing any act, with the express purpose
and intent of placing any city official under personal obligation to such
lobbyist or person.
   (d)   Improper influence. A registrant shall not cause or influence the
introduction of any ordinance, resolution, appeal, application, petition,
nomination, or amendment for the purpose of thereafter being employed as a
lobbyist to secure its granting, denial, confirmation, rejection, passage, or
defeat.
   (e)   False appearances. A person who lobbies or engages another person to
lobby, or any other person acting on behalf of such person, shall not cause any
communication to be sent to a city official in the name of a fictitious person,
or in the name of any real person unless the real person consents.
   (f)   Prohibited representations. A person who lobbies or engages another
person to lobby, or any other person acting on behalf of such person, shall not
represent, either directly or indirectly, orally or in writing, that the person
can control or obtain the vote or action of any city official.
   (g)   Lobbying by bidders and proposers on city contracts and public subsidy
matters.
      (1)   Bidders and proposers on city contracts.
         (A)   A person responding to a request for bids or request for
proposals on a city contract shall not lobby a city council member regarding
the bid or request for proposal either directly or indirectly (through a
representative, employee, or agent) from the time the advertisement or public
notification of the request for bids or request for proposals is made until the
time the contract is awarded by the city council.
         (B)   A city council member shall not discuss a request for bids or a
request for proposals on a city contract either directly (with the person or
entity submitting the bid or proposal) or indirectly (with a lobbyist,
representative, employee, or agent of the person or entity submitting the bid
or proposal) from the time the advertisement or public notification of the
request for bids or request for proposals is made until the time the contract
is awarded by the city council. The department issuing the request for bids or
request for proposals shall forward to all city council members any protest
received and any response to that protest before city council considers
awarding that city contract.
      (2)   Public subsidy matters.
         (A)   A person applying for or requesting a public subsidy matter
shall not lobby a city council member either directly or indirectly (through a
representative, employee, or agent) from the time a complete application or
request is accepted until the applicant or requestor is notified that the
public subsidy matter will not be placed on a city council agenda or the public
subsidy matter is approved or denied by city council.
         (B)   A city council member shall not discuss an application or
request for a public subsidy matter either directly (with the person or entity
submitting the application or request) or indirectly (with a lobbyist,
representative, employee, or agent of the person or entity submitting the
application or request) from the time a complete application or request is
accepted until the applicant or requestor is notified that the public subsidy
matter will not be placed on a city council agenda or the public subsidy matter
is approved or denied by city council.
      (3)   City council meetings. This subsection does not prohibit a bidder
or proposer from speaking at the city council meeting where the award of the
contract is considered.
   (h)   Limits on gifts, benefits, and expenditures. A lobbyist shall not
confer gifts, benefits, and expenditures upon a city official exceeding a total
aggregate value of $300 per lobbyist, per calendar year. (Ord. Nos. 27748;
30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-36.   IDENTIFICATION OF CLIENTS.
   (a)   Appearances. Each person who lobbies or engages another person to
lobby before the city council or before a city board or commission identified
in Section
12A-29(1)(H) shall orally identify himself or herself and any client he or she
represents upon beginning an address. Each person who lobbies or engages
another person to lobby shall also disclose on appropriate sign-in sheets his
or her identity, the identity of the client he or she represents, and whether
he or she is registered as a lobbyist under this article.
   (b)   Oral lobbying contacts. Any person who makes an oral lobbying contact
with a city official shall, at the beginning of the lobbying contact, state
whether the person is registered under this article and identify each client on
whose behalf the lobbying contact is made.
   (c)   Written lobbying contacts. Any registrant who makes a written lobbying
contact (including an electronic communication) with a city official shall
identify each client on whose behalf the lobbying contact is made and identify
himself or herself as a registered lobbyist. (Ord. Nos. 27748; 30391; 32072;
32472)
SEC. 12A-37.   TIMELINESS OF FILING REGISTRATIONS, ACTIVITY REPORTS, AND NON-
REGISTRANT DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS.
   (a)   A registration, an activity report, or a non-registrant disclosure
statement filed by first-class United States mail or by common or contract
carrier is timely if:
      (1)   it is properly addressed with postage and handling charges prepaid;
      (2)   it bears a post office cancellation mark or a receipt mark from a
common or contract carrier indicating a time within the applicable filing
period or before the applicable filing deadline, or the person required to file
furnishes satisfactory proof that it was deposited in the mail or with a common
or contract carrier within that filing period or before that filing deadline;
and
      (3)   it was in fact received by the city secretary.
   (b)   A registration, an activity report, or a non-registrant disclosure
statement filed electronically is timely if it is time and date stamped as
having been received by the city's server by 5:00 p.m. on the last day
permitted for filing. (Ord. Nos. 27748; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-38.   ADMINISTRATION.
   The city secretary shall:
      (1)   provide guidance and assistance on requirements for lobbyist
registration, activity reports, and non-registrant disclosure statements and
develop common standards, rules, and procedures for compliance with this
article;
      (2)   coordinate with the inspector general to review registrations,
activity reports, and non-registrant disclosure statements for completeness and
timeliness;
      (3)   maintain filing, coding, and cross-indexing systems to carry out
the purposes of this article, including:
         (A)   a publicly available list identifying all lobbyists and lobbying
firms registered with the city and their clients; and
         (B)   computerized systems designed to minimize the burden of filing
and maximize public access to materials filed under this article;
      (4)   on a quarterly basis, provide an updated list of all registered
lobbyists and lobbying firms, and their clients, to the inspector general, the
city council, the city manager, the city attorney, the city auditor, the
administrative municipal judge, all department heads, and all chairs of boards
and commissions identified in Section
12A-29(1)(H);
      (5)   make available for public inspection and copying at reasonable
times the registrations, activity reports, and non-registrant disclosure
statements filed under this article; and
      (6)   retain registrations, activity reports, and non-registrant
disclosure statements in accordance with the Local Government Records Act
(Title 6, Subtitle C, Texas Local Government Code, as amended). (Ord. Nos.
27748; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-39.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to
perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A
person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a
violation is committed, permitted, or continued.
   (b)   An offense under this article is punishable by a criminal fine not to
exceed $500. (Ord. Nos. 27748; 32472)
ARTICLE VI.
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
SEC. 12A-40.   FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE REPORT.
   (a)   Who must file.
      (1)   Designated city officials and designated city employees. Before
initially accepting appointment or assuming the duties of office, and annually
thereafter, the following city officials and employees shall file with the city
secretary a complete, sworn financial disclosure report complying with
Subsection (b):
         (A)   City of Dallas appointed members to the following boards,
commissions, and committees:
            (i)   Board of adjustment and board of adjustment alternate
members.
            (ii)   Building inspection advisory, examining, and appeals board.
            (iii)   Business development corporation board.
            (iv)   City plan and zoning commission.
            (v)   Civil service board and civil service board adjunct members.
            (vi)   Community development commission.
            (vii)   Dallas Area Rapid Transit board.
            (viii)   Dallas-Fort Worth international airport board.
            (ix)   Ethics advisory commission.
            (x)   Fire code advisory and appeals board.
            (xi)   Housing finance corporation board.
            (xii)   Landmark commission and landmark commission alternate
members.
            (xiii)   Park and recreation board.
            (xiv)   Permit and license appeal board.
            (xv)   All reinvestment zone boards.
            (xvi)   All municipal management district boards.
         (B)   The first assistant city attorney.
         (C)   The inspector general.
         (D)   The city auditor and city secretary, and their first assistants.
         (E)   Assistant city managers and chiefs.
         (F)   Municipal judges.
         (G)   Chief financial officer.
      (2)   The mayor, city council members, the city attorney, the city
manager, and candidates for city council. The mayor, each city council member,
the city attorney, the city manager, and each candidate for a place on the city
council are required to file with the city secretary verified financial
statements complying with Chapter 145 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended.
   (b)   Contents of financial disclosure report.
      (1)   For purposes of this subsection:
         (A)   FAMILY MEMBER means a spouse, domestic partner, or dependent of
an official or employee required to file a financial disclosure report under
Subsection (a)(1).
         (B)   REPORTING PARTY means a city official or employee filing a
financial disclosure report as required under Subsection (a)(1).
      (2)   Each financial disclosure report must be on a form provided by the
Office of the Inspector General and must contain all of the following
information:
         (A)   Name of the reporting party.
         (B)   Name of each family member of the reporting party.
         (C)   Names under which the reporting party and his or her family
members do business.
         (D)   Names of the employers of the reporting party and his or her
family members.
         (E)   Identification of each source of income amounting to more than
$300 received in the preceding calendar year by the reporting party or a family
member.
         (F)   Identification of each business entity (including self-
employment in the form of a sole proprietorship under a personal or assumed
name) in which the reporting party or a family member has an investment of more
than $1,000 at the fair market value at the time of the financial disclosure
report, which investment must be described in the financial disclosure report.
         (G)   Identification of each non-profit entity or business entity in
which the reporting party or a family member is a partner, manager, director,
officer, or board member, or serves in any other policymaking position.
         (H)   Identification of any business entity that the reporting party
knows is a partner, parent, or subsidiary business entity of a business entity
owned, operated, or managed by the reporting party or a family member.
         (I)   Identification of any person or business entity from whom,
within the previous calendar year, the reporting party or his or her spouse or
domestic partner, directly or indirectly, has:
            (i)   received and not rejected an offer of employment; or
            (ii)   accepted an offer of employment that is binding or expected
by the parties to be carried out.
         (J)   Identification (by exact street address or, if no street address
is ascertainable, by lot-and-block description) of all real property located
within the State of Texas in which the reporting party or a family member has a
leasehold interest; a contractual right to purchase; or an interest as fee
simple owner, beneficial owner, partnership owner, joint owner with an
individual or corporation, or owner of more than 25 percent of a corporation
that has title to the real property. The following property is not required to
be disclosed:
            (i)   Property used as a personal residence of a peace officer.
            (ii)   Property over which the reporting party has no decision
power concerning acquisitions or sales.
            (iii)   Property held through a real estate investment trust,
mutual fund, or similar entity, unless the reporting party or a family member
participates in the management of the trust, fund, or entity.
         (K)   Identification of persons or entities to whom the reporting
party or a family member owes an unsecured debt of more than $5,000, but not
including debts for:
            (i)   money borrowed from a relative; or
            (ii)   revolving charge accounts.
         (L)   Identification of all persons or entities who owe the reporting
party or a family member an unsecured debt of more than $5,000, but not
including debts owed by relative.
         (M)   Identification of the source of each gift or accumulation of
gifts from one source of more than $300 in estimated fair market value received
by the reporting party or a family member, or received by a person for the use
or benefit of the reporting party or a family member, within the preceding
calendar year and the estimated fair market value of each gift. Quarterly
reports required under this article can be used to meet this requirement. This
requirement does not include:
            (i)   a gift received from a relative, if given on account of
kinship, or from a domestic partner, if given on account of personal
relationship;
            (ii)   a gift received by will, by intestate succession, or as
distribution from an inter vivos or testamentary trust established by a spouse,
domestic partner, or ancestor;
            (iii)   gifts received among and between fellow city officials and
city employees;
            (iv)   a lawful campaign or officeholder contribution reported as
required by Chapter 254 of the Texas Election Code; and
            (v)   admission to an event in which the reporting party is
participating in connection with official duties.
   (c)   Open records. A financial disclosure report is an open record subject
to the Texas Open Records Act and must be maintained in accordance with the
Local Government Records Act.
   (d)   Annual filing date. An annual financial disclosure report filed by an
official or employee who is required to report must be received by the city
secretary by 5:00 p.m. on April 30. When the deadline falls on a Saturday or
Sunday, or on an official city holiday as established by the city council, the
deadline for receipt by the city secretary is extended to 5:00 p.m. of the next
day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or official city holiday. The inspector
general may for good cause grant an extension of time in which to file a report
upon written request submitted in advance of the deadline. The extension may
not exceed 15 days.
   (e)   Reporting periods. Each initial or annual financial disclosure report
filed by an individual designated in Subsection (a)(1) must disclose
information relating to the prior calendar year.
   (f)   City secretary.
      (1)   The city secretary shall:
         (A)   prior to January 15 of each year, notify all city officials and
employees designated in Subsection (a)(1) of their obligation to file financial
disclosure reports with the city secretary, and shall provide the officials and
employees with the appropriate forms to be completed;
         (B)   provide forms to all new city council appointees and advise them
of reporting requirements and deadlines;
         (C)   provide guidance and assistance on the reporting requirements
for persons required to file financial disclosure reports and develop common
standards, rules, and procedures for compliance with this article;
         (D)   Reserved.
         (E)   maintain filing, coding, and cross-indexing systems to carry out
the purpose of this article and maintain a publicly available list of all
persons required to file a financial disclosure report;
         (F)   make the reports filed under this article available for public
inspection and copying at reasonable times; and
         (G)   upon determining that a person who is required to file a
financial disclosure report has failed to do so timely or has filed incomplete
or unresponsive information:
            (i)   notify the person by certified mail that failure to file or
correct the filing within 15 days after the original deadline is a violation of
this chapter; and
            (ii)   publicly announce to the city council the names of those who
have not timely or completely filed a financial disclosure report and to whom
the notification is being sent.
      (2)   The failure of the city secretary to provide any notification
required by Subsection (f)(1) does not bar appropriate remedial action, but may
be considered on the issue of culpability.
   (g)   In addition to other remedies and penalties set forth in this chapter,
a violation of this section is punishable by a criminal fine not to exceed
$500. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 24485; 25236; 25906; 27819; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-41.   SHORT FORM ANNUAL REPORT.
   A person who is required to file an annual financial disclosure report under
Section
12A-40(a)(1) may fulfill those filing obligations by submitting a short sworn
statement on a form provided by the inspector general to the city secretary. A
person is eligible to submit a short statement, if there have been no changes
in the information disclosed by that person in a complete financial disclosure
report filed within the past five years. The short statement must indicate the
date of the person's most recently filed complete financial disclosure report
and must state that there have been no changes in that information. The annual
filing date of the short form annual report is the same as that for the
financial disclosure report in Section
12A-40(d). (Ord. Nos. 24316; 25906; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-42.   GIFT REPORTING.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   All city officials and employees must file a disclosure statement
on a quarterly basis, for all reportable gifts received in each three-month
period in a calendar year, subject to the reporting exceptions below. City
officials and employees required to file an annual Financial Disclosure Report,
under Section
12A-40, may use it as the first quarter's disclosure statement.
      (2)   All disclosure statements must be filed in an electronic format
with the city secretary. Disclosure statements must include the:
         (A)   date of the gift;
         (B)   identity of the person or entity giving the gift;
         (C)    name of the city official or employee receiving the gift;
         (D)   a description of the gift; and
         (E)   the estimated monetary value of the gift.
      (3)   City officials and employees are not required to report gifts with
a monetary value of less than $300, except that reporting is required for gifts
from a single source in a single year with a cumulative value of $300 or more,
excluding gifts of perishable food or beverages of an estimated value of $100
or less.
      (4)   City officials and employees are not required to report gifts from
a relative or person with whom the city official or employee has a personal,
professional, or business relationship, unless the gift is accepted in the city
official or employee's official capacity as described in Section
12A-2(25).
   (b)   Reporting of gifts over $300. The mayor, city council members, the
city attorney, the city manager, and city officials and employees required to
file a financial disclosure report under Section
12A-40 shall also report all gifts of $300 or more in the financial disclosure
report.
   (c)   Additional requirements for city officials in Section
12A-40(a). The mayor, city council members, the city attorney, the city
manager, and designated city officials listed in Section
12A-40(a) who have received no reportable gifts must file a quarterly gift
report acknowledging that no reportable gifts were received.
   (d)   Additional departmental reporting requirements. Employees must file
this disclosure statement in addition to any departmental requirements. (Ord.
Nos. 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-43.   DONATIONS.
   (a)   City officials, employees, and departments receiving a donation to the
city of money, real estate, products, or services shall report the donation to
the city secretary and the city manager or the city manager's designee on a
form to be provided by the city manager or the city manager's designee. The
report must include:
      (1)   the date of the donation;
      (2)   the identity of the person or business entity making the donation;
      (3)   the city official, employee, or department receiving the donation;
      (4)   a description of the donation;
      (5)   the estimated monetary value of the donation;
      (6)   the intended use of the donation; and
      (7)   the actual use and disposition of the donation.
Reports of all donations, subject to the exceptions below, received in each
three-month period in a calendar year, are required to be submitted to the city
secretary on a quarterly basis. The report must be filed with the city manager
or the city manager's designee within 30 days after receipt of the donation.
This report is required in addition to any other documentation required for the
donation.
   (b)   The individual or department that receives the donation is responsible
for reporting the donation.
   (c)   Reporting is not required for donations to the city of money, real
estate, products, or services with a monetary value of less than $1,000, except
that reporting is required for donations from a single source in a single year
with a cumulative value of $1,000 or more. (Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-44.    TRAVEL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Except as provided in Section
12A-12(b), any person who, in connection with his or her official duties,
accepts a trip or excursion to a location greater than 50 miles from the city
that involves the gratuitous provision of transportation, accommodations,
entertainment, meals, or refreshments paid for by a person or entity other than
a public agency, received in each three-month period in a calendar year
(quarterly), must file with the city secretary (except subordinates of the city
manager, who shall also file with the city manager) on a quarterly basis, a
disclosure statement identifying:
      (1)   the name of the sponsor of the trip or excursion;
      (2)   the name of the person or entity paying for the trip or excursion,
if different from the sponsor;
      (3)   the places to be visited; and
      (4)   the purpose and dates of the travel.
 
   (b)   Nothing in this section authorizes personnel reporting to the city
manager to violate policies and procedures established by the city manager
regarding travel request authorizations.
   (c)   All employees must file this disclosure statement in addition to any
departmental requirements. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 25906; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-45.    VIOLATION OF REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   Failure to timely file a report required under this article is a violation
of this chapter, as is the filing of a report with incorrect, misleading, or
incomplete information. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 25906; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-45.1.   REPORTING REQUIREMENTS CHART.
 
REPORT     WHO REPORTS                                                                    DUE DATE    SUBMITTED
                                                                                                      TO
                                                                                          Annual
                                                                                          Filing
                                                                                          Date: 5:00
                                                                                          p.m., April
                                                                                          30th.
                                                                                          * When the
                                                                                          deadline
                                                                                          falls on a
                                                                                          Saturday or
                                                                                          Sunday, or
                                                                                          on an
                                                                                          official
                                                                                          city
                                                                                          holiday as
                                                                                          established
           1.   City of Dallas appointed members to the following boards, commissions, by the city
           and committees:                                                                council,
              a.   Board of Adjustment and Board of Adjustment Alternate Members    the
              b.   Building Inspection Advisory, Examining, and Appeals Board       deadline
              c.   Business Development Corporation Board                           for receipt
              d.   City Plan and Zoning Commission                                  by the City
              e.   Civil Service Board and Civil Service Board Adjunct Members      Secretary
              f.   Community Development Commission                                 is extended
              g.   Dallas Area Rapid Transit Board                                  to 5:00
              h.   Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board                    p.m. of the
Financial     i.   Ethics Advisory Commission                                       next day
Disclosure    j.   Fire Code Advisory and Appeals Board                             that is not City
Report        k.   Housing Finance Corporation Board                                a Saturday, Secretary
Section       l.   Landmark Commission and Landmark Commission Alternate Members    Sunday, or
12A-40        m.   Park and Recreation Board                                        official
              n.   Permit and License Appeal Board                                  city
              o.   All Reinvestment Zone Boards                                     holiday.
              p.   All Municipal Management District Boards                         * The
           2.   First Assistant City Attorney                                          Inspector
           3.   Inspector General                                                      General may
           4.   City Auditor and City Secretary, and their First Assistants            for good
           5.   Assistant City Managers and Chiefs                                     cause grant
           6.   Municipal Judges                                                       an
           7.   Chief Financial Officer                                                extension
                                                                                          of time in
                                                                                          which to
                                                                                          file a
                                                                                          report upon
                                                                                          written
                                                                                          request
                                                                                          submitted
                                                                                          in advance
                                                                                          of the
                                                                                          deadline.
                                                                                          The
                                                                                          extension
                                                                                          may not
                                                                                          exceed 15
                                                                                          days.
                                                                                           
 
 
REPORT     WHO REPORTS                                       DUE DATE                                                                     SUBMITTED
                                                                                                                                          TO
                                                             Annual Filing Date for the Mayor, City Council Members, City Attorney, and
                                                             City Manager -
Financial                                                    5:00 p.m., April 30th
Statement                                                    Filing Date for Candidates for a Place on City Council, not later than the
Report     1.   Mayor                                     earlier of:
Texas      2.   City Council Members                      1.   The 20th day after deadline for filing an application for a place on
Local      3.   City Attorney                             the ballot of an election; or                                                City
Government 4.   City Manager                              2.   The fifth day before the date of the election.                       Secretary
Code       5.   Candidates for a Place on the City Council* When the deadline falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or an official national or
Chapter                                                     state holiday, the deadline for receipt by the City Secretary is extended to
145                                                          5:00 p.m. of the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or an official
                                                            national or state holiday.
                                                             * The City Attorney or City Manager may request the City Secretary to grant
                                                             an extension of not more than 60 days for filing the statement.
           A person who is required to file an annual
Short Form financial disclosure report may fulfill those     Annual Filing Date: 5:00 p.m., April 30th.
Annual     filing obligations by submitting a short sworn    * When the deadline falls on a Saturday or Sunday, or on an official city    City
Report     statement if there have been no changes in the    holiday as established by the city council, the deadline for receipt by the  Secretary
Section    information disclosed by that person in a         City Secretary is extended to 5:00 p.m. of the next day that is not a
12A-41     complete financial disclosure report filed within Saturday, Sunday, or official city holiday.
           the past five years.
 
 
REPORT    WHO REPORTS                                                                     DUE DATE   SUBMITTED
                                                                                                     TO
          City officials and city employees who are not required to file an annual
          financial disclosure report:
          1.   Not required to report gifts with a monetary value of less than $300,
          except that reporting is required for gifts from a single source in a single
          year with a cumulative value of $300 or more, excluding gifts of perishable
          food or beverages of an estimated value of $100 or less.                        Disclosure
          2.   Must also follow departmental reporting requirements for gifts.         statement
          City officials and city employees who are required to file an annual financial  must be
          disclosure report:                                                              filed on a
          1.   Received gifts with a monetary value of $300 or more, excluding gifts ofquarterly
          perishable food or beverages of an estimated value of $100 or less.             basis, for
Gift      2.   May use the annual financial disclosure report as the first quarter's   all        City
Reporting disclosure statement.                                                           reportable Secretary
Section   3.   Must also follow departmental reporting requirements for gifts.         gifts      (electronic
12A-42    The Mayor, City Council Members, City Attorney, City Manager, and City          received   format)
          Officials and Employees under Section                                           in each
          12A-40(a) are required to report:                                               three-
          1.   Gifts of $300 or more in the financial disclosure report in addition to month
          the quarterly report.                                                           period in
          2.   If no reportable gifts were received, must file a quarterly gift report a calendar
          acknowledging that no reportable gifts were received.                           year.
          No one is required to report gifts from a relative or person with whom the city  
          official or employee has a personal, professional, or business relationship,
          unless the gift is accepted in the city official or employee's official
          capacity.
          *See Section
          12A-12(b) for gifts that are not considered reportable gifts.
 
 
REPORT    WHO REPORTS                                                                DUE DATE  SUBMITTED
                                                                                               TO
                                                                                     Donations
                                                                                     must be
                                                                                     reported
                                                                                     to the
                                                                                     city
                                                                                     secretary
                                                                                     on a
                                                                                     quarterly
                                                                                     basis,
                                                                                     received
                                                                                     in each
          City Officials, city employees, and city departments:                      three-    City
          1.   Reporting is not required for donations to the city of money, real month     Manager
Donations estate, products, or services with a monetary value of less than $1,000,   period in (within 30
Section   except that reporting is required for donations from a single source in a  a         days of
12A-43    single year with a cumulative value of $1,000 or more.                     calendar  receipt of
          2.   The donation report must be filed in addition to any other         year.     the
          documentation required for the donation.                                   Donations donation)
                                                                                     must be
                                                                                     reported
                                                                                     to the
                                                                                     city
                                                                                     manager
                                                                                     within 30
                                                                                     days
                                                                                     after
                                                                                     receipt
                                                                                     of the
                                                                                     donation.
                                                                                     Travel
                                                                                     must be   City
                                                                                     reported  Secretary
                                                                                     on a      Subordinate
Travel    Any person who, in connection with his or her official duties, accepts a   quarterly s of the
Reporting trip or excursion to a location greater than 50 miles from the city that   basis in  City
Section   involves the gratuitous provision of transportation, accommodations,       each      Manager
12A-44    entertainment, meals, or refreshments paid for by a person or entity other three-    shall also
          than a public agency.                                                      month     file with
                                                                                     period in the City
                                                                                     a         Manager.
                                                                                     calendar
                                                                                     year.
 
(Ord. 32472)
ARTICLE VII.
LEGAL COUNSEL.
SEC. 12A-46.   CITY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE.
   (a)   The city attorney’s office shall serve as the legal counsel to the
ethics advisory commission.
   (b)   The city attorney’s office shall serve as legal advisor to city
officials and employees on matters pertaining to the code of ethics.
      (1)   Confidential advisory opinions.
         (A)   Issuance. By written request to the city attorney, any city
official or employee may request a confidential advisory opinion regarding
whether his or her own proposed actions or conduct would violate this chapter.
The attorney assigned to draft the advisory opinion shall make all reasonable
efforts to issue the advisory opinion within 10 business days after receipt of
the request. The city attorney, for good cause shown, may decline to issue the
opinion.
         (B)   Reliance. A person who reasonably and in good faith acts in
accordance with a confidential advisory opinion may not be found to have
violated this chapter by engaging in conduct approved in the opinion, if:
            (i)   the person requested the issuance of the opinion;
            (ii)   the request for an opinion fairly and accurately disclosed
all relevant facts necessary to render the opinion; and
            (iii)   the person waives the attorney- client privilege with
respect to the written advisory opinion.
         (C)    Pending confidential advisory opinions. Whenever a confidential
advisory opinion has been requested regarding the proposed actions or conduct
of a city official or employee, no action may be taken by the ethics advisory
commission or inspector general regarding those particular actions or conduct
until the city attorney issues the confidential advisory opinion. Any time
limits that the inspector general is required to follow in processing an ethics
complaint regarding those particular actions or conduct will be extended to
allow for the city attorney to issue the advisory opinion.
      (2)   General advisory opinions.
         (A)   Publishing. The city attorney may publish written general
advisory opinions to serve as guidance to city officials and employees.
         (B)   Reliance. A person who reasonably and in good faith acts in
accordance with a general advisory opinion published by the city attorney may
not be found to have violated this chapter.
   (c)   If the ethics advisory commission determines that a person has
violated this chapter, the city council may direct the city attorney to
initiate whatever legal action is necessary, including but not limited to
injunctive relief. (Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472; 32924)
SEC. 12A-47.   OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL.
   (a)   Powers and duties. The office of the inspector general serves as an
independent investigative authority in regard to ethics and official
misconduct. The inspector general has the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Seek out and initiate investigations into misconduct involving
ethics, fraud, waste, abuse, and corruption of city officials, city employees,
and persons doing business with the city.
      (2)   Receive and investigate complaints and anonymous tips alleging:
         (A)   violations of the laws, ordinances, and rules in Section
12A-50(a)(2); and
         (B)   fraud, waste, abuse, and corruption within the city.
      (3)   Submit quarterly reports to the ethics advisory commission, the
city council, the city auditor, and the city manager detailing the findings of
investigations completed by the inspector general.
      (4)   Prosecute alleged or suspected violations of the laws, ordinances,
and rules in Section
12A-50(a)(2) before the ethics advisory commission and recommend appropriate
disciplinary action.
      (5)   Issue subpoenas in accordance with Paragraph (b)(2).
      (6)   Make recommendations to the ethics advisory commission that
complainants are vexatious and recommend appropriate sanctions for vexatious
complainants.
      (7)   Supervise a chief integrity officer to administer and manage the
Integrity Officer Program.
      (8)   Investigate and enforce claims of retaliation in violation of this
chapter.
   (b)   Investigations.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, the inspector general has
broad authority to initiate investigations, either as the result of a tip
received, or upon observing suspicious conduct or documentation. Investigations
initiated by the inspector general shall be treated as complaints received by
the inspector general, following the same complaint process in Section
12A-52.
      (2)   For the purpose of conducting investigations authorized by this
chapter, the inspector general shall subpoena witnesses and compel the
production of books, papers, and other evidence material in the same manner as
is prescribed by the laws of this state for compelling the attendance of
witnesses and production of evidence in the corporation court. A person
receiving a subpoena in accordance with this section may, before the return
date specified in the subpoena, petition the corporation court for a motion to
modify or quash the subpoena. Refusal to appear or to produce any document or
other evidence after receiving a subpoena pursuant to this paragraph is a
violation of this chapter subject to sanctions as described in Section
2-9 of the Dallas City Code.
      (3)   The inspector general shall not commence or continue an
investigation involving alleged conduct that is the subject of pending civil or
criminal litigation, and shall instead postpone such investigation pending:
         (A)   the conclusion of any claim or civil litigation involving the
alleged conduct; and
         (B)   if grand jury proceedings are anticipated, the conclusion of all
grand jury proceedings relating to the alleged conduct.
   (c)   Quarterly reports. The inspector general shall submit quarterly
reports to the ethics advisory commission, the city council, the city attorney,
the city auditor, and the city manager detailing the findings and conclusions
of all completed investigations, whether initiated by the inspector general or
initiated as a result of a formal complaint or anonymous tip. The report shall
summarize all completed investigations, including dismissals, approved
settlement agreements, and the disposition of prosecutions. For investigations
that have been dismissed, the reports shall not include the names of
complainants or of persons investigated by the inspector general.
   (d)   Integrity Officer Program.
      (1)   Purpose.
         (A)   The Integrity Officer Program provides support to city
departments and offices by ensuring that city employees and persons doing
business with the city comply with the Code of Ethics and adhere to all ethical
standards and reporting requirements.
         (B)   The city manager, city secretary, city attorney, and city
auditor shall designate a liaison to assist the chief integrity officer with
ethics training and the Chief Integrity Program.
      (2)   Chief integrity officer. The inspector general shall supervise a
chief integrity officer to coordinate with city departments and offices to
provide training related to integrity, transparency, and accountability within
city government. The duties of the chief integrity officer shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
         (A)   Administer and manage the Integrity Officer Program under the
supervision of the inspector general.
         (B)   Develop and implement training programs and other communication
with city officials, city employees, and persons doing business with the city
that reinforce ethical conduct and the requirements of the code of ethics.
         (C)   Assist the city attorney, inspector general, ethics advisory
commission, and city manager on matters of ethics, including proposing
amendments to the Code of Ethics.
         (D)   Notify all city departments and offices of any significant
amendments to the Code of Ethics.
         (E)   Annually distribute a plain- language guide to the Code of
Ethics to all city officials, employees, and registered lobbyists.
         (F)   Assist the inspector general in the enforcement of the Code of
Ethics.
         (G)   Promote a culture of ethics within the city. (Ord. Nos. 32072;
32472; 32924)
SEC. 12A-48.   OUTSIDE LEGAL COUNSEL.
   (a)   Ethics advisory commission. An independent outside attorney, who does
not otherwise represent the city, a city official, or an employee in his or her
official capacity, may be appointed by the city council, at the recommendation
of the city attorney, to serve as legal counsel to the ethics advisory
commission for a particular case whenever:
      (1)   a complaint is filed relating to:
         (A)   an alleged violation of this chapter by a city council member;
or
         (B)   an alleged violation of this chapter by a city employee who is a
department director or of higher rank;
      (2)   the ethics advisory commission requests such an appointment; or
      (3)   the city attorney requests such an appointment for good cause
shown.
   (b)   City official or employee charged in a complaint.
      (1)   Once an information is filed by the inspector general with the
ethics advisory commission, a city official or employee named as the respondent
in the information may retain an independent outside attorney, who does not
otherwise represent the city, a city official, or an employee in his or her
official capacity, approved by the city attorney to serve as the person's legal
counsel for a particular case.
      (2)   If a city official or employee charged in a complaint retains an
independent outside attorney from an approved list provided by the city
attorney, the city will pay the reasonable and necessary fees not to exceed the
median hourly rate from the most recent State Bar of Texas salary survey for
the Dallas- Fort Worth-Arlington metropolitan statistical area, as well as the
reasonable costs of that attorney from the time the inspector general files the
complaint with the ethics advisory commission through the conclusion of the
evidentiary hearing. The ethics advisory commission shall review the invoice
submitted by outside council and determine whether the fees and costs are
reasonable and necessary in accordance with this paragraph.
      (3)   If the ethics advisory commission finds that the city official or
employee committed a violation of this chapter, the city official or employee
shall reimburse the city for the fees and expenses of an attorney retained
under Paragraph (2).
   (c)   Complaints filed against employees within the office of the inspector
general. If a complaint is filed against the inspector general or any employee
within the office of the inspector general, the city attorney shall retain an
independent outside attorney, who does not otherwise represent the city, a city
official, or the inspector general in his or her official capacity to
investigate the complaint to its conclusion in accordance with Article IX.
(Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472; 32924)
ARTICLE VIII.
ETHICS ADVISORY COMMISSION - CREATION; COMPOSITION, TERMS, AND QUALIFICATIONS.
SEC. 12A-49.   ETHICS ADVISORY COMMISSION - CREATION; COMPOSITION, TERMS, AND
QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Creation and composition. There is hereby created the ethics advisory
commission, to be composed of 15 members appointed by the city council as a
whole. The mayor shall appoint the chair, and the full city council shall
appoint two vice-chairs. Regular meetings of the commission shall be attended
by a quorum of the entire 15-member commission.
   (b)   Evidentiary hearing panels.
      (1)   Once an information has been submitted to the commission for an
evidentiary hearing, the city secretary shall select hearing panel members on a
random basis, subject to availability, to hear and adjudicate the information.
The panel chair shall meet a special qualification requirement and shall act as
the presiding officer of the panel. Hearing panels must include at least one
other member meeting the special qualifications requirements. Only one panel
may hear and adjudicate a particular ethics complaint. If a case is withdrawn
and subsequently refiled, it must be returned to the panel to which it was
originally assigned.
      (2)   The city secretary shall randomly assign commissioners to
evidentiary hearing panels, except that:
         (A)   an information in which the complainant or respondent is a city
council member shall not be heard or adjudicated by a panel whose membership
includes the commissioner nominated by that city council member; and
         (B)   the city secretary shall make reasonable efforts to select
commissioners who did not sit on the most recent evidentiary hearing panel.
      (3)   To the greatest extent practicable, the panels must reflect the
geographic and ethnic diversity of the city.
   (c)   Terms of office. Each member of the commission shall be appointed for
a two-year term beginning on October 1 of each odd-numbered year. All members
shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified.
   (d)   Qualifications.
      (1)   Except as provided in this article, each member of the ethics
advisory commission shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 8 of the city code. Additionally, at least six members of the ethics
advisory commission must meet a minimum of one of the following special
qualifications:
         (A)   Possess a juris doctorate degree from an institution accredited
by the American Bar Association.
         (B)   Formerly served as a Justice of the Peace.
         (C)   Currently or formerly employed as a professor or instructor at
an institution of higher learning in the following disciplines:
            (i)   Ethics.
            (ii)    Criminal justice.
         (D)   Currently or formerly employed as an ethics officer, or similar
position, in a public or private organization, aligning the practices of that
organization with the stated ethical standards of the organization or enforcing
the ethical standards or codes of the organization.
      (2)   At least two members meeting the special qualifications must be
assigned to each five-member panel.
      (3)   No member of the commission may be:
         (A)   serving as a city official in another capacity or the relative
of a person serving as a city official in another capacity;
         (B)   a city employee or the relative of a city employee;
         (C)   an elected public official;
         (D)   a candidate for elected public office;
         (E)   a person who, for compensation, represents the private interests
of others before the city council;
         (F)   a paid campaign worker or a political consultant of a current
city council member; or
         (G)   a current or former member of a bar association who has had his
or her law license suspended or revoked. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 29645; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-50.   JURISDICTION AND POWERS.
   (a)   Jurisdiction.
      (1)   The ethics advisory commission shall have jurisdiction to review
and make findings concerning any alleged violation of the laws, ordinances, and
rules listed in Paragraph (2) by any person subject to those laws, ordinances,
or rules, including but not limited to current city officials and employees,
former city officials and employees, and persons doing business with the city.
      (2)   The ethics advisory commission may consider violations of the
following laws, ordinances, and rules:
         (A)   Section
8-22, "Board Members," of
Article V, "Code of Conduct," of
Chapter 8, "Boards and Commissions," of the Dallas City Code;
         (B)   
Chapter 12A, "Code of Ethics," of the Dallas City Code;
         (C)   
Chapter 15A, "Elections," of the Dallas City Code, except to the extent that
Chapter 15A is administered and enforced by the Texas Ethics Commission;
         (D)   the second sentence of
Chapter XVI, Section 16(a) of the city charter, which reads "No officer or
employee of the city shall directly or indirectly, in any way be required to
contribute to any political campaign, political party, organization which
supports candidates for public office, or for any partisan political purpose
whatsoever";
         (E)   Chapter
XXII, Section 11, "Financial Interest of Employee or Officer Prohibited," of
the city charter;
         (F)   Chapter
XXIV, Section 1, "No Officer or Employee to Accept Gift, Etc., From Public
Utility," of the city charter;
         (G)   
Chapter IV, Section 5(b)(5), "Districts and Redistricting," of the city
charter;
         (H)   Texas Local Government Code Chapter 145, "Financial Disclosure
by and Standards of Conduct for Local Government Officers," as amended;
         (I)   Texas Local Government Code Chapter 171, "Regulation of
Conflicts of Interest of Officers of Municipalities, Counties, and Certain
Other Local Governments," as amended;
         (J)   Texas Local Government Code Chapter 176, "Disclosure of Certain
Relationships with Local Government Officers; Providing Public Access to
Certain Information," as amended;
         (K)   Section 212.017, "Conflict of Interest; Penalty," of Texas Local
Government Code Chapter 212, "Municipal Regulation of Subdivisions and Property
Development," as amended;
         (L)   conflicts of interest and gift regulations applicable to local
government recipients of federal grants, including Subsection (c) of Section
200.318 of Title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended; and
         (M)   any other city rule or city code or city charter provision
pertaining to the ethical conduct of city officials or employees.
   (b)   Statute of limitations. The commission may not consider any alleged or
suspected violation that occurred more than one year before the date of the
filing of a complaint or more than one year before the initiation of an
investigation by the inspector general. The inspector general shall not accept,
process, or investigate any complaint that is filed more than one year after
the date of the alleged or suspected violation. This statute of limitations is
tolled during any time an investigation is halted due to ongoing criminal or
civil litigation in accordance with Section
12A-47(b)(3).
   (c)   Termination of city official's or employee's duties. The termination
of a city official's or employee's duties does not affect the jurisdiction of
the ethics advisory commission with respect to alleged violations occurring
prior to the termination of the official's or employee's official duties.
   (d)   Powers. The ethics advisory commission has only the following powers:
      (1)   To establish, amend, and rescind rules and procedures governing its
own internal organization and operations in a manner and form consistent with
this article.
      (2)   To meet as often as necessary to fulfill its responsibilities.
      (3)   To request from the city manager through the city council the
appointment of such staff as is necessary to carry out the duties of the
commission.
      (4)   To review and dispose of informations brought by the inspector
general.
      (5)   To make findings of fact as necessary for the disposition of an
information.
      (6)   To approve, reject, or modify settlement agreements between the
inspector general and respondents.
      (7)   To review invoices submitted by outside council and determine
whether the legal fees and costs are reasonable and necessary in accordance
with Section
12A-48(b).
      (8)   To make notifications and extend deadlines within the jurisdiction
of the ethics advisory commission.
      (9)   To advise and make recommendations to the city council concerning
the city's ethics code and ethics policies.
      (10)   To make determinations that complainants are vexatious, make
findings of facts, and sanction persons who are deemed vexatious complainants.
      (11)   Such other powers as are specifically granted in this chapter or
by the city council.
   (e)   Subpoenas.
      (1)   The ethics advisory commission has the power to issue subpoenas in
accordance with Section
2-8 to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of testimony and
evidence.
      (2)   At least 14 working days before the hearing, each party may file
with the city secretary a request for subpoena of witnesses and documents, in
accordance with this subsection:
         (A)   The request for subpoena of witnesses and documents must
include:
            (i)   the name and address of each witness to be subpoenaed;
            (ii)   if documents are being subpoenaed, the specific
identification of books, papers, documents, or other tangible things sought to
be subpoenaed.
         (B)   The party requesting the subpoena shall notify the subpoenaed
witness of postponements, rescheduling, and appearance times.
         (C)   Either party may object to a subpoena request within seven
working days after receiving notice of the subpoena request. Objections to
subpoenas must be in writing, submitted to the city secretary, and copied to
the opposing party, who has three working days after receipt of the objections
to respond in writing to the substantive reasons for the objection.
         (D)   The city secretary shall forward the written objections and the
response to the objections, if any, to the ethics advisory commission panel
chair for resolution. If the panel chair is unavailable, the objections must be
ruled upon by his or her designee, who shall be a member of the hearing panel.
         (E)   Each party shall organize and number the responsive information
("the released documents") before turning it over to the city secretary. The
released documents must be provided within an amount of time determined by the
panel chair or, if no objections are filed, in an amount of time determined by
the city secretary. The city secretary shall provide a complete copy of the
released documents to both parties of the hearing, at the expense of the party
who issued the subpoena for the documents.
         (F)   The individual picking up the released documents must sign for
the produced information. The requesting party has three working days to
submit, in writing, any objections to the completeness of the released
documents. The producing party has three working days to respond, in writing,
to the substantive reasons for the requesting party's objections. The city
secretary shall maintain one complete copy of the released documents, to allow
the panel chair to fully assess and rule on any objections to the completeness
of compliance with the subpoena.
         (G)   The city secretary shall forward the objections and any response
to the objections to the panel chair for resolution. If the panel chair is
unavailable, the objections will be ruled upon by his or her designee, who
shall be a member of the hearing panel.
         (H)   Decisions rendered by the panel chair (or his or her designee,
if applicable) regarding subpoenas or responsive information are final and are
not subject to further appeal.
         (I)   After all decisions have been rendered by the panel chair
regarding the scope of documents to be released pursuant to a subpoena, the
city secretary shall provide a complete copy of the released documents to both
parties of the hearing, at the expense of the party who issued the subpoena for
the documents.
      (3)   Refusal to appear or to produce any document or other evidence
after receiving a subpoena pursuant to this section is a violation of this
chapter subject to sanctions as described in Section
2-9 of the Dallas City Code. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 29660; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-51.   ANNUAL REPORT.
   The ethics advisory commission shall prepare and submit an annual report to
the city council detailing the activities of the commission during the prior
year. The format for the report must be designed to maximize public and private
understanding of the commission's operations. The report may recommend changes
to the text or administration of this chapter. The city secretary shall take
reasonable steps to ensure wide dissemination and availability of the annual
report of the ethics advisory commission. (Ord. Nos. 32072; 32472)
ARTICLE IX.
ETHICS COMPLAINTS, INVESTIGATIONS, AND EVIDENTIARY HEARINGS.
SEC. 12A-52.   ETHICS COMPLAINTS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (a)   Filing a complaint. Any person may file a complaint with the inspector
general on a form provided by the inspector general, if the complainant, either
at the time the alleged violation of this chapter occurred or at the time the
complaint is submitted, is a resident of the city, a person doing business or
attempting to do business with the city, or a city official or employee, and
the complainant believes there has been a violation of this chapter. The
inspector general will receive and investigate all complaints. To the greatest
extent possible, the complaint should contain the following information and
items:
      (1)   The name, address, email address, and telephone number of the
complainant.
      (2)   The name, address (if known), email address (if known), and
telephone number (if known) of each person who allegedly committed the
violation (the respondent(s)).
      (3)   A statement of the facts on which the complaint is based, including
the exact date or dates of the alleged violation.
      (4)   Identification of the ethics laws, ordinances, and rules allegedly
violated, using either a citation to the applicable section or a description
containing substantially the same language as the ethics laws, ordinances, and
rules (if known).
      (5)   Copies of the documents or other evidence, if any, referenced in
the complaint or in the complainant's possession that support the complaint
attached to the complaint. If a complainant submits evidence in an electronic,
mechanical, or other format that the inspector general cannot duplicate or
display, the inspector general shall request that the complainant provide the
evidence in a format that the office can duplicate or display.
      (6)   The names, addresses, email addresses, and telephone numbers (if
known) of witnesses, if any, that can offer testimony in support of the
complaint.
      (7)   Other sources of evidence, if any, that the complainant recommends
should be considered by the inspector general.
      (8)   An affidavit in which the complainant swears or affirms, under the
penalty of perjury, that:
         (A)   the complaint states a violation of this chapter;
         (B)   the complaint is not being presented for any improper purpose,
such as to harass, cause unnecessary delays, or needlessly increase the cost of
defense to the person charged in the complaint; and
         (C)   either:
            (i)   all information submitted in and with the complaint is true
and correct; or
            (ii)   to the best of the complainant's knowledge, the factual
contentions in the complaint are supported by credible evidence submitted in
and with the complaint.
   (b)   Investigations and findings by the inspector general.
      (1)   Investigations. The inspector general shall initiate an
investigation to determine if a credible allegation exists to move the
complaint to the ethics advisory commission for an evidentiary hearing. During
the investigation, the inspector general may interview witnesses and gather and
inspect documents and other evidence relevant to the allegations.
      (2)   Dismissals. The inspector general shall dismiss complaints where
the evidence does not substantiate a credible allegation.
      (3)   Recommendations of settlement agreements.
         (A)   Except as provided in this paragraph, if a settlement agreement
is reached between the inspector general and the respondent, the inspector
general's report shall include a recommendation that the complaint be settled
according to the terms negotiated with and approved by the respondent. The
settlement agreement must include the agreed-upon final sanction, if any. The
inspector general shall brief the ethics advisory commission on the settlement
agreement at the commission's next regular meeting. The ethics advisory
commission may reject or modify the settlement agreement by a 3/4 vote of the
commission or approve the settlement agreement by a simple majority vote at the
commission's next regular meeting. If the settlement is not modified or
rejected at the commission's next regular meeting, the settlement is deemed
approved. If the settlement agreement is rejected by the ethics advisory
commission or modified in a way not approved by the respondent, the information
shall be scheduled for an evidentiary hearing in accordance with Paragraph (4).
         (B)   This paragraph does not apply to current city employees as the
disciplinary process is governed by personnel rules, regulations, and
procedures.
      (4)   Prosecution. If the inspector general finds that there exists a
credible allegation that a violation occurred and a settlement agreement has
not been reached, the inspector general shall file an information with the
ethics advisory commission. Once the commission receives the information, the
city secretary's office shall select a panel of the commission and schedule the
evidentiary hearing. The inspector general shall prosecute the complaint before
the panel in accordance with Section
12A-53.
   (c)   Notification to respondent. Once the inspector general completes an
investigation and finds that the complaint is substantiated, the inspector
general shall promptly forward a copy of the complaint to the respondent. The
inspector general shall notify the respondent of the opportunity to attend a
settlement conference.
   (d)   Confidentiality of complaints and investigations.
      (1)   No city official or employee shall reveal information relating to a
complaint or investigation until it has been made public by the inspector
general, except as required for the performance of official duties or as
required by law.
      (2)   Ex parte communications by or to members of the ethics advisory
commission are prohibited by Section
12A-53(b) of this chapter.
      (3)   All papers and communications relating to a complaint or
investigation are confidential unless required to be made public under the
Public Information Act (Chapter 552, Texas Government Code) or other applicable
law.
   (e)   Compliance with investigations. City officials and employees shall
cooperate with inspector general investigations.
   (f)   False accusations and responses. The inspector general shall, in
writing, advise all witnesses interviewed during an ethics investigation that
falsely accusing someone of a violation of this chapter may result in criminal
prosecution of anyone who knowingly makes a false accusation. The inspector
general shall, in writing, advise the person charged in the complaint that
falsely responding to a complaint may result in criminal prosecution of anyone
who knowingly makes a false response. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 25236; 29660; 29770;
30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-53.   HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Rules of procedure. Evidentiary hearings must be conducted in
accordance with this section and the rules of procedure adopted by the ethics
advisory commission.
   (b)   Ex parte communications. It is a violation of this chapter for:
      (1)   the complainant, a witness, the respondent, the inspector general,
or any person acting on their behalf to engage or attempt to engage, directly
or indirectly, in any ex parte communication about the subject matter of a
complaint or information with a member of the ethics advisory commission; or
      (2)   a member of the ethics advisory commission to:
         (A)   knowingly entertain an ex parte communication prohibited by
Subsection (b)(1); or
         (B)   knowingly communicate, directly or indirectly, with any person,
other than a member of the commission, its staff, or its legal counsel, about
any issue of fact or law relating to the complaint or information.
   (c)   Burden of proof. A determination that a violation of this chapter has
occurred can be made only upon a concurring vote of at least 3/4 of the members
of a panel. A finding that a violation occurred must be supported by a
preponderance of the evidence.
   (d)   Procedural rules. A quorum of four commission panel members must be
present for a hearing. Any member of the commission who is not present at a
hearing where testimony is given on a complaint may not participate in any
discussion, voting, or disposition regarding the complaint. All witnesses must
be sworn before any testimony is presented to the panel. The panel is not bound
by the rules of evidence and may establish time limits and other rules relating
to the participation of any person in the hearing, subject to Subsections (e),
(f), and (g).
   (e)   Role of the inspector general. In prosecuting the complaint, the
inspector general may make a statement and present and cross-examine witnesses.
   (f)   Rights of the respondent. The respondent has the right to attend the
hearing, the right to make a
statement, the right to present and cross-examine witnesses, and the right to
represent themselves or be represented by legal counsel or another advisor. If
the respondent does not attend the hearing to provide a defense, the hearing
panel may proceed with the hearing to final determination.
   (g)   Rights of the complainant. The complainant has the right to attend the
hearing. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 29660; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-54.   DISPOSITION OF COMPLAINT.
   (a)   Written decision. The ethics advisory commission panel shall make all
reasonable efforts to issue a written decision within 20 days after the
conclusion of an evidentiary hearing. The commission shall state its findings
in the written decision. The written decision must either:
      (1)   dismiss the complaint, with the grounds for dismissal set forth in
the decision; or
      (2)   find that there has been a violation of this chapter and identify
in the decision the particular provision or provisions violated.
   (b)   Notification. Within 10 days after issuing a written decision, the
ethics advisory commission panel shall forward copies of the written decision
to the respondent, the city attorney, the city council, the inspector general,
the person or body to whom the particular complaint must be referred for
sanctions, and any member of the ethics advisory commission who did not
participate in the disposition of the complaint. A copy of the findings and
decision must also be forwarded to the city secretary, who shall make it
available to the public as authorized by law.
   (c)   Similar charges barred. If the complaint is dismissed by a panel of
the ethics advisory commission because the evidence failed to establish a
violation of this chapter, the ethics advisory commission shall not
entertain any other similar complaint based on substantially the same evidence.
(Ord. Nos. 24316; 25236; 29660; 32072; 32472)
ARTICLE X.
ENFORCEMENT, CULPABLE MENTAL STATE, AND PENALTIES.
SEC. 12A-55.   GENERAL.
   The remedies contained in this article are available whenever the ethics
advisory commission finds a violation or violations of this chapter. (Ord. Nos.
24316; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-56.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   A person who violates any of the laws, ordinances, and rules listed in
Section
12A-50(a)(2), or who fails to perform an act required of the person by any of
the laws, ordinances, and rules listed in Section
12A-50(a)(2), commits a violation of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 30391; 32072;
32472)
SEC. 12A-57.   CULPABLE MENTAL STATE.
   To commit a violation under any provision of this chapter, a person must
have acted or failed to act knowingly or with knowledge. (Ord. Nos. 24316;
32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-58.   DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   (a)   An employee who fails to comply with this chapter or who violates this
chapter may be disciplined in accordance with city personnel rules and
procedures.
   (b)   If a city council member fails to comply with this chapter or violates
this chapter, the sanction must be decided by the city council in accordance
with the city charter.
   (c)   If a member of a board or commission fails to comply with this chapter
or violates this chapter, the sanction must be decided by the city council in
accordance with the city charter.
   (d)   If the civil service director, the park and recreation director, or
the employees' retirement fund administrator fails to comply with this chapter
or violates this chapter, they may be disciplined in accordance with the
personnel rules and the sanction must be decided by their respective boards.
   (e)   If the city manager, city attorney, city auditor, city secretary, or a
municipal judge fails to comply with this chapter or violates this chapter,
they may be disciplined in accordance with the personnel rules and the sanction
must be decided by the city council.
   (f)   If a former city official or former city employee fails to comply with
this chapter or violates this chapter, the sanction must be decided by the city
council.
   (g)   If a person who is not a current or former city official or a current
or former city employee fails to comply with this chapter or violates this
chapter, the sanction must be decided by city council.
   (h)   Settlement agreements approved by the ethics advisory commission must
include the final sanction, if any. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-59.   SANCTIONS.
   (a)   In determining sanctions based on a recommendation of the ethics
advisory commission, the person or entity imposing the sanction shall take into
consideration the recommendation of the ethics advisory commission and the
following factors:
      (1)   The culpability of the person charged.
      (2)   The harm to public or private interests resulting from the
violation.
      (3)   The necessity of preserving public trust in the city.
      (4)   Whether there is evidence of a pattern of disregard for ethical
standards.
      (5)   Whether remedial action has been taken that will mitigate the
adverse effects of the violation.
   (b)   For current city employees, the sanctioning person shall take
appropriate action in accordance with the personnel rules, and may impose any
of the following additional sanctions:
      (1)   Referral to ethics training. The sanctioning person may require a
city employee to attend ethics training. When recommending a referral to ethics
training, the ethics advisory commission shall include in the recommendation
the manner and quantity of training based on the type and severity of the
violation.
      (2)   Referral for damages or injunction. The sanctioning person may
refer the violation to the city attorney for an action to recover damages to
the city or to enjoin prohibited actions.
      (3)   Referral for criminal prosecution. The sanctioning person may refer
the violation to the Dallas Police Department, if the sanctioning person finds
that the violation warrants criminal prosecution.
   (c)   For the civil service director, the park and recreation director, or
the employees' retirement fund administrator, the sanctioning entity shall take
appropriate action in accordance with the personnel rules, and may impose any
of the following additional sanctions:
      (1)   Referral to ethics training. The sanctioning entity may require the
person to attend ethics training. When recommending a referral to ethics
training, the ethics advisory commission shall include in the recommendation
the manner and quantity of training based on the type and severity of the
violation.
      (2)   Referral for damages or injunction. The sanctioning entity may
refer the violation to the city attorney for an action to recover damages to
the city or to enjoin prohibited actions.
      (3)   Referral for criminal prosecution. The sanctioning entity may refer
the violation to the Dallas Police Department, if the sanctioning entity finds
that the violation warrants criminal prosecution.
   (d)   For the city manager, city attorney, city auditor, city secretary, or
a municipal judge, the city council shall take appropriate action in accordance
with the personnel rules, and may impose any of the following additional
sanctions:
      (1)   Referral to ethics training. The city council may require the
person to attend ethics training. When recommending a referral to ethics
training, the ethics advisory commission shall include in the recommendation
the manner and quantity of training based on the type and severity of the
violation.
      (2)   Referral for damages or injunction. The city council may refer the
violation to the city attorney for an action to recover damages to the city or
to enjoin prohibited actions.
      (3)   Referral for criminal prosecution. The city council may refer the
violation to the Dallas Police Department, if the city council finds that the
violation warrants criminal prosecution.
   (e)   For a city council member, a board or commission member, a former city
official, or a former city employee, the city council may impose any of the
following sanctions:
      (1)   Letter of notification. The city council may issue a letter of
notification if the city council finds that a violation of this chapter was
clearly unintentional. A letter of notification must advise the person of any
steps to be taken to avoid future violations.
      (2)   Letter of admonition. The city council may issue a letter of
admonition if the city council finds that the violation of this chapter was
minor, but where the circumstances call for a more substantial response than a
letter of notification.
      (3)   Referral to ethics training. The city council may require a current
city official to attend ethics training. When recommending a referral to ethics
training, the ethics advisory commission shall include in the recommendation
the manner and quantity of training based on the type and severity of the
violation.
      (4)   Reprimand. The city council may issue a reprimand if the city
council finds that a violation of this chapter was not minor and was committed
intentionally or through reckless disregard of this chapter.
      (5)   Resolution of censure. The city council may adopt a resolution of
censure if the city council finds that a serious or repeated violation of this
chapter has been committed intentionally or through reckless disregard of this
chapter and the violation substantially threatens the public trust.
      (6)   Voiding of prior actions. The city council may, to the extent
allowed by law, void any prior city council or city board or commission action
that approved any decision, agreement, award, or contract if the action was
taken as a result of a violation of this chapter and the interests of the city
require voiding of the prior action.
      (7)   Suspension from office. The city council may suspend a current city
official other than a city council member from office for a period determined
by the city council if the city council finds that a serious or repeated
violation of this chapter was committed intentionally or through culpable
disregard of this chapter. Any proceedings for suspension of a current city
official shall be in compliance with the city charter and state law.
      (8)   Removal from office. The city council may remove a current city
official, including a city council member, from office if the city council
finds that a serious or repeated violation of this chapter was committed
intentionally or through culpable disregard of this chapter and future
violations are likely to occur. Any proceedings for removal of a current city
official from office shall be in compliance with the city charter and state
law.
      (9)   Referral for damages or injunction. The city council may refer the
violation to the city attorney for an action to recover damages to the city or
to enjoin prohibited actions.
      (10)   Referral for criminal prosecution. The city council may refer the
violation to the Dallas Police Department, if the city council finds that the
violation warrants criminal prosecution.
   (f)   For a person who is not a current or former city official or a current
or former city employee (e.g., lobbyists, people doing business with the city,
resident), the city council may impose any of the following sanctions:
      (1)   Letter of notification. The city council may issue a letter of
notification if the city council finds that a violation of this chapter was
clearly unintentional. A letter of notification must advise the person of any
steps to be taken to avoid future violations.
      (2)   Letter of admonition. The city council may issue a letter of
admonition if the city council finds that the violation of this chapter was
minor, but where the circumstances call for a more substantial response than a
letter of notification.
      (3)   Reprimand. The city council may issue a reprimand if the city
council finds that a violation of this chapter was not minor and was committed
intentionally or through reckless disregard of this chapter.
      (4)   Resolution of censure. The city council may adopt a resolution of
censure if the city council finds that a serious or repeated violation of this
chapter has been committed intentionally or through reckless disregard of this
chapter and the violation substantially threatens the public trust.
      (5)   Disqualification from contracting or lobbying. The city council
may, to the extent allowed by law, prohibit the person from entering into
contracts with the city or from lobbying before the city on behalf of clients.
The scope and duration of the disqualification shall be determined by the city
council.
      (6)   Voiding of prior actions. The city council may, to the extent
allowed by law, void any prior city council or city board or commission action
that approved any decision, agreement, award, or contract if the action was
taken as a result of a violation of this chapter and the interests of the city
require voiding of the prior action.
      (7)   Referral for damages or injunction. The city council may refer the
violation to the city attorney for an action to recover damages to the city or
to enjoin prohibited actions.
      (8)   Referral for criminal prosecution. The city council may refer the
violation to the Dallas Police Department, if the city council finds that the
violation warrants criminal prosecution. (Ord. Nos. 30391; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-60.   PROSECUTION FOR PERJURY.
   Any person who knowingly files or makes a false sworn statement under this
chapter is subject to criminal prosecution for perjury under the laws of the
State of Texas. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 29660; 32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-61.   INTERFERENCE WITH AN INVESTIGATION.
   A person commits an offense if the person interferes with any investigation
of an alleged violation of this chapter in any manner, including seeking to
persuade or coerce others to withhold their cooperation. (Ord. Nos. 30391;
32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-62.   DISQUALIFICATION FROM CONTRACTING.
   (a)   Any person who has been found by the ethics advisory commission to
have knowingly violated any provision of this chapter may be prohibited by the
city council from entering into any contract with the city for a period of two
years.
   (b)   It is a violation of this chapter:
      (1)   for a person debarred from entering into a contract with the city
to enter or attempt to enter into a contract with the city during the period of
disqualification from contracting; or
      (2)   for a city official or employee to knowingly assist in a violation
of Subsection (b)(1).
   (c)   Nothing in this section prohibits any person from receiving a city
service or benefit, or from using a city facility, according to the same terms
generally available to the public.
   (d)   A business entity may be disqualified from contracting with the city
based on the conduct of the entity's employee or agent if the conduct occurred
within the scope of employment or agency with the entity. (Ord. Nos. 24316;
32072; 32472)
SEC. 12A-63.   VEXATIOUS COMPLAINANTS.
   (a)   Definition. A vexatious complainant is someone who persistently files
ethics complaints without having sufficient grounds for doing so. Vexatious
complainants file complaints that:
      (1)   abuse the investigative process of the inspector general;
      (2)   harass, annoy, cause delay or detriment to a person subject to a
complaint;
      (3)   are repeatedly baseless and without merit; or
      (4)   are filed for a political or other wrongful purpose.
   (b)   Report and recommendation of the inspector general. If the inspector
general credibly suspects a person of being a vexatious complainant, the
inspector general shall submit a report to the ethics advisory commission chair
detailing the facts supporting the inspector general's position and requesting
a hearing on the matter.
   (c)   Stay of complaints. Once the inspector general has submitted a
vexatious complainant report to the ethics advisory commission, the inspector
general shall not accept or process another complaint from the complainant
until the commission has determined whether the complainant is a vexatious
complainant.
   (d)   Notification. The inspector general shall promptly forward a copy of
the report to the complainant with instructions detailing the response and
hearing procedures.
   (e)   Response. The complainant shall have the opportunity to submit a sworn
response, together with such other information the complainant believes is
relevant. The response must be submitted to the inspector general within 10
days after the date that the complainant was sent the inspector general's
report. Copies of all information provided to the inspector general by the
complainant must be distributed to the ethics advisory commission within 10
days after the inspector general receives the information.
   (f)   Format of evidence. If a complainant submits evidence in an
electronic, mechanical, or other format that the inspector general cannot
duplicate or display, the inspector general shall request the complainant
provide the evidence in a format that the inspector general can duplicate or
display. If the complainant fails to provide the evidence to the city inspector
general in a format that the inspector general can duplicate or display within
seven days after the inspector general has made a request, then the evidence
may not be presented to or considered by the ethics advisory commission when
making its determination.
   (g)   Evidentiary hearing. The ethics advisory commission shall hold a
hearing to determine whether the complainant is a vexatious complainant. Not
less than 10 days before the hearing, the inspector general shall, by certified
mail or personal service, give written notice to the complainant of the date,
time, and place of the hearing. If the complainant consents in writing, the
inspector general may give written notice by facsimile, email, or first class
U.S. mail.
   (h)   Ex parte communications. It is a violation of this section for:
      (1)   the complainant, the inspector general, or any person acting on
their behalf to engage or attempt to engage, directly or indirectly, in any ex
parte communication about the subject matter of an evidentiary hearing under
this section with any member of the ethics advisory commission; or
      (2)   a member of the ethics advisory commission to:
         (A)   knowingly entertain an ex parte communication prohibited by
Subsection (h)(1); or
         (B)   knowingly communicate, directly or indirectly, with any person,
other than a member of the commission, its staff, or its legal counsel, about
any issue of fact or law relating to an evidentiary hearing under this section.
   (i)   Hearing procedures. Unless otherwise provided in this section, the
procedures for hearings in Section
12A-53 apply to hearings conducted in accordance with this section.
   (j)   Rights of the complainant. The complainant has the right to attend the
hearing, the right to make a statement, the right to present and cross-examine
witnesses, and the right to be represented by legal counsel or another advisor.
   (k)   Standard of review. In determining whether a complainant is a
vexatious complainant, the ethics advisory commission may consider the
inspector general's report and additional evidence of:
      (1)   the timing of the complaints with respect to when the facts
supporting the alleged violations became known or should have become known to
the complainant;
      (2)   the nature and type of any publicity surrounding the filing of the
complaints;
      (3)   the existence and nature of any relationship between the persons
charged in the complaints and the complainant before the complaints were filed;
      (4)   whether the complainant knew or reasonably should have known that
the allegations in the complaints were groundless or without merit; and
      (5)   the complainant's motives in filing the complaints, including
whether or not the complaints were meant:
         (A)   to abuse the investigative process of the inspector general;
         (B)   to harass, annoy, cause delay or detriment to a person subject
to a complaint; or
         (C)   for a political or other wrongful purpose.
   (l)   Determination. A determination that a complainant is a vexatious
complainant may be made only upon an affirmative vote of three-fifths of all
commission members present and voting. Otherwise, the complainant is not deemed
a vexatious complainant. A finding that a complainant is vexatious must be
supported by a preponderance of the evidence. The commission's determination
that a complainant is not a vexatious complainant does not affect the prior
decision of the inspector general to dismiss the complainant's prior
complaints.
   (m)   Sanction for being deemed a vexatious complainant.
      (1)   If a complainant is determined to be a vexatious complainant, the
ethics advisory commission may prohibit the complainant from filing another
complaint alleging one or more violations of this chapter for up to:
         (A)   two years after the date of the commission's determination that
the complainant is a vexatious complainant, if the commission had not
determined within the preceding five years that the complainant was a vexatious
complainant; or
         (B)   four years after the date of the commission's determination that
the complainant is a vexatious complainant, if the commission had determined
within the preceding five years that the complainant was a vexatious
complainant.
      (2)   When determining whether and for how long to prohibit a complainant
who has been deemed a vexatious complainant from filing another complaint under
this chapter, the ethics advisory commission shall consider the following
factors:
         (A)   The seriousness of the potential consequences to the persons
charged in the groundless complaints and the extent and gravity of the abuse,
harassment, and delay resulting from the filing of groundless complaints.
         (B)   The sanction necessary to deter future violations, including
number of groundless complaints filed and whether there are any mitigating
circumstances.
         (C)   Any other matters that justice may require.
      (3)   If the ethics advisory commission prohibits the complainant from
filing another complaint for a specific amount of time under Subsection (m)(1),
the inspector general shall not accept or process another complaint alleging
one or more violations of this chapter from the complainant during the time
that the complainant is prohibited from filing a complaint.
      (4)   The inspector general may notify the appropriate regulatory or
supervisory agency of the findings and determination of the ethics advisory
commission, including referring its findings and determination to a criminal
investigation agency or prosecution entity for investigation of a violation of
a state or federal law.
   (n)   Written decision. If the ethics advisory commission determines that a
complainant is a vexatious complainant and imposes a sanction, it shall make
all reasonable efforts to issue a written decision within 15 days after the
hearing. The commission shall state its findings in the written decision.
   (o)   Notification. Within 10 days after issuing a written decision, the
ethics advisory commission shall forward copies of the findings and decision to
the complainant, the city attorney, the city secretary, the city council, and
any member of the commission who did not participate in the disposition of the
matter. The city secretary shall make copies of the findings and decision
available to the public as authorized by law. (Ord. Nos. 29660; 32072; 32472)
ARTICLE XI.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISION.
SEC. 12A-64.   CITY COUNCIL REVIEW.
   This entire chapter shall be reviewed by city council every two years in
even-numbered years beginning in January 2024, and every other January
thereafter. (Ord. Nos. 24316; 30391; 32072; 32472)
CHAPTER 12B
CONVENIENCE STORES
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
12B-1.   Purpose of chapter.
Sec.
12B-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
12B-3.   Authority of chief of police, fire department, and department of code
compliance.
Sec.
12B-4.   Delivery of notices.
Sec.
12B-5.   Violations; penalty.
ARTICLE II.
REGISTRATION OF CONVENIENCE STORES.
Sec.
12B-6.   Registration required; fees.
Sec.
12B-7.   Registration application.
Sec.
12B-8.   Issuance, denial, and display of certificate of registration;
registration compliance decal.
Sec.
12B-9.   Revocation of registration.
Sec.
12B-10.   Appeals.
Sec.
12B-11.   Expiration and renewal of registration.
Sec.
12B-12.   Nontransferability.
Sec.
12B-13.   Property inspections.
ARTICLE III.
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR CONVENIENCE STORES.
Sec.
12B-14.   Surveillance camera system; video recording and storage.
Sec.
12B-15.   Alarm system.
Sec.
12B-16.   Drop safes.
Sec.
12B-17.   Security signs; height markers.
Sec.
12B-18.   Store visibility.
Sec.
12B-19.   Employee safety training; telephone access.
Sec.
12B-20.   Trespass affidavits.
Sec.
12B-21.   Coin-operated amusement devices prohibited.
Sec.
12B-22.   Exterior lighting.
Sec.
12B-23.   Automatic teller machines.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 12B-1.   PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the city of Dallas by reducing the occurrence of crime,
preventing the escalation of crime, and increasing the successful prosecution
of crime that occurs in convenience stores in the city. To this end, this
chapter establishes a registration program for convenience stores and provides
requirements relating to surveillance camera systems, video recording and
storage systems, alarm systems, drop safes, security signs, height markers,
store visibility, safety training programs, and trespass affidavits. (Ord.
27293)
SEC. 12B-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION means a certificate of registration
issued by the chief under this chapter to the owner or operator of a
convenience store.
      (2)   CHIEF means the chief of the police department of the city or the
chief's authorized representative.
      (3)   CIGAR BAR means a bar that derives 15 percent or more of its gross
revenue on a quarterly (three-month) basis from the sale or rental of tobacco,
tobacco products, or smoking accessories for on-premises consumption.
      (4)   CONVENIENCE GOODS means basic food, household, tobacco products,
paraphernalia, and pharmaceutical items.
      (5)   CONVENIENCE STORE means any business that is primarily engaged in
the retail sale of convenience goods, or both convenience goods and gasoline,
and has less than 10,000 square feet of retail floor space. A convenience store
does not include any business that has no retail floor space accessible to the
public.
      (6)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department of code compliance or
the director's authorized representative.
      (7)   DROP SAFE means a cash management device in which money can be
deposited without the depositor having access to the contents.
      (8)   EMPLOYEE means any person listed on the payroll of a convenience
store as an employee, whether part-time, full-time, permanent, or temporary.
The term does not include a person providing only janitorial or security
services to the convenience store.
      (9)   HEIGHT MARKER means a measuring strip that may be attached on or
near a door frame of a convenience store to aid in identifying the height of a
person suspected of committing a crime.
      (10)   MANAGER means the person designated in the registration
application filed under this chapter as being responsible for the daily
operation of a convenience store.
      (11)   PARAPHERNALIA means "illegal smoking paraphernalia" as that term
is defined in
Chapter 31 of the Dallas City Code or any other smoking paraphernalia that is
commonly used, or commonly known to be used, for the inhalation of tobacco or
illegal substances. For purposes of this definition, rolling papers, tobacco
cigarettes, and tobacco cigars are not considered paraphernalia.
      (12)   PERSON means any individual, corporation, organization,
partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
      (13)   REGISTERED AGENT means the person identified in the registration
application filed under this chapter who is authorized to receive on behalf of
the convenience store any legal process or notice required or provided for in
this chapter.
      (14)   REGISTRANT means a person issued a certificate of registration for
a convenience store under this chapter and includes all owners, operators, or
the person in the care, custody, or control of the convenience store.
      (15)   TOBACCO PRODUCT means a tobacco product as defined in Chapter 155
of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
      (16)   TOBACCO SHOP means a retail or service establishment that derives
90 percent or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly (three-month) basis from
the sale of tobacco or tobacco products. (Ord. Nos. 27293; 30472; 31867)
SEC. 12B-3.   AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE, FIRE DEPARTMENT, AND DEPARTMENT OF
CODE COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, the chief of police shall
implement and enforce this chapter in collaboration with the director and may
by written order establish such rules, regulations, or procedures, not
inconsistent with this chapter, as the chief determines are necessary to
discharge any duty under or to affect the policy of this chapter.
   (b)   In addition to the chief of police and the director, the chief of the
fire department, including representatives, agents, or city employees
designated by the chief of the fire department, shall enforce the registration
requirement in Section
12B-6. (Ord. Nos. 27293; 30472; 31867)
SEC. 12B-4.   DELIVERY OF NOTICES.
   Any written notice that the chief or director is required to give a
registrant under this chapter is deemed to be delivered:
      (1)   on the date the notice is hand delivered to the registrant or the
registrant's registered agent;
      (2)   three days after the date the notice is placed in the United States
mail with proper postage and properly addressed to the registrant or the
registrant's registered agent at the address provided for the registrant or the
registered agent in the most recent registration application; or
      (3)   on the date the notice is sent electronically to the electronic
mailing address of the registrant listed on the application. (Ord. Nos. 27293;
30472; 31867)
SEC. 12B-5.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to
perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits an offense. A
person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a
violation is committed, permitted, or continued.
   (b)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than
$250 or more than $500.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (d)   The penalties provided for in Subsection (b) are in addition to any
other enforcement remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and
state law.
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that an
establishment is operating as a cigar bar or tobacco shop as defined in this
chapter. (Ord. Nos. 27293; 30472)
ARTICLE II.
REGISTRATION OF CONVENIENCE STORES.
SEC. 12B-6.   REGISTRATION REQUIRED; FEES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a
convenience store without a valid certificate of registration. A separate
certificate of registration is required for each physically separate
convenience store.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that at the time
of the alleged offense:
      (1)   the convenience store had been open for business less than 45 days;
      (2)   the majority ownership of the convenience store had changed and the
store had been open for business under the new ownership for less than 45 days;
or
      (3)   the establishment is operating as a cigar bar or tobacco shop as
defined in this chapter.
   (c)   The annual fee for a convenience store registration is $265. The fee
is payable to the director upon issuance of a certificate of registration. No
refund of registration fees shall be made. (Ord. Nos. 27293; 30472; 32556)
SEC. 12B-7.   REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a certificate of registration for a convenience store, a
person must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the
chief. The applicant must be the person who will own or operate the convenience
store. The application must contain all of the following information:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, electronic mailing
address, and telephone number of the applicant.
      (2)   The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and
telephone number of the convenience store.
      (3)   The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, electronic mailing
addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of the convenience store and any
lien holders and other persons with a financial interest in the convenience
store, and the nature and extent of each person's interest in the convenience
store.
      (4)   The name, street address, mailing address, electronic mailing
address, and telephone number of the manager of the convenience store.
      (5)   The name, street address, mailing address, electronic mailing
address, and telephone number of a person or persons who can be contacted 24
hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of an emergency condition
involving the convenience store.
      (6)   The name, street address, mailing address, electronic mailing
address, and telephone number of the registered agent for the convenience
store.
      (7)   A statement that the applicant understands that notices may be
issued and delivered to the registrant via hand delivery, United States mail,
or electronic mail in accordance with Section 12B-4.
      (8)   The total area in square feet of the convenience store.
      (9)   Such additional information as the applicant desires to include or
that the chief deems necessary to aid in the determination of whether the
requested certificate of registration should be granted.
   (b)   A registrant shall notify the director within 45 days after any
material change in the information contained in the application for a
certificate of registration for a convenience store, including, but not limited
to, any changes in ownership of the property and any changes in the registered
agent, manager, or emergency contact person for the property. (Ord. Nos. 27293;
30472)
SEC. 12B-8.   ISSUANCE, DENIAL, AND DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION;
REGISTRATION COMPLIANCE DECAL.
   (a)   The chief shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration
for a convenience store, along with a registration compliance decal, if the
chief determines that:
      (1)   the applicant has complied with all requirements for issuance of
the certificate of registration; and
      (2)   the applicant has not made a false statement as to a material
matter in an application for a certificate of registration.
   (b)   If the chief determines that the requirements of Subsection (a) have
not been met, the chief shall deny a certificate of registration to the
applicant.
   (c)   If the chief determines that an applicant should be denied a
certificate of registration, the chief shall deliver written notice to the
applicant that the application is denied and include in the notice the reason
for denial and a statement informing the applicant of the right of appeal.
   (d)   A certificate of registration issued under this section must be
displayed to the public in a manner and location approved by the chief. The
certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the director,
chief of the fire department, chief, or any other peace officer for
examination.
   (e)   A registration compliance decal must be continuously and conspicuously
displayed above the main public entrance door to the convenience store. (Ord.
Nos. 27293; 31867)
SEC. 12B-9.   REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The chief shall revoke a certificate of registration for a convenience
store if the chief determines that the registrant:
      (1)   failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or any other
city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to the convenience store; or
      (2)   intentionally made a false statement as to a material matter in the
application or in a hearing concerning the certificate of registration.
   (b)   Before revoking a certificate of registration under Subsection (a),
the chief shall deliver written notice to the registrant that the certificate
of registration is being considered for revocation. The notice must include the
reason for the proposed revocation, action the registrant must take to prevent
the revocation, and a statement that the registrant has 10 days after the date
of delivery to comply with the notice.
   (c)   If, after 10 days from the date the notice required in Subsection (b)
is delivered, the registrant has not complied with the notice, the chief shall
revoke the certificate of registration and deliver written notice of the
revocation to the registrant. The notice must include the reason for the
revocation, the date the chief orders the revocation, and a statement informing
the registrant of the right of appeal. (Ord. 27293)
SEC. 12B-10.   APPEALS.
   If the chief denies issuance or renewal of a certificate of registration or
revokes a certificate of registration, this action is final unless the
applicant or registrant files an appeal with the permit and license appeal
board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. 27293)
SEC. 12B-11.   EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   A certificate of registration for a convenience store expires one year
after the date of issuance.
   (b)   A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in
accordance with Section
12B-7. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the certificate of registration. (Ord. 27293)
SEC. 12B-12.   NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   A certificate of registration for a convenience store is not transferable.
(Ord. 27293)
SEC. 12B-13.   PROPERTY INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   An applicant or registrant shall permit, at reasonable times upon
request, representatives of the police department to inspect the interior and
exterior of the convenience store, including but not limited to surveillance
camera systems, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter and
other city ordinances and state and federal laws applicable to convenience
stores. The applicant or registrant commits an offense if, either personally or
through an agent or employee, the applicant or registrant refuses to permit a
lawful inspection of the convenience store as required by this section.
   (b)   No inspection fee is required for an initial inspection of a
convenience store under this chapter. If a convenience store must be
reinspected, the reinspection fee is $159. (Ord. Nos. 27293; 32556)
ARTICLE III.
SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR CONVENIENCE STORES.
SEC. 12B-14.   SURVEILLANCE CAMERA SYSTEM; VIDEO RECORDING AND STORAGE.
   (a)   A registrant shall provide, maintain, and operate at least three color
digital high-resolution surveillance cameras in the convenience store in
compliance with this subsection.
      (1)   Each camera must be capable of providing a digital image with a
minimum resolution of two megapixels, a minimum aspect ratio of 1920 horizontal
pixels by 1080 vertical pixels, and a minimum frame rate of 15 frames per
second.
      (2)   One camera must be positioned to provide coverage of the cash
register or other area where money is exchanged. The second camera must be
positioned to provide a clear and identifiable full frame view of the face of
each individual filmed entering the main public entrance of the store. The
third camera must be positioned to provide a clear and identifiable full frame
of view of the face of each individual filmed exiting the main public exit of
the store. The coverage of the cameras required by this paragraph must remain
unobstructed by any display, sign, or other item.
      (3)   Each camera must be operating at all times, including hours when
the store is not open for business. Each camera must be operated in a fixed
position and not in a panning motion.
      (4)   Each camera must display the date and time of each recording.
      (5)   A sign stating "STORE IS UNDER CAMERA SURVEILLANCE," in letters at
least two inches high, must be posted at each public entrance and exit of the
convenience store and must be readable from inside and outside the store.
   (b)   A registrant shall provide for video recording and storage in
compliance with this subsection.
      (1)   One or more digital video recording devices must be used to record
images from each surveillance camera in the convenience store. Each recording
device must be kept in a secured location that is remote from the surveillance
cameras.
      (2)   The video recording devices must be designed, equipped, and
operated, at a minimum, to digitally record images from the surveillance
cameras every time motion occurs in the convenience store, whether or not the
store is open for business.
      (3)   All digital video recordings must be maintained for at least 30
days.
      (4)   A digital video recording must be made available to the director
and to the chief or any other peace officer for viewing as soon as possible
after being requested. A copy of a digital video recording must be provided to
the director and to the chief or any other peace officer within 72 hours after
being requested. (Ord. Nos. 27293; 31867)
SEC. 12B-15.   ALARM SYSTEM.
   (a)   A registrant shall provide, maintain, and operate an alarm system in
the convenience store in compliance with this section.
   (b)   A convenience store must have a silent panic or holdup alarm system
for which a valid alarm permit is held in compliance with
Article I,
Chapter 15C of this code. The system must, at a minimum, include a panic button
located within reach of the cash register and out of view of the customer. The
panic button must generate an alarm signal indicating a holdup or other life-
threatening emergency requiring a police department response.
   (c)   A sign indicating that an alarm system is in use must be posted at
each public entrance and exit of the convenience store. (Ord. 27293)
SEC. 12B-16.   DROP SAFES.
   (a)   A registrant shall provide and maintain drop safes and signs in the
convenience store in compliance with this section.
   (b)   A drop safe or similar device must be bolted to the floor of the
convenience store.
   (c)   A sign indicating that employees cannot open the drop safe must be
posted at each public entrance and exit of the convenience store. (Ord. 27293)
SEC. 12B-17.   SECURITY SIGNS; HEIGHT MARKERS.
   (a)   A registrant shall provide, post, and maintain security signs and
height markers in the convenience store in compliance with this section.
   (b)   Signs stating “NO SOLICITATION” and “NO TRESPASSING,” in letters at
least two inches high, must be posted at each public entrance and exit of a
convenience store. The signs may contain additional language as required by law
and must be in a format approved by the chief.
   (c)   A height marker must be posted at each public exit of a convenience
store. (Ord. 27293)
SEC. 12B-18.   STORE VISIBILITY.
   (a)   A registrant shall provide for and maintain visibility in a
convenience store in compliance with this section.
   (b)   An unobstructed line of sight that allows a clear view of and from the
cash register and sales transaction area through all windows and public
entrance and exit doors must be maintained in the convenience store at all
times. The unobstructed line of sight must, at a minimum, extend from three
feet above the ground to at least six feet above the ground.
   (c)   Store windows and doors must be maintained clear of all items that
would obstruct a clear view, including, but not limited to, signage,
advertisements, shelving, and merchandise.
   (d)   All public entrance and exit doors of a convenience store must be made
of glass or another transparent material, except that a convenience store
lawfully operating in the city on October 15, 2008 is not required to comply
with this subsection until there is a change in the majority ownership of the
store. (Ord. 27293)
SEC. 12B-19.   EMPLOYEE SAFETY TRAINING; TELEPHONE ACCESS.
   (a)   A registrant shall ensure that safety training is provided for and
completed by employees of the convenience store in compliance with this
section.
      (1)   Each employee of a convenience store shall annually complete a
safety training program offered by the city or otherwise approved by the chief.
The safety training program must include, but is not limited to, the following
subjects:
         (A)   Behavior before, during, and after a robbery.
         (B)   Opening and closing the store.
         (C)   Making a bank deposit.
         (D)   Operation of security devices.
         (E)   Physical deterrents and preventative measures.
         (F)   Knowledge of store policies and training requirements.
      (2)   Each employee must complete the safety training program within 10
days after beginning employment with the convenience store.
      (3)   Each employee shall sign a statement indicating the date, time, and
place of completion of the safety training program. Copies of each employee's
statements must be maintained on file in the convenience store for as long as
the employee is employed by the convenience store. The statements must be made
available to the director and to the chief or any other peace officer
immediately upon request.
   (b)   Telephone access must be provided at each convenience store for use by
employees. (Ord. Nos. 27293; 31867)
SEC. 12B-20.   TRESPASS AFFIDAVITS.
   A registrant shall execute a trespass affidavit, on a form provided by the
chief for that purpose, that authorizes the police department to enforce, on
behalf of the registrant, all applicable trespass laws on the premises of the
convenience store. (Ord. Nos. 27293; 30472)
SEC. 12B-21.   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   Coin-operated amusement devices, as defined in Chapter 6A, are prohibited in
a convenience store, including the sales floor, office, storage room, and back
room areas, whether open or closed to the public.
(Ord. 31620)
SEC. 12B-22.   EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   Exterior lighting that illuminates all sides of the main building, parking
areas, and fuel pump islands must be provided and maintained. Exterior lighting
must be turned on daily between sunset and sunrise. In this section SUNSET and
SUNRISE mean the time of day published on the weather page of the Dallas
Morning News as the time for sunset and sunrise on that day in the city. (Ord.
31867)
SEC. 12B-23.   AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINES.
   Automatic teller machines must be:
      (1)   secured to the floor of the convenience store using bolts or other
similar hardware; and
      (2)   located more than 12 feet away from glass windows and doors. (Ord.
31867)
CHAPTER 13
COURTS, FINES AND IMPRISONMENTS
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
13-1.   General penalty; continuing violations.
Sec.
13-1.1.   Authority to issue citations to appear in municipal court.
Sec.
13-1.2.   Compliance not a defense to prosecution.
Sec.
13-2.   Liability of corporate officers for penalty.
Sec.
13-2.1.   Agricultural operations.
ARTICLE II.
MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD.
Sec.
13-3.   Municipal court of record; created and designated; jurisdiction;
session.
Sec.
13-4.   Other terms and laws applicable to the municipal court of record.
Sec.
13-5.   Powers and duties of municipal judges.
Sec.
13-5.1.   Judicial nominating commission created.
Sec.
13-5.2.   Judicial nominating commission duties and responsibilities; selection
of municipal judges.
Sec.
13-6.   Bailiffs of the municipal court of record.
Sec.
13-7.   Department of municipal court and detention services created; director.
Sec.
13-8.   Duties of the municipal clerk; court administrator and director; deputy
clerks.
Sec.
13-9.   Office of the city marshal.
Sec.
13-10.   Duties of the city marshal.
Sec.
13-11.   City marshal’s authority; eligibility for pension.
Sec.
13-12.   Fidelity bonds.
Sec.
13-13.   Collection of fines.
Sec.
13-14.   Minutes of the municipal court of record.
Sec.
13-15.   Disposition of court records.
Sec.
13-16.   Recording of proceedings; fees.
Sec.
13-17.   Appeals from the municipal court of record.
Sec.
13-18.   Record of case on appeal.
Sec.
13-19.   Reserved.
Sec.
13-20.   Form of appearance bonds.
Sec.
13-21.   Delivery of appearance bonds to municipal clerk; destruction of
certain records.
Sec.
13-22.   Alternative methods for payment of fines; imprisonment for default in
payments.
Sec.
13-23.   Appeal bonds.
Sec.
13-24.   Recognizance before trial.
Sec.
13-25.   Return of deposits made with recognizance agreements.
Sec.
13-26.   City officials or employees not to recommend attorneys or sureties.
Sec.
13-27.   Traffic citations and complaints to be delivered to the municipal
clerk.
Sec.
13-28.   Violation of promise to appear.
Sec.
13-28.1.   Local consolidated fee.
Sec.
13-28.2.   Reserved.
Sec.
13-28.3.   Reimbursement fee for certain payments through the internet or an
interactive voice response telephone system.
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED.
Sec.
13-29.   Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
PRISONERS GENERALLY.
Sec.
13-30.   Property of prisoners - Searching; record of valuables.
Sec.
13-31.   Same - Delivery to claimant.
Sec.
13-32.   Same - Authority to sell unclaimed property.
Sec.
13-33.   Same - Delivery to purchasing agent.
Sec.
13-34.   Same - Notice and manner of sale.
Sec.
13-35.   Same - Deposit of proceeds of sale.
Sec.
13-36.   Same - City officers and employees not to purchase at sales.
Sec.
13-37.   Use of force to restrain prisoners.
Sec.
13-38.   Supervision of prison generally; separation of prisoners by sexes.
Sec.
13-39.   Feeding prisoners.
Sec.
13-40.   Reserved.
Sec.
13-41.   Conversing with prisoners.
Sec.
13-42.   “City prisoners” defined; working prisoners; control of prisoners
generally.
Sec.
13-43.   Allowance for labor.
Sec.
13-44.   Reserved.
Sec.
13-45.   Parole of prisoners - Authority of manager; recommendation of police
chief.
Sec.
13-46.   Same - Reason to be stated; filing copy.
Sec.
13-47.   Same - Conditions and limitations.
Sec.
13-48.   Escape.
Sec.
13-49.   Penalty for violation of article.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 13-1.   GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Whenever a person does an act that is forbidden, fails to perform an
act that is required, or commits an act that is made an offense by any
provision of this code or of any ordinance, rule, or regulation of the city and
no specific penalty is provided for a violation of the provision, the violation
is punishable by a fine:
      (1)   not to exceed $500;
      (2)   not to exceed $2,000 if the provision violated governs fire safety,
zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse; or
      (3)   fixed by state law if the violation is one for which the state has
fixed a fine.
   (b)   A person violating a provision of this code or other ordinance, rule,
or regulation of the city is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part
of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted,
unless otherwise provided.
   (c)   Where the city council has by ordinance established a minimum fine for
an offense under this code or any other ordinance, rule, or regulation of the
city, a judge of the municipal court may never impose a lower fine for the
offense. (Ord. Nos. 18001; 19963; 21973)
SEC. 13-1.1.   AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATIONS TO APPEAR IN MUNICIPAL COURT.
   A director of any city department, or his authorized representative, shall
have the power to issue one or more citations to any person to appear in the
municipal court, if the director or representative has probable cause to
believe that the person is criminally responsible for any offense within the
jurisdiction of the municipal court. (Ord. 17226)
SEC. 13-1.2.   COMPLIANCE NOT A DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION.
   Unless specifically provided otherwise in this code, it is not a defense to
prosecution under any provision of this code that the violation with which a
person is charged no longer exists, and no judge of the municipal court may
dismiss a complaint or enter a finding of not guilty on the grounds that the
violation no longer exists. (Ord. 21973)
SEC. 13-2.   LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICERS FOR PENALTY.
   Whenever a corporation or association violates any provision of this code or
other ordinance of the city, the president, vice-president, secretary,
treasurer, manager or any agent or employee of such corporation or association
shall be severally liable for the penalty prescribed for such violation.
SEC. 13-2.1.   AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the express intent of the city council to comply with
Texas Agriculture Code Chapter 251. This section allows a person to seek relief
from the enforcement of any provision in this code that would result in
imposing a governmental requirement on an agricultural operation in violation
of Texas Agriculture Code Chapter 251.
   (b)   Defense to prosecution. Except as provided in this section, it is a
defense to prosecution to any provision in this code if the complained of
offense pertains to an agricultural operation as defined in Texas Agriculture
Code Section 251.002.
   (c)   Exception to defense to prosecution. The defense to prosecution
provided in this section does not apply if the city council has, in accordance
with Texas Agriculture Code Section 251.005, made a finding by resolution that
the governmental requirement is necessary to protect public health, or if the
governmental requirement is otherwise expressly permitted under state law.
(Ord. No. 33224)
ARTICLE II.
MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD.
SEC. 13-3.   MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD; CREATED AND DESIGNATED; JURISDICTION;
SESSION.
   (a)   In accordance with Section 1, Chapter VIII of the Dallas city charter
and Chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code, there is hereby created a
municipal court of record, which is divided into 16 divisions to be designated
as Municipal Court of Record No. 1, Municipal Court of Record No. 2, Municipal
Court of Record No. 3, Municipal Court of Record No. 4, Municipal Court of
Record No. 5, Municipal Court of Record No. 6, Municipal Court of Record No. 7,
Municipal Court of Record No. 8, Municipal Court of Record No. 9, Municipal
Court of Record No. 10, Municipal Court of Record No. 11, Community Court No.
12, Community Court No. 13, Community Court No. 14, Community Court No. 15, and
Community Court No. 16.
   (b)   Each municipal court of record division shall have and exercise
concurrent jurisdiction with the other municipal court of record divisions, the
jurisdiction being that which is conferred upon all municipal courts and
municipal courts of record by Chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code and other
state law.
   (c)   Jurisdiction under Subchapter B, Chapter 54, Texas Local Government
Code.
      (1)   In addition to the jurisdiction granted in Subsection (b) of this
section and in accordance with Section 30.00005 of the Texas Government Code,
each municipal court of record division has concurrent jurisdiction with a
district court or a county court at law under Subchapter B, Chapter 54, Texas
Local Government Code, within the city’s territorial limits and property owned
by the city located in the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose
of enforcing health and safety and nuisance abatement ordinances.
      (2)   The municipal clerk is authorized to charge and collect fees and
costs of court for litigation filed in municipal court pursuant to Subchapter
B, Chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code. The fees and costs charged
and collected will be the same as those authorized by law to be collected by a
clerk of a county court.
      (3)   Any party in a case filed under this subsection has the right to
appeal the decision of the municipal court by filing a verified petition in
state district court alleging error in the municipal court’s decision. The
petition must be filed within 30 calendar days after the municipal court issues
its ruling, or else the municipal court’s decision will become final. An appeal
in state district court is limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence
rule.
   (d)   The municipal court of record divisions may be in concurrent and
continuous session, either day or night. (Ord. Nos. 7429; 15603; 16661; 19802;
24763; 24946; 24978; 25496; 25927; 27438; 27706; 27823; 30769)
SEC. 13-4.   OTHER TERMS AND LAWS APPLICABLE TO THE MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD.
   (a)   Wherever the term “corporation court” or “municipal court” is used in
this code, it means “municipal court of record.”
   (b)   Any provision of the city charter, city ordinances, or state law that
is applicable to a municipal court will be applicable to the municipal court of
record unless the provision is in conflict or inconsistent with Chapter 30 of
the Texas Government Code, which governs the municipal court of record in the
city of Dallas. (Ord. Nos. 7429; 15603; 14802; 19802; 24946)
SEC. 13-5.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF MUNICIPAL JUDGES.
   (a)   A judge shall preside over each of the municipal court of record
divisions. A judge appointed under Section 4, Chapter VIII of the city charter
shall be known as a “municipal judge.” A judge appointed under Section 6,
Chapter VIII of the city charter shall be known as an “associate municipal
judge.”
   (b)   A municipal judge shall:
      (1)   hold a respective court within the city at a place designated by
the city council;
      (2)   follow all rules of procedure contained in the ordinances of the
city and state law;
      (3)   enter on the docket of the municipal court of record division over
which the municipal judge presides, appropriate notations of the disposition of
each case;
      (4)   have authority to preside over any of the municipal court of record
divisions, and may exchange benches with other municipal judges; and
      (5)   have all other powers and duties assigned to a municipal judge by
the city charter, other city ordinances, Chapter 30 of the Texas Government
Code, or other state law.
   (c)   The administrative municipal judge of the municipal court of record
shall:
      (1)   provide for equal distribution of cases among the municipal court
of record divisions and select so many bailiffs of the municipal court of
record as are necessary;
      (2)   have the power to transfer cases from one municipal court of record
division to another and assign municipal judges to preside over the various
divisions;
      (3)   promulgate work rules for the administration of the municipal court
of record;
      (4)   provide at least one performance evaluation annually of each
municipal judge; and
      (5)   have all other powers and duties assigned to the administrative
municipal judge by the city charter, other city ordinances, Chapter 30 of the
Texas Government Code, or other state law. (Ord. Nos. 7429; 15603; 18477;
18837; 19802; 20201; 21011; 22496; 24946)
SEC. 13-5.1.   JUDICIAL NOMINATING COMMISSION CREATED.
   (a)   There is hereby created the judicial nominating commission of the
city, which shall be an advisory body of 16 members. Fifteen of the members
will be appointed by the city council, with each city council member appointing
one member of the commission. The sixteenth member of the commission will be
the Dallas city attorney, who shall serve as an ex officio, voting member of
the commission and who, for purposes of Section 13, Chapter XXIV of the city
charter, shall be appointed by the full city council. The mayor shall appoint
the chair of the commission, and the full city council shall appoint the vice-
chair.
   (b)   Each member of the commission shall be appointed for a two-year term
beginning on October 1 of each odd-numbered year. All members shall serve until
their successors are appointed and qualified. The term limits established for
board and commission members in Section
8-1.5 of this code do not apply to the city attorney’s service on the
commission.
   (c)   A city of Dallas municipal judge shall serve as an ex officio,
nonvoting member of the commission.
   (d)   The commission must reflect, as nearly as practicable, the racial,
ethnic, and gender makeup of the city’s population.
   (e)   The commission must meet at least once each quarter of the
commission’s term and may hold additional meetings at the call of the chair.
   (f)   No member of the judicial nominating commission may engage in the
practice of law in or before the municipal courts of the city. (Ord. Nos.
21011; 21515; 21804; 24003; 27833; 29645)
SEC. 13-5.2.   JUDICIAL NOMINATING COMMISSION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES;
SELECTION OF MUNICIPAL JUDGES.
   (a)   The judicial nominating commission shall act as an advisory body to
the city council and shall:
      (1)   recommend nominees to serve as full- time and associate
governmental judges;
      (2)   make reports and recommendations to the city council ad hoc
judicial nominations committee on the status of the selection process for
municipal judges;
      (3)   review and make recommendations to the city council ad hoc judicial
nominations committee on the salary structure for municipal judges, including
evaluating the feasibility of a merit pay plan;
      (4)   make recommendations to the city council concerning the selection,
removal, and pay of administrative law judges in accordance with
Article XXVII,
Chapter 2 of this code; and
      (5)   perform other duties assigned by the city council.
   (b)   The ad hoc judicial nominations committee of the city council shall
provide to the judicial nominating commission minimum qualifications and
evaluation guidelines for assessing applicants for a vacancy in the office of
municipal judge and a time schedule for recommending nominees. The guidelines
must include appropriate goals for achieving sufficient racial, ethnic, and
gender diversity within the municipal court of record. Each associate and full-
time municipal judge, including the administrative municipal judge, shall
reside in the city of Dallas within four months after the date of appointment
and throughout his or her term as a municipal judge for the city of Dallas.
   (c)   When there is a vacancy in the office of full- time or associate
municipal judge (including a vacancy created by the expiration of a judge’s
term), the director of human resources shall receive applications, which shall
be forwarded to the judicial nominating commission through its chair. The
commission shall review the applications and resumes, research applicant
qualifications, and conduct interviews; except that if a vacancy occurs within
120 days after the appointment of any full-time or associate municipal judge,
for which the commission conducted interviews, the commission is not required
to conduct additional interviews but may, in its discretion, recommend nominees
to fill the new vacancy from applicants who were interviewed for any municipal
judge position that was filled within the preceding 120 days. The commission
may also, by a two-thirds vote, waive the interview requirement for any person
who has completed at least eight consecutive years of continuous service as a
full-time municipal judge for the city when that person applies for a position
as an associate municipal judge. If in the opinion of the commission, none of
the applicants for a municipal judge position meets minimum qualifications
established by the city council ad hoc judicial nominations committee, the
commission may search for and interview additional applicants.
   (d)   After deliberation, the judicial nominating commission shall recommend
to the city council ad hoc judicial nominations committee a number of nominees
equal to 150 percent of the number of vacancies in the office of full-time or
associate municipal judge, rounded up to whole numbers. The nominees must be
divided into two groups, one for full-time judges and one for associate judges,
with the members of each group being ranked in the order of preference by the
judicial nominating commission, with Number 1 being the highest ranking. If the
number of applicants for all of the vacant municipal judge positions is less
than the number of nominees required by this subsection to be recommended to
the ad hoc judicial nominations committee, then the commission may, in its
discretion, either recommend any persons who have applied or seek additional
candidates.
   (e)   Upon receiving the judicial nominating commission’s recommendation of
nominees, the city council ad hoc judicial nominations committee may interview
one or more of the nominees or other applicants interviewed by the commission.
If not satisfied with any number of the nominees or other applicants
interviewed by the commission, the ad hoc judicial nominations committee may
request that the commission recommend a specified number of additional nominees
to the committee. After deliberation, the ad hoc judicial nominations committee
shall forward to the full city council a number of nominees equal to 150
percent of the number of vacancies in the office of full-time or associate
municipal judge, rounded up to whole numbers. The nominees must be divided into
two groups, one for full-time judges and one for associate judges, with the
members of each group being ranked in the order of preference by the ad hoc
judicial nominations committee, with Number 1 being the highest ranking.
Rankings of the nominees by the judicial nominating commission must also be
forwarded to the full city council.
   (f)   Upon receiving the recommendation of nominees from the ad hoc judicial
nominations committee, the city council shall select one nominee or other
applicant interviewed by the ad hoc judicial nominations committee or the
judicial nominating commission to fill each vacancy. Before making a selection,
the city council may interview one or more of the nominees or other applicants
interviewed by the ad hoc judicial nominations committee or the judicial
nominating commission. If not satisfied with any number of these candidates,
the city council may, in its discretion, fill whatever vacancies it desires and
request that the judicial nominating commission recommend to the ad hoc
judicial nominations committee a specified number of additional nominees for
the unfilled vacancies.
   (g)   When there is a vacancy in the office of the administrative municipal
judge (including a vacancy created by the expiration of the judge’s term), the
judicial nominating commission shall conduct interviews of all interested full-
time municipal judges of the city of Dallas, and all interested applicants for
vacant full-time municipal judge positions, for the office of administrative
municipal judge. After deliberation, the commission shall recommend to the full
city council three nominees for the office of administrative municipal judge
ranked in the order of preference, with Number 1 being the highest ranking. The
city council shall interview the nominees and select one as the administrative
municipal judge, or, if not satisfied with any of the nominees, the city
council may reject all and request that the judicial nominating commission
repeat the nominating process.
   (h)   The city manager shall provide staff to assist the judicial nominating
commission in performing its duties and responsibilities.
   (i)   Nothing in this section affects the holdover status of an incumbent
municipal judge under applicable city, state, and federal laws. (Ord. Nos.
21011; 21515; 21804; 22321; 22612; 23124; 24946; 25518; 25655; 26093; 29394)
SEC. 13-6.   BAILIFFS OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD.
   (a)   The bailiffs of the municipal court of record, under the direction and
supervision of the administrative municipal judge, shall serve the municipal
court of record.
   (b)   The bailiffs shall:
      (1)   be selected by the administrative municipal judge;
      (2)   meet all qualifications necessary to be certified as peace officers
by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education; and
      (3)   be appointed and commissioned by the city marshal as deputy city
marshals.
   (c)   The administrative municipal judge or his designee shall supervise the
activities of bailiffs and shall have the authority to impose disciplinary
action in accordance with city personnel rules. If the administrative municipal
judge terminates the employment of a bailiff, the city marshal shall remove the
appointment and commission of the bailiff as a deputy city marshal.
   (d)   Appeals from disciplinary actions taken by the administrative judge
shall be to the city manager or his designee and then to the trial board in
cases where that body has jurisdiction. If a bailiff whose employment has been
terminated is reinstated during the appeal process, then the bailiff shall be
reappointed as a bailiff by the administrative municipal judge and reappointed
and recommissioned by the city marshal as a deputy city marshal. (Ord. Nos.
18477; 18837; 19802)
SEC. 13-7.   DEPARTMENT OF DALLAS MUNICIPAL COURT CREATED; DIRECTOR.
   There is hereby created the department of municipal court and detention
services, the director of which shall be the clerk of the municipal court of
record who shall be known as the municipal clerk. (Ord. Nos. 18477; 19802;
22669; 32557; 33233)
SEC. 13-8.   DUTIES OF THE MUNICIPAL CLERK; COURT ADMINISTRATOR AND DIRECTOR;
DEPUTY CLERKS.
   (a)   The municipal clerk, who also holds the position of court
administrator and director of the department of Dallas municipal court, shall:
      (1)   prepare and maintain accurate dockets and minutes for each
municipal court of record division created under this article;
      (2)   have custody of all documents and papers relating to the business
of the municipal court of record divisions;
      (3)   supervise the collection of fines imposed by the municipal court of
record;
      (4)   maintain complaints for all cases in the municipal court of record
for which a complaint is required by law;
      (5)   supervise the administration of arrest warrants; and
      (6)   have all other powers and duties assigned to the municipal clerk by
the city charter, other city ordinances, Chapter 30 of the Texas Government
Code, or other state law.
   (b)   The municipal clerk may appoint deputy clerks who, when acting under
the municipal clerk’s direction, shall have the authority to perform all acts
required of the municipal clerk by the city charter, city ordinances, or state
law. (Code 1941, Art. 28-1; Ord. Nos. 8215; 15603; 17029; 18477; 19802; 22669;
24946; 30994; 32557)
SEC. 13-9.   OFFICE OF THE CITY MARSHAL.
   There is hereby created the office of the city marshal, to be filled by a
qualified person appointed by the municipal clerk. The city marshal shall
appoint such deputies as are authorized from time to time. The city marshal and
his or her deputies shall meet all qualifications necessary to be certified as
peace officers by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement. (Ord. No. 33233)
SEC. 13-10.   DUTIES OF THE CITY MARSHAL.
   The city marshal and his or her deputies, acting under the direction of the
municipal court, shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and other legal process
issuing out of the municipal court of record;
      (2)   execute other warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and legal process as
determined by the municipal clerk;
      (3)   enforce state laws and the Dallas City Code;
      (4)   manage and operate the city detention center and sobering center;
      (5)   manage the Dallas Security Services Division, security technology
and security badging unit for protection of employees, citizens, and property
at facilities that are owned, occupied, or managed by the city to ensure
safety, orderly, and lawful conduct on those premises, except as otherwise
provided by the city manager, city charter, or ordinance of the city council;
and
      (6)   perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager or
ordinance of city council. (Ord. No. 33233)
SEC. 13-11.   CITY MARSHAL’S AUTHORITY; ELIGIBILITY FOR PENSION.
   (a)   The city marshal and his or her deputies shall serve as peace officers
and have full police authority in the exercise of their assigned duties.
   (b)   The city marshal and his or her deputies are not members of the police
department of the city and are not eligible for membership in the Firemen,
Policemen and Fire Alarm Operators Pension Fund; however, they are eligible for
membership in the employee’s retirement fund of the city. The city marshal and
his or her deputies are paid law enforcement officers for the purpose of
qualifying for survivors’ assistance benefits under the provisions of Article
6228f, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes. (Ord. No. 33233)
SEC. 13-12.   FIDELITY BONDS.
   The municipal clerk and all of his assistants having responsibilities for
collection of fines shall execute fidelity bonds in favor of the city in an
amount prescribed by the city council. The premium of the bond shall be paid by
the city. (Ord. Nos. 15603; 17029; 19802)
SEC. 13-13.   COLLECTION OF FINES.
   (a)   If a person to whom a citation has been issued for a traffic,
ordinance, or misdemeanor violation desires to plead guilty and pay a fine set
by the municipal judge for the violation charged, the municipal clerk shall
collect the amount set by the municipal court judge for that violation.
   (b)   If a person to whom a citation has been issued for a traffic,
ordinance, or misdemeanor violation does not plead guilty and pay a fine, the
municipal clerk shall cause the case to be docketed for trial. If the person is
found guilty of the violation, is assessed a fine by the municipal judge, and
desires to pay the fine assessed, the municipal clerk shall collect the fine
assessed.
   (c)   The municipal clerk is responsible for full and proper accounting of
all fines collected. He shall issue a receipt to a person who pays a fine with
cash money. (Code 1941, Art. 28-2; Ord. Nos. 8215; 17029; 19802)
SEC. 13-14.   MINUTES OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD.
   The municipal clerk shall maintain a record comprising the minutes of
proceedings before each municipal court of record division for five years. The
minutes shall contain the following:
      (1)   all entries required under Section
13-5(b)(3) of this chapter;
      (2)   the date of appeal in all cases appealed from the municipal court
of record to the county court of criminal appeals;
      (3)   the date or dates of confinement in all cases where a fine is
served; and
      (4)   the number of the receipt of payment in all cases where a fine is
paid. (Code 1941, Art. 28-1; Ord. Nos. 8215; 15603; 19181; 19802)
SEC. 13-15.   DISPOSITION OF COURT RECORDS.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the municipal clerk to preserve the records of
the municipal court of record in accordance with a record retention schedule
adopted by the city council and maintained on file in the city secretary’s
office.
   (b)   Municipal court of record dockets, minutes, warrants, complaints, bond
copies, motions, and citations may be reduced to a microphotograph, microfilm,
or other process by which the original records may be accurately copied,
reproduced, or originated on film, if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The municipal clerk, or his designated representative, must check
and certify that each microfilm record is a true and correct duplication of the
original court record.
      (2)   An index to all microfilm records must be prepared and maintained.
      (3)   The public must have free access to any information, to which they
are entitled under law, that is contained in the microfilm records.
   (c)   A microfilm record made in compliance with Subsection (b) is an
original record and will be accepted by any court or administrative agency of
the state. When issued and certified by the municipal clerk, a copy of the
microfilm record on paper or film will be accepted as a certified copy of an
original record by any court or administrative agency of the state.
   (d)   Unless otherwise required by state or federal law, an original record
of the municipal court of record that is microfilmed in compliance with
Subsection (b) may be destroyed after the microfilm record has been checked and
certified as being a true and correct duplication of the original court record
in accordance with Subsection (b)(1); except, that any original court record,
the subject matter of which is in litigation, may not be destroyed until the
litigation is final.
   (e)   Unless otherwise required by state or federal law, a microfilm record
made in compliance with Subsection (b) may be destroyed in accordance with the
record retention schedule adopted for the municipal court of record and
maintained on file in the city secretary’s office. (Code 1941, Art. 28-5; Ord.
Nos. 8215; 19181; 19802)
SEC. 13-16.   RECORDING OF PROCEEDINGS; FEES.
   (a)   The municipal court of record shall comply with the recording
procedures set forth in Chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code.
   (b)   Upon request of the municipal judge or upon written request of one of
the parties to a trial, proceedings of the municipal court of record, limited
to trial testimony and motions before the court, shall be recorded. The
proceedings shall primarily be recorded electronically, but may be recorded by
a qualified court reporter. The defendant may, at his expense, have a court
reporter present in the courtroom during the proceedings.
   (c)   The recording of municipal court of record proceedings shall be kept
and stored for not less than 20 days beginning the day after the last day of
the court proceeding, trial, or denial of motion for new trial, whichever
occurs last. The proceedings that are appealed shall be transcribed from the
recording by a court reporter or other person authorized to transcribe the
court of record proceedings. The court reporter or other person transcribing
the recorded proceedings is not required to have been present at the
proceedings when they were recorded.
   (d)   The defendant shall pay for any transcription of the recorded
proceedings unless the court finds, after a hearing in response to an affidavit
by the defendant, that the defendant is unable to pay or give security for the
transcription.
   (e)   Before the recorded proceedings are transcribed, the defendant shall,
unless found by the court to be unable to pay for the transcription, post a
cash deposit with the municipal clerk for the estimated cost of the
transcription. The cash deposit shall be based on the length of the
proceedings, as indicated by the amount of tape used to electronically record
the proceedings, and the costs of court reporter, typing, and other incidental
services. The municipal clerk shall post a current schedule of charges for
transcription fees, including deposits. If the cash deposit exceeds the actual
cost of the transcription, the municipal clerk shall refund the difference to
the defendant. If the cash deposit is insufficient to cover the actual cost of
the transcription, the defendant must pay the additional amount before he is
given the transcription. If a case is reversed on appeal, the municipal clerk
shall refund to the defendant any amounts paid for a transcription. (Ord. Nos.
19802; 24946)
SEC. 13-17.   APPEALS FROM THE MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD.
   A defendant who pleads not guilty has the right of appeal from a judgment of
conviction in the municipal court of record under the procedures prescribed by
Chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code. A defendant who pleads guilty or nolo
contendere waives the right of appeal from a judgment in the municipal court of
record. An appeal from the municipal court of record may not be by trial de
novo. All appeals from the municipal court of record must comply with the
requirements and procedures set forth in Chapter 30 of the Texas Government
Code and other applicable law. (Ord. Nos. 19802; 24946)
SEC. 13-18.   RECORD OF CASE ON APPEAL.
   If a case is appealed from the municipal court of record to the county
criminal court, or other court to which an appeal may be made, the municipal
clerk shall cause a record of the case to be prepared from the transcript and
the statement of facts, which must conform to the requirements of Chapter 30 of
the Texas Government Code. After approval of the record by the municipal judge,
the municipal clerk shall deliver the record and the appeal bond in the case to
the county clerk, or deputy county clerk, authorized by law to receive such
appeals. The municipal clerk shall procure from the county clerk or deputy
county clerk a receipt showing that the appeal in the particular case was
received. A full copy of the record on appeal must be kept in the office of the
municipal clerk. (Code 1941, Art. 28-3; Ord. Nos. 8215; 19802; 24946; 31395,
eff. 1/1/20)
SEC. 13-19.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 24978)
SEC. 13-20.   FORM OF APPEARANCE BONDS.
   Appearance bond forms, approved by any municipal judge, shall be printed and
retained in the office of the city jail, available without charge for use of
anyone desiring to submit an appearance bond and being released from jail
pending his appearance in the municipal court of record. Appearance bond forms
shall also be retained in the office of the municipal clerk, available without
charge for use of anyone desiring to submit an appearance bond in order to have
an alias case redocketed for trial. Each form of bond must be filled out
showing the signature of the official before whom the bond is executed, the
face amount of the bond, the names and addresses of the principal and sureties,
and the date. Any other bond approved by a municipal judge, or pursuant to any
order by a municipal judge complying with state law, may be accepted in lieu of
bonds printed on the approved form provided for in this section. (Code 1941,
Art. 28-6; Ord. Nos. 8215; 19802)
SEC. 13-21.   DELIVERY OF APPEARANCE BONDS TO MUNICIPAL CLERK; DESTRUCTION OF
CERTAIN RECORDS.
   Within 24 hours after acceptance by the office of the city jail, each
appearance bond shall be delivered to and retained by the municipal clerk, such
bonds to be a part of the records of the municipal court of record. The
municipal court of record may at any time order the destruction of any of these
records; provided, that no records shall be destroyed which pertain to any case
not yet disposed of or which has been disposed of within less than 12 months.
(Code 1941, Art. 28-7; Ord. Nos. 8215; 19802)
SEC. 13-22.   ALTERNATIVE METHODS FOR PAYMENT OF FINES; IMPRISONMENT FOR
DEFAULT IN PAYMENTS.
   When a defendant is convicted of any offense over which the municipal court
of record has jurisdiction, a judgment that the defendant pay a fine may also
direct that payment of the fine be made within a limited time or in
installments on specified dates and that, on default of payment as stipulated,
the defendant shall be imprisoned until the fine is satisfied in full. Unless
such direction is given in the judgment, the fine is payable immediately. Any
judgment providing for an installment payment must be in writing, with a copy
being given to the defendant and a copy being signed by the defendant
acknowledging his receipt of the copy. It is expressly provided that if the
defendant has duly posted an appearance bond, appeal bond, or cash escrow
deposit, he shall remain free pending further disposition of his case. (Code
1941, Art. 28-8; Ord. Nos. 8215, 13216; 19802)
SEC. 13-23.   APPEAL BONDS.
   (a)   Forms of bonds of appeal of any cause from the municipal court of
record, approved by any municipal judge, shall be printed and retained in the
office of the municipal clerk and made available without charge to any person
desiring to appeal from any order of the municipal court of record. Any other
appeal bond approved by a municipal judge and complying with the state statutes
with reference to appeal bonds may be accepted by a municipal judge in lieu of
bonds printed on the approved form provided for in this subsection.
   (b)   An appeal bond must be in the amount of $50 or double the amount of
the fines and costs adjudged against a defendant, whichever is greater. An
appeal bond must:
      (1)   state that the defendant was convicted in the case and has
appealed; and
      (2)   be conditioned on the defendant’s appearance, upon notice, in the
court to which the appeal is taken. (Code 1941, Art. 28-9; Ord. Nos. 8215;
19802)
SEC. 13-24.   RECOGNIZANCE BEFORE TRIAL.
   (a)   A person in the city jail charged with violating a provision of this
code or other city ordinance may be discharged from the jail on his own
recognizance if he executes a recognizance agreement on a form provided for
that purpose and delivers it and an escrow deposit to the municipal clerk. The
escrow deposit must be an amount of cash equal to that amount set by the
municipal judges for the offense charged. The municipal clerk shall perform
this duty subject to the direction of the city manager.
   (b)   Recognizance agreement forms shall be kept in the offices of the city
jail and the municipal court of record. These forms shall be serially numbered
in triplicate so that the agreements may be prepared with an original (which
within 24 hours after its acceptance shall be delivered to the municipal clerk,
together with the jail arrest card prepared in the case), a duplicate (which
may be delivered to the person charged), and a triplicate (which shall be
delivered to the municipal clerk together with the escrow deposit accepted with
the agreement). A recognizance agreement must include:
      (1)   a description of the offense with which the person has been
charged;
      (2)   the agreement of the person charged to appear in the municipal
court of record before a municipal judge on a certain date and hour; and
      (3)   a statement that upon failure of the person executing the agreement
to appear before the municipal judge, or to cause someone on his behalf to
appear, the amount, or any part of the amount, paid as an escrow deposit in
lieu of an appearance bond may on default be assessed as a fine against the
person and the escrow deposit applied as payment of the fine.
   (c)   A person who makes an escrow deposit when executing a recognizance
agreement shall be entitled to a return of his deposit if he:
      (1)   at any time, in lieu of the deposit, submits an appearance bond
that is found sufficient by a municipal judge;
      (2)   complies with the terms of the agreement and, at a hearing before a
municipal judge, is acquitted or the proceedings dismissed; or
      (3)   after complying with the terms of the agreement and being fined,
pays the fine or executes an appeal bond that is approved and filed;
otherwise, as the recognizance agreement shall provide, the amount of the
escrow deposit shall be applied to the payment of the fine and all costs in the
case, with any balance to be returned to the person. (Code 1941, Art. 28-10;
Ord. Nos. 8215; 15279; 17029; 19802)
SEC. 13-25.   RETURN OF DEPOSITS MADE WITH RECOGNIZANCE AGREEMENTS.
   If any sum is returnable to a person who has made an escrow deposit with the
execution of a recognizance agreement, it shall be returned by the municipal
clerk who shall obtain an appropriate receipt from the person. (Code 1941, Art.
28-11; Ord. Nos. 8215; 17029; 19802)
SEC. 13-26.   CITY OFFICIALS OR EMPLOYEES NOT TO RECOMMEND ATTORNEYS OR
SURETIES.
   No appointive official of the city or employee of the city in any capacity
may recommend to any person charged with a violation of any provision of this
code or other city ordinance a lawyer for representing the person in the matter
or a person for serving as surety on any bond for the person in the matter. The
penalty for a violation of this section by an official or employee of the city,
in addition to any other penalty which may be now or hereafter provided for,
shall include, at the option of the appointive power and after a determination
that a violation of this section has occurred, immediate discharge of the
official or employee in the manner provided for in the city personnel rules.
(Code 1941, Art. 28-12; Ord. Nos. 8215; 19802)
SEC. 13-27.   TRAFFIC CITATIONS AND COMPLAINTS TO BE DELIVERED TO THE MUNICIPAL
CLERK.
   The chief of police and the directors of other city departments authorized
to issue citations to the municipal court of record shall deliver to the
municipal clerk, at least once every 24 hours, the court copy of every citation
issued by the department. (Code 1941, Art. 28-14; Ord. Nos. 8215; 15279; 17029;
19802)
SEC. 13-28.   VIOLATION OF PROMISE TO APPEAR.
   (a)   A person lawfully released from custody, whether by posting of bond or
by signing a written notice to appear, on condition that he subsequently appear
in the municipal court of record, commits an offense if he fails to appear in
the municipal court of record in accordance with the terms of his release.
   (b)   The requirement for appearance in the municipal court of record is met
if counsel appears on behalf of a person required to appear.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, “custody” means an arrest or a detention
for purposes of issuing a written citation by a police officer or by a person
authorized to issue citations under Section
13-1.1 of this chapter.
   (d)   An offense committed under this section is punishable by a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $500. (Ord. Nos. 17030; 17226; 19802)
SEC. 13-28.1.   LOCAL CONSOLIDATED FEE.
   (a)   Pursuant to Chapter 134 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, the municipal clerk shall collect a local consolidated fee of $14 for
each misdemeanor offense conviction, in addition to any other fines, penalties,
or court costs required by city ordinance or state or federal law.
   (b)   The local consolidated fee collected under this section must be
deposited and allocated in accordance with Section 134.103(b) of the Texas
Local Government Code as follows:
      (1)   Municipal court building security fund. Funds may only be used for
security personnel services, and items related to buildings that house the
operation of municipal court. A non-exhaustive list of potential uses included
in Article 102.017(c) of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
      (2)   Local truancy prevention and diversion fund. Per Section 134.156 of
the Texas Local Government Code, funds may only be used to finance the salary,
benefits, training, travel expenses, office supplies, and other necessary
expenses relating to the position of juvenile case manager. Funds may not be
used to supplement the income of an employee whose primary role is not as a
juvenile case manager.
      (3)   Municipal court technology fund. Fund may only be used to finance
the purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for a municipal
court. A non-exhaustive list of potential uses is included in Article 102.0172
(b) of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
       (4)   Municipal jury fund. Per Section 134.154 of the Texas Local
Government Code, funds may only be used for juror reimbursement and to
otherwise fund finance jury services. (Ord. Nos. 22669; 23263; 31395; 32003)
SEC. 13-28.2.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 31395)
SEC. 13-28.3.   REIMBURSEMENT FEE FOR CERTAIN PAYMENTS THROUGH THE INTERNET OR
AN INTERACTIVE VOICE RESPONSE TELEPHONE SYSTEM.
   (a)   Pursuant to Chapter 132 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, the municipal clerk may collect a reimbursement fee up to an amount
not to exceed five percent of the amount of the fee, fine, court cost, or other
charge being paid for each payment of fines, penalties, court costs, or other
fees assessed by the municipal court made through:
      (1)   the internet, when the payment is made by check, debit card, or
credit card; or
      (2)   an interactive voice response telephone system, when the payment is
made by credit card.
   (b)   The reimbursement fee collected under this section must be deposited
in the general fund of the city or the municipality must approve any fee
charged by a vendor under a contract authorized to provide services through the
internet. (Ord. Nos. 27362; 28423; 29149; 31395; 32003)
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED.
SEC. 13-29.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 19802)
ARTICLE IV.
PRISONERS GENERALLY.
SEC. 13-30.   PROPERTY OF PRISONERS - SEARCHING; RECORD OF VALUABLES.
   Whenever any person under arrest by any police officer of the city shall be
confined in the city jail and before his confinement in the city jail, he shall
be searched by any police officer or jailer or jail guard, and any articles or
thing of value whatever shall be taken from the person imprisoned. It shall be
the duty of the jailer or jail guard, whether day or night man, to make an
itemized record of each article or thing of value whatever taken from the
person of anyone so imprisoned, and it shall be the duty of the jailer or jail
guard to sign the record as to each person imprisoned from whom any article or
thing of value is taken. (Code 1941, Art. 113-1; Ord. 8175)
SEC. 13-31.   SAME - DELIVERY TO CLAIMANT.
   If any person shall claim to be the owner of any article or thing of value
taken from the person of any prisoner, the chief of police shall turn over and
deliver the same to the person claiming it if in his opinion such person is the
owner. (Code 1941, Art. 113-2; Ord. 8175)
SEC. 13-32.   SAME - AUTHORITY TO SELL UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   In the event the true owner does not claim any property or article of value
deposited with the chief of police as provided in this article and the same
shall have remained in his custody for as long as four months from the time it
was originally delivered into his custody, without being claimed or reclaimed
by the owner, whether known or not, may be sold and disposed of at public
auction, as provided in this article. (Code 1941, Art. 113-3; Ord. 8175)
SEC. 13-33.   SAME - DELIVERY TO PURCHASING AGENT.
   The chief of police shall give to the purchasing agent of the city a list of
all property subject to sale hereunder and shall thereafter deliver such
property to the purchasing agent before the date of sale, and take a receipt
from such purchasing agent showing in detail all property so delivered. (Code
1941, Art. 113-4; Ord. 8175)
SEC. 13-34.   SAME - NOTICE AND MANNER OF SALE.
   Thirty days notice of time and place of sale of all property subject to sale
as provided in this article shall be posted at the courthouse door at the
county and at any regular entrance to the city hall and a copy thereof sent by
registered mail to the last-known address of the owner, in the event the name
of the owner is known to the purchasing agent, and thereafter such property
shall be offered for sale at public auction to the highest bidder for each
piece of property or assembled in lots, whichever in the discretion of the
purchasing agent of the city shall offer the best price obtainable for such
property. (Code 1941, Art. 113-5; Ord. 8175)
SEC. 13-35.   SAME - DEPOSIT OF PROCEEDS OF SALE.
   The proceeds of the sale provided for in the preceding section shall be
deposited to the credit of the appropriate city fund. (Code 1941, Art. 113-6;
Ord. Nos. 8175; 29645)
SEC. 13-36.   SAME - CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES NOT TO PURCHASE AT SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for any police officer or other officer or employee of
the city, either directly or indirectly, to purchase at such sale or in any
manner acquire the ownership at such sale of any article or property taken from
a city prisoner. (Code 1941, Art. 113-7; Ord. 8175)
SEC. 13-37.   USE OF FORCE TO RESTRAIN PRISONERS.
   The chief of police, or any police officer, may, in order to restrain or
control prisoners, use such reasonable force as does not amount to cruel or
unusual punishment. (Code 1941, Art. 112-1; Ord. 8154)
SEC. 13-38.   SUPERVISION OF PRISON GENERALLY; SEPARATION OF PRISONERS BY
SEXES.
   There shall be someone in charge of the prison at all hours ready to receive
the prisoners. Male and female prisoners shall be kept separate. (Code 1941,
Art. 112-2; Ord. 8154)
SEC. 13-39.   FEEDING PRISONERS.
   It shall be the duty of the person in charge of the prisoners to see that
all prisoners get their meals on time, and are well cared for. (Code 1941, Art.
112-3; Ord. 8154)
SEC. 13-40.   RESERVED.
SEC. 13-41.   CONVERSING WITH PRISONERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person outside the city prison to hold any
conversation with any of the inmates thereof without first obtaining permission
of the jail supervisor or person in charge of prisoners. (Code 1941, Art. 112-
5; Ord. 8154)
SEC. 13-42.   “CITY PRISONERS” DEFINED; WORKING PRISONERS; CONTROL OF PRISONERS
GENERALLY.
   All persons who shall be convicted of any offense whatever in the municipal
court of the city, and who shall make default in the payment of any and all
fines, charges and penalties that may be imposed by such judgment of
conviction, are hereby defined and shall be designated as city prisoners, and
shall be required to do manual labor on any property, premises or public works
of the city, or belonging to the city, wherever the same may be situated or
located. Such prisoners shall at all times be in the charge of and under the
control, direction and instructions of the peace officers of the city, and,
when such prisoners are not at actual labor, they shall be confined in the
prison house or jail or holdover situated in the city, as may be most
convenient, and shall at all times be under the rules and regulations adopted
by the city council for such prisoners. (Code 1941, Art. 112-6; Ord. 8154)
SEC. 13-43.   ALLOWANCE FOR LABOR.
   All prisoners, as that term is defined in the preceding section, shall be
allowed the sum of five dollars per day for all labor performed by them, which
sum shall be credited upon the amount of the fine and penalty imposed upon such
prisoner as shown by the judgment of conviction of same; provided, that the
city shall furnish to each prisoner, while in its custody, a reasonable and
sufficient amount of wholesome food for the proper nourishment and sustenance
of such prisoner, and such medical attention and drugs and medicine as may be
necessary for the purpose of treatment and care of such prisoner while in the
custody of the city. (Code 1941, Art. 112-7; Ord. Nos. 8154, 13217)
SEC. 13-44.   RESERVED.
SEC. 13-45.   PAROLE OF PRISONERS - AUTHORITY OF MANAGER; RECOMMENDATION OF
POLICE CHIEF.
   The city manager shall have authority to parole prisoners who are confined
in the municipal jail by reason of the fact that they have been unable to pay
the fine assessed by the judge of the municipal court of the city; provided,
however, that before any parole shall be granted by the city manager, the same
shall have been recommended by the chief of police of the city. (Code 1941,
Art. 112-9; Ord. 8154)
SEC. 13-46.   SAME - REASON TO BE STATED; FILING COPY.
   All paroles recommended by the chief of police and issued by the city
manager shall contain a statement of the facts upon which such parole is based
and the reason for recommending the same. A copy of the parole and other papers
in connection therewith shall be filed in the office of the city secretary, who
shall keep a separate file concerning paroled prisoners. (Code 1941, Art. 112-
10; Ord. 8154)
SEC. 13-47.   SAME - CONDITIONS AND LIMITATIONS.
   The city manager shall have the power and authority to impose such
conditions and limitations upon a parole as in his discretion seem just and
advisable under the circumstances of each particular case. (Code 1941, Art.
112-11; Ord. 8154)
SEC. 13-48.   ESCAPE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, while in custody as a prisoner of the
city, either awaiting trial or having been convicted, to escape from such
custody, or attempt to escape therefrom, without having first been duly
discharged from such custody aforesaid. (Code 1941, Art. 112-12; Ord. 8154)
SEC. 13-49.   PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished
in accordance with Section
13-1, and, in addition, any officer or employee or the city violating any of
the provisions of this article may be removed, suspended or reduced in grade by
the city manager or the head of the department in which he is employed or by
the city council, as the case may be, pursuant to the charter, ordinances and
civil service regulations of the city. (Code 1941, Art. 113-8; Ord. 8175)
CHAPTER 13A
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
CHAPTER 14
DANCE HALLS
Sec.
14-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
14-2.   License required.
Sec.
14-2.1.   Location of Class E dance halls within 1,000 feet of a business
serving or selling alcoholic beverages.
Sec.
14-2.2.   Reserved.
Sec.
14-2.3.   Exemption from locational restrictions for late-hours permits.
Sec.
14-2.4.   Exemption from locational restrictions for Class E dance halls.
Sec.
14-3.   Issuance of license; posting.
Sec.
14-3.1.   Late-hours permit.
Sec.
14-4.   Fees.
Sec.
14-5.   Hours of operation.
Sec.
14-6.   Inspection.
Sec.
14-6.1   Identification records.
Sec.
14-7.   Dance hall supervisor.
Sec.
14-8.   Persons under 17 prohibited.
Sec.
14-8.1.   Persons under 14 and over 18 prohibited.
Sec.
14-8.2.   Reserved.
Sec.
14-9.   Expiration of license.
Sec.
14-10.   Suspension.
Sec.
14-11.   Revocation.
Sec.
14-11.1.   Surrender of license after suspension, revocation, or denial of
renewal.
Sec.
14-12.   Appeals.
Sec.
14-13.   Transfer of license or late-hours permit.
Sec.
14-14.   Penalty.
Sec.
14-15.   Injunction.
SEC. 14-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   APPLICANT means:
         (A)   a person in whose name a license to operate a dance hall will be
issued;
         (B)   each individual who signs an application for a dance hall
license as required by Section
14-2(c);
         (C)   each individual who is an officer of a dance hall business for
which a license application is made under Section
14-2, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears on the
application;
         (D)   each individual who has a 20 percent or greater ownership
interest in a dance hall business for which a license application is made under
Section
14-2, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears on the
application; and
         (E)   each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over
a dance hall business for which a license application is made under Section
14-2, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears on the
application.
      (2)   DANCE HALL means a place where:
         (A)   dancing by patrons or customers is permitted; or
         (B)   dance or any similar live performance is presented to the
public.
      (3)   CLASS A DANCE HALL means any place where dancing is permitted three
days or more a week.
      (4)   CLASS B DANCE HALL means any place where dancing is permitted less
than three days a week.
      (5)   CLASS C DANCE HALL means any place where dancing is scheduled one
day at a time.
      (6)   CLASS E DANCE HALL means any place where dancing is permitted seven
days a week for persons from age 14 through age 18 only.
      (7)   CONVICTION means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any
state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation
that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. “Conviction” includes
disposition of charges against a person by probation or deferred adjudication.
      (8)   HOTEL OR MOTEL means a hotel or motel as defined in the Dallas
Development Code, as amended.
      (9)   IN SESSION means the status of a school during the fall or spring
term when students are required to attend the school.
      (10)   LATE-HOURS PERMIT means a permit authorizing a licensee to operate
a Class A, B, or C dance hall until 4:00 a.m.
      (11)   LICENSE means a permit to operate a dance hall.
      (12)   LICENSEE means:
         (A)   a person in whose name a license to operate a dance hall has
been issued;
         (B)   each individual listed as an applicant on the application for a
dance hall license;
         (C)   each individual who is an officer of a dance hall business for
which a license has been issued under this chapter, regardless of whether the
individual’s name or signature appears on the license application;
         (D)   each individual who has a 20 percent or greater ownership
interest in a dance hall business for which a license has been issued under
this chapter, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears
on the license application; and
         (E)   each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over
a dance hall business for which a license has been issued under this chapter,
regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears on the license
application.
      (13)   PERSON means an individual, partnership, corporation, association,
or other legal entity.
      (14)   PRIVATE CLUB means an association of persons for the promotion of
some common object, which operates not for a profit a place for the
accommodation of its members and guests only.
      (15)   SCHOOL means a public or private elementary or secondary school.
      (16)   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL of a dance hall means and
includes any of the following:
         (A)   the sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
         (B)   the transfer of securities that constitute a controlling
interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
         (C)   the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal
device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 18725; 18803; 18994;
19241; 21184; 21837; 23137; 24440; 24541)
SEC. 14-2.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a dance hall without a
license.
   (b)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
chief of police. Only a person who is an officer of or who has an ownership
interest in a dance hall business may apply for a license for the dance hall.
Each applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   A person who wishes to operate a dance hall must sign the application
for a license as an applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a dance hall
is other than an individual, each individual who is an officer of the business
or who has a 20 percent or greater ownership interest in the business must sign
the application for a license as an applicant. Each applicant must meet the
requirements of Section
14-3(a), and each applicant will be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that the actor is
conducting a dance at:
      (1)   a private residence from which the general public is excluded;
      (2)   a place owned by the federal, state, or local government;
      (3)   a public or private elementary school, secondary school, college,
or university;
      (4)   a place owned by a religious organization;
      (5)   a location where no more than three dances a month are conducted
and the actor is a private club;
      (6)   a hotel or motel that contains a dance hall that is not promoted or
advertised for use by members of the general public who are not occupants of
the hotel’s or motel’s guest rooms;
      (7)   an establishment that:
         (A)   has a restaurant certificate of occupancy;
         (B)   has a valid food and beverage certificate issued by the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Commission;
         (C)   derives 50 percent or more of its gross revenues on a quarterly
basis from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages; and
         (D)   does not charge an entrance or admission fee; or
      (8)   an establishment where:
         (A)   persons contract for instruction in dance methods, styles,
techniques, and disciplines recognized by professional dance organizations;
         (B)   the dance instruction is only provided by persons trained in
dance methods, styles, techniques, and disciplines recognized by professional
dance organizations;
         (C)   no dancing occurs on the premises except by:
            (i)   a person employed or under contract to provide dance
instruction at the establishment; and
            (ii)   a person contracting for dance instruction at the
establishment; and
         (D)   the primary purpose of the dancing at the establishment is for
the education of the persons contracting for dance instruction and not for the
entertainment of the general public. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 19241; 21184; 21837;
23137; 24440; 24541)
SEC. 14-2.1.   LOCATION OF CLASS E DANCE HALLS WITHIN 1,000 FEET OF A BUSINESS
SERVING OR SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (a)   In this section, BUSINESS THAT SERVES OR SELLS ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
means a bar, lounge, tavern, or liquor store use, as defined in Section
51A-4.210 of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
   (b)   No license may be issued for a Class E dance hall under this chapter
if the dance hall will be located within 1,000 feet of a lawfully existing
business that serves or sells alcoholic beverages.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, measurements must be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
entry door in the part of a building used as a Class E dance hall to the
nearest entry door in the part of a building used as a business that serves or
sells alcoholic beverages.
   (d)   If, on June 27, 1990, a business operating as a Class E dance hall is
located within 1,000 feet of a business that serves or sells alcoholic
beverages, then the business that was first lawfully established and
continually operating at that particular location is deemed a conforming use
and the later established business is deemed a nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use is exempted from the location requirement of Subsection (b)
of this section for the first three license renewals after June 27, 1990,
unless the use is sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued
for a period of 30 days or more. A nonconforming use may not be increased,
enlarged, extended, or altered, except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. (Ord. Nos. 20663; 21184; 23137; 24440)
SEC. 14-2.2.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 23137)
SEC. 14-2.3.   EXEMPTION FROM LOCATIONAL RESTRICTIONS FOR LATE-HOURS PERMITS.
   (a)   If the chief of police denies the issuance of a late-hours permit for
a Class A, B, or C dance hall to an applicant because the location of the dance
hall is in violation of Section
14-3.1 of this chapter, then the applicant may, not later than 10 calendar days
after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written
request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of Section
14-3.1.
   (b)   If a written request is filed under Subsection (a) of this section
with the city secretary within the 10- day limit, a permit and license appeal
board, created under Section
2-95 of this code, shall consider the request. The city secretary shall set a
date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is
received.
   (c)   A hearing by the board may proceed if a quorum of the board is
present. The board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested
person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply.
   (d)   The permit and license appeal board may, in its discretion, grant an
exemption from the locational restrictions of Section
14-3.1 for a late-hours permit for a Class A, B, or C dance hall, whichever
applies, if it finds that:
      (1)   the location of the proposed dance hall will not have a detrimental
effect on nearby property or be contrary to the public safety or welfare;
      (2)   the location of the proposed dance hall will not downgrade the
property value or quality of life in any adjacent area or encourage the
development of urban blight;
      (3)   the location of the proposed dance hall operating under a late-
hours permit in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood
conservation or interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and
      (4)   all other applicable provisions of this chapter will be observed.
   (e)   The board shall grant or deny the exemption by majority vote. Failure
to reach a majority vote will result in denial of the exemption. Any dispute of
fact must be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The
decision of the permit and license appeal board is final.
   (f)   If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year
from the date of the board’s action, unless a two-year exemption is granted
under Subsection (g) of this section.
   (g)   Two-year exemptions.
      (1)   The board, by a majority vote, may grant a dance hall an exemption
from the locational restrictions of Section
14-3.1 for a two-year period after the date of the board’s action, if, in
addition to determining that the dance hall qualifies for an exemption under
Subsection (d) of this section, the board finds that:
         (A)   the dance hall has been granted an exemption from the locational
restrictions of Section
14-3.1 for the three consecutive years preceding the current exemption request;
         (B)   the applicant has not had any dance hall license suspended,
revoked, or denied within the 24 months preceding the exemption request; and
         (C)   no violations of this chapter have been committed by the
applicant, or by any employee of a dance hall of the applicant, within the 24
months preceding the exemption request.
      (2)   If the board grants a two-year exemption for a dance hall under
this subsection, the applicant is still required to annually obtain a dance
hall license and a late-hours permit for the dance hall and pay the required
license and permit fees in accordance with this chapter. If an annual late-
hours permit for the dance hall is denied under Section
14-3.1(c), then the two-year exemption becomes void, and a new exemption must
be obtained from the permit and license appeal board.
   (h)   Upon the expiration of an exemption, a dance hall operating under a
late-hours permit is in violation of the locational restrictions of Section
14-3.1, until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
   (i)   If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for
an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the
board’s action.
   (j)   The grant of an exemption for a late-hours permit for a Class A, B, or
C dance hall does not exempt the applicant from any provision of this chapter
other than the locational restrictions of Section
14-3.1. (Ord. Nos. 21184; 21837; 23137; 24440; 25002)
SEC. 14-2.4.   EXEMPTION FROM LOCATIONAL RESTRICTIONS FOR CLASS E DANCE HALLS.
   (a)   If the chief of police denies the issuance of a Class E dance hall
license to an applicant because the location of the Class E dance hall is in
violation of Section
14-2.1 of this chapter, then the applicant may, not later than 10 calendar days
after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written
request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of Section
14-2.1.
   (b)   If a written request is filed under Subsection (a) of this section
with the city secretary within the 10- day limit, a permit and license appeal
board, selected in accordance with Section
2-95 of this code, shall consider the request. The city secretary shall set a
date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is
received.
   (c)   A hearing by the board may proceed if a quorum of the board is
present. The board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested
person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply.
   (d)   The permit and license appeal board shall grant an exemption from the
locational restrictions of Section
14-2.1 for a Class E dance hall if it finds that:
      (1)   a physical barrier exists between the proposed dance hall and the
business that serves or sells alcoholic beverages, such that the shortest
distance in any direction that a person would have to physically travel from
the nearest entry door in the part of the building used as the dance hall to
the nearest entry door in the part of the building used as the business that
serves or sells alcoholic beverages is not less than 1,000 feet;
      (2)   the character of the neighborhood surrounding the proposed dance
hall is conducive to youth programs and activities and contains other uses that
promote positive youth development;
      (3)   the public safety record for the premises of the proposed dance
hall and the surrounding businesses, including any business that serves or
sells alcoholic beverages, indicates that the area is reasonably safe for
persons from age 14 through age 18;
      (4)   the location of the Class E dance hall in the area will not be
contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation or development; and
      (5)   all other applicable provisions of this chapter will be observed.
   (e)   The board shall grant or deny the exemption by majority vote. Failure
to reach a majority vote will result in denial of the exemption. Any dispute of
fact must be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The
decision of the permit and license appeal board is final.
   (f)   If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year
from the date of the board’s action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, a
Class E dance hall is in violation of the locational restrictions of Section
14-2.1 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
   (g)   If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for
an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the
board’s action.
   (h)   The grant of an exemption for a Class E dance hall does not exempt the
applicant from any provision of this chapter other than the locational
restrictions of Section
14-2.1. (Ord. Nos. 22416; 23137; 24440; 25002)
SEC. 14-3.   ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; POSTING.
   (a)   The chief of police shall approve issuance of a license by the special
collections division of the water utilities department to an applicant within
30 days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or
more of the following to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or the applicant’s spouse.
      (3)   Reserved.
      (4)   Reserved.
      (5)   An applicant has failed to answer or falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form provided.
      (6)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter within two years immediately preceding
the application.
      (7)   Any fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
      (8)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of a
crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 43 of
the Texas Penal Code:
               (aa)   prostitution;
               (bb)   promotion of prostitution;
               (cc)   aggravated promotion of prostitution;
               (dd)   compelling prostitution;
               (ee)   obscenity;
               (ff)   sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to
minor;
               (gg)   sexual performance by a child; or
               (hh)   possession of child pornography;
            (ii)   any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 21 of
the Texas Penal Code:
               (aa)   public lewdness;
               (bb)   indecent exposure; or
               (cc)   indecency with a child;
            (iii)   sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in
Chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (iv)   incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway
child as described in Chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or
            (v)   criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any
of the offenses listed in Paragraph (10)(A)(i) through (iv) of this subsection;
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24-month period.
      (9)   An applicant has been operating the proposed business as a dance
hall without a valid license issued under this chapter.
      (10)   Alcoholic beverages are possessed, consumed, or sold on premises
used or to be used by the applicant for a Class E dance hall.
      (11)   An applicant for a Class E dance hall license is in violation of
the locational requirements of Section
14-2.1 of this chapter.
      (12)   Operation of the proposed dance hall would violate the city’s
zoning ordinances.
   (b)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or the applicant’s spouse under Subsection
(a).
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, when the chief of
police denies issuance or renewal of a license, the applicant may not apply for
or be issued any class of dance hall license for one year after the date the
denial became final. If, subsequent to the denial, the chief of police finds
that the basis for the denial has been corrected or abated, the applicant may
apply for and be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the
date the denial became final. If issuance or renewal of a license is denied
under Section
14-3(a)(11) only, the applicant may be granted a license immediately upon
compliance with Section
14-2.1 of this chapter. If issuance or renewal of a license is denied under
Subsection (a)(8)(A), the applicant may not apply for or be issued another
dance hall license until the appropriate number of years required by Subsection
(a)(8)(B) has elapsed. If issuance or renewal of a license is denied under
Subsection (a)(6), the applicant may not apply for or be issued another dance
hall license until the time period required by Subsection (a)(6) has elapsed.
   (d)   The chief of police, upon approving issuance of a dance hall license,
shall send to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
written notice of that action and state where the applicant must pay the
license fee and obtain the license. The chief of police’s approval of the
issuance of a license does not authorize the applicant to operate a dance hall
until the applicant has paid all fees required by this chapter and obtained
possession of the license.
   (e)   The license must state on its face the name of the person to whom it
is granted, the expiration date, the address of the dance hall, and whether it
is issued for a Class A, Class B, Class C, or Class E dance hall.
   (f)   The license, along with any late-hours permit, must be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the dance hall so that it may be
easily read at any time. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 16067; 18725; 18803; 20663; 21184;
21837; 23137; 24206; 24440; 24541; 27697)
SEC. 14-3.1.   LATE-HOURS PERMIT.
   (a)   A person who is issued a Class A, Class B, or Class C dance hall
license may apply, on a form provided by the chief of police, for a late-hours
permit. Upon receipt of the application and payment of the late-hours permit
fee, the chief of police shall issue a late-hours permit to the applicant,
except that no late- hours permit may be issued for a dance hall located within
1,000 feet of:
      (1)   a boundary of a residential district as defined in
Chapter 41A of this code; or
      (2)   the property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined
in
Chapter 41A of this code, whether such use is within the city limits or not.
   (b)   For purposes of Subsection (a) of this section, measurement will be
made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest part of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a dance hall is conducted, to the nearest boundary of a
residential district or property line of a lot devoted to a residential use.
   (c)   Dance halls with two-year exemptions from locational restrictions.
      (1)   Notwithstanding Subsection (a), upon receipt of a late-hours permit
application and payment of the late-hours permit fee for a dance hall that has
been granted a two-year exemption from locational restrictions by the permit
and license appeal board under Section
14-2.3 of this chapter, the chief of police shall issue a late-hours permit to
the applicant without requiring further action by the permit and license appeal
board, except that no late-hours permit may be issued if the chief finds that:
         (A)   the exemption has expired;
         (B)   the applicant has had a dance hall license suspended, revoked,
or denied within the 24 months preceding the application for the late-hours
permit; or
         (C)   the applicant, or any employee of a dance hall of the applicant,
has committed a violation of this chapter within the 24 months preceding the
application for the late-hours permit.
      (2)   If the chief of police denies a late-hours permit under Paragraph
(1) of this subsection, the dance hall’s two-year exemption from the locational
restrictions of this section becomes void, and the applicant must obtain
another exemption from the permit and license appeal board in accordance with
Section
14-2.3 before a late-hours permit may be issued for the dance hall.
   (d)   Once issued, a late-hours permit is considered a part of the license
for a Class A, Class B, or Class C dance hall and is valid only when the dance
hall license it accompanies is valid. (Ord. Nos. 18725; 21184; 21837; 23137;
24440; 25002)
SEC. 14-4.   FEES.
   (a)   The following nonrefundable fees will be charged for each license
issued under the terms of this chapter:
      (1)   For a Class A dance hall, the annual license fee is $817.
      (2)   For a Class B dance hall, the annual license fee is $801.
      (3)   For a Class C dance hall, the daily license fee is $801.
      (4)   For a Class E dance hall, the annual license fee is $801.
      (5)   For a late-hours permit, the annual fee is $817 in addition to the
license fee for a Class A, B, or C dance hall, whichever is applicable.
   (b)   In addition to the fees required by Subsections (a) and (c), an
applicant for an initial Class E dance hall license or an initial late-hours
permit shall, at the time of making application, pay a nonrefundable fee of
$1,908 for the city to conduct a survey to ensure that the proposed dance hall
is in compliance with the locational restrictions set forth in Section
14-2.1 or
14-3.1, whichever is applicable.
   (c)   In addition to the fees required by Subsections (a) and (b), an
applicant for an initial dance hall license shall, at the time of making
application, pay a nonrefundable fee of $90 for the chief of police to obtain a
letter of zoning verification to ensure that the proposed dance hall is
permitted in the zoning district in which it will be located. The chief of
police shall request and obtain the letter of zoning verification from the
department of development services within 30 days after receipt of the license
application. For any dance hall holding a valid license on October 25, 2000,
this subsection will apply to the first renewal of that license issued after
October 25, 2000. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 18411; 18725; 18803; 20612; 21184; 21837;
22206; 23137; 24440; 25047; 25048; 27697; 29477; 30653; 32002; 32003; 33232)
SEC. 14-5.   HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   A person without a late-hours permit commits an offense if he operates
a Class A, Class B, or Class C dance hall between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:
00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, or between 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on
Sunday.
   (b)   A person with a late-hours permit commits an offense if he operates a
Class A, Class B, or Class C dance hall between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m., Monday through Saturday, or between 4:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he operates a Class E dance hall during
any hours other than the following:
      (1)   when school is in session in the school district in which the dance
hall is located, between the hours of:
         (A)   4:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday;
         (B)   4:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight, Friday;
         (C)   1:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight, Saturday; and
         (D)   1:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m., Sunday; or
      (2)   when school is not in session in the school district in which the
dance hall is located, between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight,
Monday through Sunday. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 18725; 18803; 21184; 23137; 24440)
SEC. 14-6.   INSPECTION.
   (a)   Representatives of the police department, the fire department, the
department of code compliance, and the building official may inspect the
premises of a dance hall, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law,
at any time it is open for business or occupied and at other reasonable times
upon request.
   (b)   A person who operates a dance hall or a person designated as the dance
hall supervisor commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection
of the premises of a dance hall by a representative of the police department,
the fire department, the department of code compliance, or the building
official at any time the dance hall is open for business or occupied and at
other reasonable times upon request. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 18803; 21184; 22026;
23137; 23694; 24440; 27697)
SEC. 14-6.1.   IDENTIFICATION RECORDS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a dance hall without
maintaining on the premises a current registration card or file that clearly
identifies:
      (1)   all employees of the dance hall; and
      (2)   all individuals who perform or otherwise provide entertainment at
the dance hall more than seven calendar days within any month.
   (b)   The registration card or file must contain the following information
for each employee or individual required to be registered under Subsection (a):
      (1)   Full legal name.
      (2)   Date of birth.
      (3)   Race and gender.
      (4)   Hair color, eye color, height, and weight.
      (5)   Current residence address and telephone number.
      (6)   Driver’s license number or other personal identification number.
      (7)   Social security number.
      (8)   Color photograph with a full face view.
   (c)   If a dance hall is located on premises that contain multiple uses,
only the employees and individuals that actually perform work associated with
the dance hall use are required to be registered and identified in compliance
with this section.
   (d)   All records maintained on an employee or individual in compliance with
this section must be retained at the dance hall for at least 90 days following
the date of any voluntary or involuntary termination of the employee’s or
individual’s employment or contract with the dance hall.
   (e)   A person who operates a dance hall or the person’s agent or employee
shall allow immediate access to these records by representatives of the police
department. (Ord. Nos. 24440; 24541)
SEC. 14-7.   DANCE HALL SUPERVISOR.
   (a)   A person who operates a dance hall must designate a person as dance
hall supervisor and register that person’s name with the chief of police.
   (b)   A person designated dance hall supervisor must remain on the premises
of the dance hall during the time dancing is permitted and until 30 minutes
after the end of the dance to ensure that the dance is conducted in an orderly
manner. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 21184; 23137; 24440)
SEC. 14-8.   PERSONS UNDER 17 PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person under the age of 17 years may enter a Class A, Class B, or
Class C dance hall unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he falsely represents himself to be
either a parent or guardian of a person under the age of 17 years for the
purpose of gaining the person’s admittance into a Class A, Class B, or Class C
dance hall.
   (c)   A licensee or employee of a Class A, Class B, or Class C dance hall
commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 17 years to
enter or remain on the premises of the dance hall unless the person is
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (d)   A licensee of a Class A, Class B, or Class C dance hall commits an
offense if he maintains the premises without posting a sign at each entrance to
the business that reads: “It is unlawful for any person under 17 years old to
enter this location without a parent or guardian.” (Ord. Nos. 15721; 18803;
21184; 23137; 24440)
SEC. 14-8.1.   PERSONS UNDER 14 AND OVER 18 PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person under the age of 14 years or over the age of 18 years may
enter a Class E dance hall.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he is over the age of 18 years and:
      (1)   enters a Class E dance hall; or
      (2)   for the purpose of gaining admittance into a Class E dance hall, he
falsely represents himself to be:
         (A)   of an age from 14 years through 18 years;
         (B)   a licensee or an employee of the dance hall;
         (C)   a parent or guardian of a person inside the dance hall; or
         (D)   a governmental employee in the performance of official duties.
   (c)   A licensee or an employee of a Class E dance hall commits an offense
if he knowingly allows a person to enter or remain on the premises of the dance
hall who is:
      (1)   under the age of 14 years; or
      (2)   over the age of 18 years.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (b)(1) and (c)(2)
that the person is:
      (1)   a licensee or employee of the dance hall;
      (2)   a parent or guardian of a person inside the dance hall; or
      (3)   a governmental employee in the performance of official duties.
   (e)   A licensee of a Class E dance hall commits an offense if he maintains
the premises without posting a sign at each entrance to the dance hall that
reads: “It is unlawful for any person under 14 years old to enter this location
without a parent or guardian. It is unlawful for any person over 18 years old
to enter this location.” (Ord. Nos. 18803; 18994; 21184; 23137; 24440)
SEC. 14-8.2.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 23137)
SEC. 14-9.   EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   A license for a Class A, Class B, or Class E dance hall expires one
year from the date of issuance, except that a license for a Class E dance hall
issued pursuant to an exemption to a locational restriction expires on the date
the exemption expires. A license may be renewed only by making application as
provided in Section
14-2. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will not be affected by the pendency of the
application.
   (b)   A late-hours permit for a Class A, Class B, or Class C dance hall
expires in conjunction with the accompanying dance hall license and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in Section
14-3.1.
   (c)   A license for a Class C dance hall expires at 2:00 a.m., or 4:00 a.m.
if a late-hours permit has been issued, on the day following the date of the
dance. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 18725; 18803; 20663; 21184; 21837; 22416; 23137;
24440)
SEC. 14-10.   SUSPENSION.
   The chief of police shall suspend a dance hall license for a period of time
not exceeding 30 days if the chief of police determines that a licensee or an
employee of a licensee has:
   (1)   violated Sections
14-3(c),
14-5,
14-8, or
14-8.1 of this chapter;
   (2)   refused to allow an inspection of the dance hall premises as
authorized in this chapter;
   (3)   knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the dance hall premises;
or
   (4)   knowingly permitted the possession, consumption, or sale of an
alcoholic beverage on the premises of a Class E dance hall. (Ord. Nos. 15721;
18803; 21184; 23137; 24440; 24541)
SEC. 14-11.   REVOCATION.
   (a)   The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in
Section
14-10 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
   (b)   The chief of police shall revoke a license if the chief of police
determines that one or more of the following is true:
      (1)   A licensee has given false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the chief of police during the application process.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises.
      (4)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises.
      (5)   A licensee or an employee knowingly permitted dancing or a live
performance during a period of time when the dance hall license was suspended.
      (6)   A licensee has been:
         (A)   convicted of an offense listed in Section
14-3(a)(8)(A) for which the time period required in Section
14-3(a)(8)(B) has not elapsed; or
         (B)   convicted of or is under indictment for any felony offense while
holding a dance hall license.
      (7)   While an employee of the dance hall and while on the licensed
premises, a person has committed an offense listed in Section
14-3(a)(8)(A), for which a conviction has been obtained, two or more times
within a 12-month period.
      (8)   A licensee of a Class E dance hall is in violation of the
locational requirements of Section
14-2.1 of this chapter.
      (9)   A licensee or an employee has violated Section
14-13 of this chapter.
      (10)   A licensee’s state license or permit to sell or serve alcoholic
beverages is revoked by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission or a renewal
license or permit is refused to the licensee on grounds set forth in Section
11.46 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
   (c)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the
revocation of the license.
   (d)   When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation will
continue for one year, and the licensee may not apply for or be issued any
class of dance hall license for one year from the date revocation became final.
If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the
revocation action has been corrected or abated, the applicant may apply for and
be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became final. If the license was revoked under Subsection (b)(8)
only, the applicant may be granted a license immediately upon compliance with
Section
14-2.1 of this chapter. If the license was revoked under Subsection (b)(6), an
applicant may not apply for or be granted another license until the appropriate
number of years required under Section
14-3(a)(8)(B) has elapsed. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 16067; 18803; 20663; 21184; 21837;
23137; 24206; 24440; 24541)
SEC. 14-11.1.   SURRENDER OF LICENSE AFTER SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR DENIAL OF
RENEWAL.
   After receipt of notice of suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of a
dance hall license, the licensee shall, on or before the date specified in the
notice, discontinue operating the dance hall and surrender the license to the
chief of police. (Ord. 24440)
SEC. 14-12.   APPEALS.
   If the chief of police denies the issuance or renewal of a license, suspends
or revokes a license, or denies issuance of a late-hours permit, the chief of
police shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. The
aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief of police to a permit and
license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of
police in suspending or revoking a license until the permit and license appeal
board makes a final decision. A suspension or revocation upheld by the board
takes effect on the first midnight that is at least 24 hours after the board
issues its decision. If within a 10-day period the chief of police suspends,
revokes, or denies issuance of a sexually oriented business license for the
same location involved in the chief’s actions on the dance hall license, then
the chief may consolidate the requests for appeals of those actions into one
appeal. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 16067; 18200; 19241; 21184; 21837; 23137; 24440)
SEC. 14-13.   TRANSFER OF LICENSE OR LATE-HOURS PERMIT.
   A licensee shall not transfer a license or late-hours permit to another, nor
shall a licensee operate a dance hall under the authority of a license, or a
late-hours permit, at any place other than the address designated in the
application. (Ord. Nos. 15721; 18725; 21184; 23137; 24440)
SEC. 14-14.   PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, except Sections
14-2.1 and
14-3.1, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less than $200 or more
than $500. Any person who violates Section
14-2.1 or
14-3.1 of this chapter, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less
than $200 or more than $2,000.
   (b)   Except where otherwise specified, a culpable mental state is not
required for the commission of an offense under this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 21184;
23137; 24440; 24541)
SEC. 14-15.   INJUNCTION.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a dance hall without a valid
license or in violation of Section
14-2.1 of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for criminal violations. (Ord. Nos. 21184; 23137; 24440)
CHAPTER 14A
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. 22026)
CHAPTER 14B
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Sec.
14B-1.   Title.
Sec.
14B-2.   Intent and purpose.
Sec.
14B-3.   Definitions.
Sec.
14B-4.   Reserved.
Sec.
14B-5.   Director of the office of management services - powers and duties.
Sec.
14B-6.   Declaration of state of disaster.
Sec.
14B-7.   Mayor - powers and duties.
Sec.
14B-7.1.   Limitation on disaster declaration.
Sec.
14B-8.   State-designated emergency management director and state- designated
emergency management coordinator - powers and duties.
Sec.
14B-9.   Powers and duties of city attorney during disaster.
Sec.
14B-10.   Appointment of special municipal court judges.
Sec.
14B-11.   Emergency management volunteers.
Sec.
14B-12.   Governmental function.
Sec.
14B-13.   Offenses; penalties.
SEC. 14B-1.   TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
Emergency Management Ordinance of the City of Dallas. (Ord. Nos. 15983; 17226;
25834)
SEC. 14B-2.   INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (a)   The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish an emergency
management program that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of
all of the city’s personnel, facilities, and equipment to combat a disaster as
defined in this chapter.
   (b)   This chapter will not relieve any city department or office of the
legal responsibilities or authority delegated to it by statute, ordinance, or
the city charter.
   (c)   Nothing in this chapter may be construed to interfere with the
dissemination of news or comment on public affairs, but any communications
facility or organization, including radio and television stations, wire
services, internet websites, and newspapers, may be required to transmit or
print public service messages furnishing information or instructions in
connection with a disaster or potential disaster. (Ord. Nos. 15983; 17226;
25834; 27697; 33224)
SEC. 14B-3.   DEFINITIONS.
   (1)   CONTRABAND means any article, substance, or property, the possession
or transportation of which is prohibited, that is subject to summary
destruction upon seizure by officers of the law.
   (2)   CURFEW means a regulation requiring withdrawal of persons from
streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings, or
any other public places in all or a delineated part of the city during the
stated hours when the regulation is in effect.
   (3)   DIRECTOR means the director of the office of management services.
   (4)   DISASTER has the meaning assigned to it by Texas Government Code
Chapter 418, as amended.
   (5)   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT means the mitigation of, preparation for,
response to, and recovery from a disaster, and the maintaining of the public
peace, health, and safety during a disaster. The term includes plans and
preparations for protection from, and relief, recovery, and rehabilitation
from, the effects of a disaster. The term does not include any activity that is
the primary responsibility of the military forces of the United States or the
State of Texas.
   (6)   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES means:
      (A)   the employees, equipment, and facilities of all city departments,
offices, boards, institutions, and commissions; and
      (B)   all volunteer personnel, equipment, and facilities contributed by
or obtained from volunteer persons or agencies.
   (7)   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT VOLUNTEER means any person duly registered,
identified, and appointed by the director of the office of management services,
the city manager, or the mayor and assigned to participate in the emergency
management activity.
   (8)   MEDICAL SUPPLY DISTRIBUTOR has the meaning assigned to it by
Subchapter C of Chapter 546 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
   (9)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, association, or other legal
entity.
   (10)   PLACE OF WORSHIP has the meaning assigned to it by Texas Civil
Practice and Remedies Code Chapter 110, as amended.
   (11)   REGULATIONS mean plans, programs, and other emergency procedures
deemed essential to emergency management.
   (12)   STATE-DESIGNATED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR means the mayor of the
city as specified by executive order RP32 of the governor of the State of
Texas.
   (13)   VOLUNTEER means any person contributing service, equipment, or
facilities to the emergency management organization without compensation. (Ord.
Nos. 15983; 17226; 25834; 27697; 33224)
SEC. 14B-4.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 27697)
SEC. 14B-5.   DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT SERVICES - POWERS AND
DUTIES.
   The director shall coordinate the office of emergency management and crisis
response. The director’s duties include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to
augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency management
purposes;
      (2)   developing and coordinating emergency plans for the immediate use
of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower, and other resources of the city
for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and property in
the event of a disaster, and for the purpose of protecting and restoring to
usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public
health, safety, and welfare in the event of a disaster;
      (3)   negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in
control of buildings or other property for the use of those buildings or
property for emergency management purposes and designating suitable buildings
as public shelters;
      (4)   through public informational programs, educating the civilian
population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons
and property in case of impending or present disaster;
      (5)   conducting rehearsals of emergency plans to ensure the efficient
operation of the emergency management forces and to familiarize residents with
emergency management regulations, procedures, and operations;
      (6)   coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies
engaged in any disaster activity within the city; and
      (7)   administering federal and state disaster assistance programs
related to emergency management. (Ord. Nos. 15983; 17226; 25834; 27697; 32864)
SEC. 14B-6.   DECLARATION OF STATE OF DISASTER.
   (a)   If the mayor determines that a local disaster exists, the mayor shall
declare a local state of disaster and invoke emergency powers. Emergency powers
may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except
with the consent of the city council.
   (b)   During any period in which a state of disaster has been declared by
either the mayor or the governor, the city council may convene to perform its
duties as the situation demands, and shall receive reports relative to
emergency management activities. If it becomes necessary for the mayor and city
council to vacate or leave the city limits, the city council shall have full
power and authority to act in matters affecting property or people remaining in
the city limits in the same manner as though the city council were conducting
its business within the city limits. As soon as the city council finds that
emergency powers need not be used to deal with a situation, it shall
immediately proclaim that the state of disaster has terminated.
   (c)   Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a
state of disaster must be filed promptly with the city secretary and given
prompt and general publicity, such as through newspapers, radio, television,
and internet websites. (Ord. Nos. 15983; 17226; 25834; 33224)
SEC. 14B-7.   MAYOR - POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   Except as provided in Section 14B-7.1, during any period that a
disaster order or proclamation, issued by either the mayor or governor, is in
effect, the mayor may promulgate such regulations as he or she deems necessary
to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations
and powers may include, but are not limited to, the power to:
      (1)   prohibit or restrict the movement of vehicles in order to
facilitate the work of emergency management forces or to facilitate the mass
movement of persons from critical areas within or without the city;
      (2)   recommend the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous
or vulnerable to disaster;
      (3)   order a curfew into effect in all or any delineated part of the
city and to exempt from the curfew any person whose movement is essential to
the health, safety, and welfare of the public;
      (4)   order the closing of any place where arms, ammunition, dynamite, or
other explosives are sold, and forbid the sale, barter, loan, or gift of those
items;
      (5)   order the closing of bars, lounges, private clubs, package liquor
stores or any business establishment having a liquor, beer, or wine permit;
gasoline stations; theaters; ball rooms; and public rooms or buildings;
      (6)   prohibit the sale of beer, wine, and intoxicating liquor and
prohibit the sale, distribution, or gift of gasoline or other flammable liquid
or combustible product in any container other than a gasoline tank properly
affixed to a motor vehicle;
      (7)   declare certain items that may be potentially injurious to the
public health or welfare to be contraband and authorize a search for those
items;
      (8)   exclude sightseers from any area where a disaster or emergency is
imminent or has occurred;
      (9)   order the detention of persons who impede or incite others to
impede the preservation or restoration of order;
      (10)   temporarily suspend or modify, for not more than 60 days, any
regulation or ordinance of the city of Dallas, including, but not limited to,
those regarding health, safety, or zoning, if the suspension or modification is
essential to provide temporary housing for disaster victims;
      (11)   promulgate any other regulations necessary to preserve public
peace, health, and safety during a disaster.
   (b)   Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority granted by
this chapter will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published on
the internet and in newspapers and aired on radio and television. These
regulations will have the effect of ordinances when duly filed with the city
secretary. (Ord. Nos. 15983; 17226; 25834; 33224)
SEC. 14B-7.1.   LIMITATION ON DISASTER DECLARATION.
   The mayor, director, state-designated emergency management director, the
state- designated emergency management coordinator, or any other city official
or employee may not issue:
      (1)   Place of worship. An order that closes or has the effect of closing
a place of worship.
      (2)   Construction and related services. An order to address a pandemic
disaster that limits or prohibits:
         (A)   housing and commercial construction activities, including
related activities involving the sale, transportation, and installation of
manufactured homes;
         (B)   the provision of governmental services for title searches,
notary services, and recording services in support of mortgages and real estate
services and transactions;
         (C)   residential and commercial real estate services, including
settlement services; or
         (D)   essential maintenance, manufacturing, design, operation,
inspection, security, and construction services for essential products,
services, and supply chain relief efforts.
      (3)   Medical supply distributor. An order that limits or prohibits
access to highways, streets, and bridges for a vehicle used by a medical supply
distributor to transport prescription drugs and other medical supplies to an
emergency care facility, pharmacy, or nursing home if the transport vehicle
will not negatively impact evacuation activities or any response or recovery
activities in the disaster area. (Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 14B-8.   STATE-DESIGNATED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR AND STATE-
DESIGNATED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR - POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The mayor as the state-designated emergency management director may
designate a person to serve as the state-designated emergency management
coordinator.
   (b)   The state-designated emergency management director and the state-
designated emergency management coordinator shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
      (1)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and other properties,
including, but not limited to, sites required for installation of temporary
housing units and the housing units themselves, found lacking and needed for
the protection of health, life, and property.
      (2)   To require emergency services of any city officer or employee. If
regular city forces are determined inadequate, then to require the services of
such other personnel as he or she can obtain that are available, including
citizen volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services
shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by state law
to other registered and identified emergency management and disaster workers.
      (3)   To cause to be prepared the city of Dallas emergency operations
plan. (Ord. Nos. 15983; 17226; 25834; 33224)
SEC. 14B-9.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY DURING DISASTER.
   During any imminent or present disaster, if the city attorney finds that
additional attorneys are needed to represent the city in the municipal courts
so as to afford alleged offenders a speedy trial, the city attorney shall
appoint, on a temporary basis, the number of special assistant attorneys that
he or she deems necessary. All of these appointments must be submitted to the
city council for confirmation at the earliest practicable date. (Ord. Nos.
15983; 17226; 25834)
SEC. 14B-10.   APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGES.
   During any imminent or present disaster, the city council shall appoint
special municipal court judges, as needed, to ensure the speedy trial of
alleged offenders. These appointments must be acted upon and the length of the
appointment must be determined by the city council at the earliest practicable
date. (Ord. Nos. 15983; 17226; 25834)
SEC. 14B-11.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT VOLUNTEERS.
   If the required knowledge or skill for a disaster function is not available
within the city government, the city manager is authorized to seek assistance
from persons outside of the city government. If a person outside of city
government is assigned duties of a supervisory nature, that person shall have
the authority to perform such duties prior to, during, and after the occurrence
of a disaster, until authorization is withdrawn. Services from persons outside
of government may be accepted by the city on a volunteer basis. These citizens
shall be enrolled as emergency management volunteers in cooperation with the
chief administrative officers of departments or offices affected. (Ord. Nos.
15983; 17226; 25834)
SEC. 14B-12.   GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.
   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for
the protection of the public peace, health, and safety. Neither the city nor
its officers, agents, representatives, or employees, nor any emergency
management volunteer, who is, in good faith, carrying out, complying with or
attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant
to this chapter, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or
property as the result of his or her actions, unless the actions taken or not
taken consisted of willful misconduct, gross negligence, or bad faith. (Ord.
Nos. 15983; 17226; 25834)
SEC. 14B-13.   OFFENSES; PENALTIES.
   (a)   During the period an actual or impending disaster has been declared, a
person shall not:
      (1)   enter or remain upon the premises of any mercantile establishment
not open for business to the general public;
      (2)   possess or transport items designated as contraband by the
director, city manager, mayor, or city council;
      (3)   violate any of the orders duly issued by the director, city
manager, mayor, or city council pursuant to emergency powers authorized by this
chapter, Chapter 418 of the Texas Government Code, or other city, state, or
federal law; or
      (4)   willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization or any peace officer in the enforcement of this
chapter, or any order or regulation issued under authority provided for in this
chapter, Chapter 418 of the Texas Government Code, or other city, state, or
federal law.
   (b)   A person violating any provision of this section, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500. (Ord. Nos.
15983; 17226; 19963; 25834)
CHAPTER 15
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. 20743)
CHAPTER 15A
ELECTIONS
ARTICLE I.
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
Sec.
15A-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
15A-2.   Campaign contribution limitation.
Sec.
15A-3.   Campaign contributions by political committees.
Sec.
15A-4.   Personal services.
Sec.
15A-4.1.   Campaign contributions by applicants in zoning cases and public
subsidy matters and by bidders and proposers on city contracts.
Sec.
15A-5.   Use of legal name.
Sec.
15A-6.   Responsibility of campaign treasurer and candidate.
Sec.
15A-7.   Enforcement.
ARTICLE I-a.
OFFICEHOLDER CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
Sec.
15A-7.1.   Use of officeholder campaign contributions.
Sec.
15A-7.2.   Enforcement.
ARTICLE I-b.
CITY-FUNDED OFFICEHOLDER ACCOUNTS.
Sec.
15A-7.3.   Purpose.
Sec.
15A-7.4.   Use of city-funded officeholder accounts.
Sec.
15A-7.5.   Enforcement.
ARTICLE II.
ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN FINANCE REPORTS.
Sec.
15A-8.   Purpose.
Sec.
15A-9.   Definitions.
Sec.
15A-9.1.   Supplemental reports required.
Sec.
15A-10.   Electronic filing required; defenses; penalty.
Sec.
15A-11.   Computer access; posting of reports; availability of paper copies.
Sec. 15A-12. thru 15A-13.   Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
TEMPORARY POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
Sec.
15A-14.   Definitions.
Sec.
15A-15.   Temporary political campaign signs allowed on public property;
requirements and restrictions.
Sec.
15A-16.   Placement and removal of temporary political campaign signs.
Sec.
15A-17.   Penalty; enforcement.
ARTICLE I.
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
SEC. 15A-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this article have the meanings ascribed to them in Chapter
251, Texas Election Code, as amended, or as defined in this section.
      (1)   CITY-FUNDED OFFICEHOLDER ACCOUNT means, for the purposes of this
chapter, an individual attributable Mayor/Council account that is funded from
the city budget and intended for use by a city council member to cover the
expenses of holding office.
      (2)   CONTRIBUTION means:
         (A)   a direct or indirect transfer of money, goods, services, or any
other thing of value and includes an agreement made or other obligation
incurred, whether legally enforceable or not, to make a transfer. The term
includes a loan or extension of credit, other than those expressly excluded by
this subdivision, and a guarantee of a loan or extension of credit, including a
loan described by this subdivision; or
         (B)   an expenditure made to advocate or influence the election of a
candidate and that is made in cooperation, consultation, or in concert with the
candidate's campaign. The following is considered a contribution within the
meaning of this subparagraph:
            (i)   the expenditure is made at the request or suggestion of the
candidate's campaign;
            (ii)   the individual or political committee suggests the
expenditure and the candidate's campaign assents to the suggestion;
            (iii)   the individual or political committee making the
expenditure communicates with the candidate's campaign before making the
expenditure;
            (iv)   the candidate's campaign has solicited funds for or directed
funds to the individual or political committee making the expenditure, but only
if the expenditure or direction occurred in the 12 months before the election
that the expenditure seeks to influence; or
            (v)   the individual or political committee making the expenditure
uses information from the candidate's campaign to design, prepare, or pay for
the expenditure unless that same information is available to the general
public.
         (C)   The term does not include:
            (i)   a loan made in the due course of business by a corporation
that is legally engaged in the business of lending money and that has conducted
the business continuously for more than one year before the loan is made; or
            (ii)   an expenditure required to be reported under Section 305.006
(b), Government Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 15434; 16718; 21035; 22925; 30391;
30715)
SEC. 15A-2.   CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION LIMITATION.
   (a)   An individual shall not make a contribution of more than:
      (1)   $1,000 per city election in support of, or opposition to, a single
candidate for election to Place Numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, or 14 on the city council; or
      (2)   $5,000 per city election in support of, or opposition to, a single
candidate for election to Place Number 15 on the city council.
   (b)   Each individual is entitled to contribute the full amount of the
limitation established in Subsection (a), regardless of marital status.
   (c)   A political committee shall not:
      (1)   make a contribution of more than $1,000 per contributing member per
city election to a single candidate for election to Place Numbers 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, or 14 on the city council;
      (2)   make a contribution of more than $5,000 per contributing member per
city election to a single candidate for election to Place Number 15 on the city
council; or
      (3)   make a total contribution per city election of more than $2,500 to
a candidate for a single- member district nor more than $10,000 to a candidate
for mayor.
   (d)   For the purpose of this article an initial election and a runoff
election are separate elections. (Ord. Nos. 15434; 16105; 16718; 18403; 21035)
SEC. 15A-3.   CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS BY POLITICAL COMMITTEES.
   (a)   A general purpose political committee that makes a contribution to
support or oppose a candidate for election to the city council or a city
measure shall file with the city secretary:
      (1)   a copy of the latest campaign treasurer designation, a verified
statement of the number of contributing members of the committee, and a copy of
the monthly reports filed with the Texas Ethics Commission:
         (A)   for the three months immediately preceding the date of the
contribution; and
         (B)   for the two months immediately following the date of the
contribution; or
      (2)   if the committee does not file monthly reports with the Texas
Ethics Commission, then reports on the dates and covering the reporting periods
required by state law for candidates or measures, whichever apply.
   (b)   A general purpose political committee shall make its initial filing
with the city secretary no later than five business days following the date of
its first contribution to support or oppose a candidate for city council or a
city measure, the initial filing to include the required campaign treasurer
designation, the verified statement of the number of contributing members of
the committee, and copies of reports filed with the Texas Ethics Commission for
the preceding three months, if the committee files monthly with the Texas
Ethics Commission. Subsequent monthly reports filed by general purpose
political committees must be filed with the city secretary by the deadline and
covering the reporting periods designated in Chapter 254, Texas Election Code,
for monthly reports filed with the Texas Ethics Commission.
   (c)   Specific purpose political committees must file campaign reports with
the city secretary in accordance with Chapter 254, Texas Election Code. (Ord.
Nos. 15434; 16105; 16718; 21035; 22925; 27146)
SEC. 15A-4.   PERSONAL SERVICES.
   An individual may donate personal services and personal traveling expenses
to aid or defeat a candidate and such a donation does not constitute a
contribution as defined in Section 251.001 of the Texas Election Code. (Ord.
Nos. 15434; 16718; 21035)
SEC. 15A-4.1.   CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS BY APPLICANTS IN ZONING CASES AND PUBLIC
SUBSIDY MATTERS AND BY BIDDERS AND PROPOSERS ON CITY CONTRACTS.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   AFFILIATED means the relationship created when one business entity
is the parent or subsidiary of another business entity or when multiple
business entities are subsidiaries of the same parent business entity.
      (2)   APPLICANT means any person who:
         (A)   owns all or part of the property that is the subject of a zoning
case or public subsidy matter;
         (B)   is a parent, child, spouse, or other family member within the
first degree of consanguinity or affinity, or the domestic partner, of:
            (i)   the property owner; or
            (ii)   any individual described in Paragraph (2)(E) of this
subsection;
         (C)   is a representative of the property owner in connection with the
zoning case or public subsidy matter, and, if the representative is an entity,
includes any individual who holds with the entity any position described in
Paragraph (2)(E)(i) through (vii) of this subsection;
         (D)   is affiliated with the property owner; or
         (E)   if the property owner is an entity, is an individual who holds
any of the following positions with the entity or with any affiliated business
entity:
            (i)   the chief executive officer, chief financial officer, or
chief operating officer, or any person with equivalent duties, powers, and
functions;
            (ii)   a member of the board of directors of a corporation;
            (iii)   a general partner of a general partnership or limited
partnership;
            (iv)   a manager of a limited liability company that is managed by
managers;
            (v)   a member of a limited liability company that is managed by
members entitled to manage the company;
            (vi)   a member of the board of directors of a cooperative
association; or
            (vii)   a trust manager of a real estate investment trust.
      (3)   CANDIDATE means a person who has filed an application with the city
secretary for a place on the official ballot in an impending election for one
or more members of the Dallas city council.
      (4)   PUBLIC SUBSIDY MATTER means any of the following:
         (A)   A tax abatement.
         (B)   A housing tax credit.
         (C)   An historic development tax abatement.
         (D)   Federal grant money administered by the city.
         (E)   Tax increment financing.
         (F)   An economic development grant or loan.
   (b)   An applicant in a zoning case shall not (either personally or through
a representative, employee, or agent) knowingly make a campaign contribution to
a city council member or candidate during the period between the date the first
notices of a public hearing to consider the zoning case by the city plan
commission are mailed and the later of:
      (1)   60 days after the zoning case is withdrawn pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(f) of the Dallas City Code;
      (2)   60 days after the date a decision of the city plan commission on
the zoning case becomes final and all opportunities for appeal are exhausted;
or
      (3)   60 days after the date a final decision on the zoning case is made
by the city council either granting or denying the request.
   (c)   Subsection (b) does not apply to a change of zoning for historic
districts, conservation districts, or neighborhood stabilization overlays.
   (d)   An applicant in a public subsidy matter shall not (either personally
or through a representative, employee, or agent) knowingly make a campaign
contribution to a city council member or candidate
from the time the matter is posted on a council committee agenda or a council
agenda, whichever occurs first, until 60 days after the date the city council
votes on the public subsidy matter or the application for the public subsidy
matter is withdrawn by the applicant.
   (e)   A person responding to a request for bids or request for proposals on
a city contract shall not (either personally or through a representative,
employee, or agent) knowingly make a campaign contribution to a city council
member or candidate from the time the advertisement or public notification of
the request for bids or request for proposals is made until 60 days after the
date the contract is awarded by the city council. For purposes of this
subsection, "person" includes:
      (1)   any individual responding to the request for bids or proposals;
      (2)   any entity responding to the request for bids or proposals and its
affiliated business entities;
      (3)   if the person responding to the request for bids or proposals is an
entity, any individual who holds with the entity (or with any affiliated
business entity) any position described in Subsection (a)(2)(E)(i) through
(vii) of this section;
      (4)   the parent, child, spouse, or other family member within the first
degree of consanguinity or affinity, or the domestic partner, of any individual
described in Paragraph (1) or (3) of this subsection; and
      (5)   a representative of the bidder or proposer in connection with the
city contract, and, if the representative is an entity, includes any individual
who holds with the entity any position described in Subsection (a)(2)(E)(i)
through (vii) of this section.
   (f)   This section applies to a campaign contribution made to any specific-
purpose political committee that will ultimately contribute to an identified
city council member or candidate, and any campaign contribution made to the
specific-purpose political committee during the time restrictions imposed by
this section will be considered to have been made to that city council member
or candidate. The time restrictions imposed by this section do not apply to
when the specific-purpose political committee makes a campaign contribution to
the identified city council member or candidate.
   (g)   This section applies to a campaign contribution made by any political
committee established, administered, financially supported, or assisted
pursuant to state or federal law by a corporation or labor organization that is
an applicant in a zoning case or public subsidy matter or that is the person
responding to a request for bids or proposals on a city contract. The time
restrictions imposed by this section do not apply to when an individual
campaign contribution is received by the political committee, but only to when
the political committee actually makes the campaign contribution to the city
council member or candidate.
   (h)   Except as provided in Subsection (g), this section does not apply to a
campaign contribution made to or by any general-purpose political committee.
(Ord. Nos. 27749; 28169; 28239; 30489)
SEC. 15A-5.   USE OF LEGAL NAME.
   (a)   An individual shall not make a contribution in support of, or
opposition to, a candidate for city council under a name other than the name by
which the individual is identified for legal purposes.
   (b)   A contribution must be made in the name of the individual who owns and
is contributing the thing of value, and one individual shall not make a
contribution on behalf of another individual. (Ord. Nos. 15434; 16718; 21035)
SEC. 15A-6.   RESPONSIBILITY OF CAMPAIGN TREASURER AND CANDIDATE.
   (a)   A campaign treasurer for a political committee shall file reports
required by this article. Failure to file a timely report required by this
article constitutes an offense.
   (b)   A candidate for city council or the candidate’s campaign treasurer
shall not knowingly accept a contribution that will cause the amount
contributed to a candidate by an individual or a political committee, with
respect to a single city council election, to exceed the amount authorized in
Section
15A-2. (Ord. Nos. 15434; 16105; 16718; 21035)
SEC. 15A-7.   ENFORCEMENT.
   The ethics advisory commission has jurisdiction to consider a violation of
this article pursuant to the procedures detailed in
Chapter 12A of this code. (Ord. Nos. 16718; 21035; 30715)
ARTICLE I-a.
OFFICEHOLDER CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
SEC. 15A-7.1.   USE OF OFFICEHOLDER CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (a)   An officeholder who lawfully accepts officeholder campaign
contributions, as defined in the Texas Election Code, shall not use more than
$100 in officeholder campaign contributions per city election for campaign
expenditures for the officeholder's campaign for election to the city council.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section an initial election and a runoff
election are separate elections.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section
that the officeholder campaign contribution was used for a campaign expenditure
before March 1, 2015. (Ord. Nos. 29663; 30391)
SEC. 15A-7.2.   ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   If the city secretary receives a written complaint alleging a
violation of this article, the city secretary shall forward this information to
the city attorney for investigation and appropriate enforcement action, if
warranted.
   (b)   The Ethics Advisory Commission shall have jurisdiction to consider a
violation of this article pursuant to the procedures detailed in
Chapter 12A. (Ord. Nos. 29663; 30391)
ARTICLE I-b.
CITY-FUNDED OFFICEHOLDER ACCOUNTS.
SEC. 15A-7.3.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this article is to:
      (1)   ensure that city-funded officeholder accounts are used only for
public purposes;
      (2)   ensure that city-funded officeholder accounts are not used as a
gift or transfer of public funds to individuals or entities;
      (3)   prohibit the use of city-funded officeholder accounts for campaign
purposes; and
      (4)   ensure the city-funded officeholder accounts are used in compliance
with Texas Election Commission rules, regulations, and opinions. (Ord. 30391)
SEC. 15A-7.4.   USE OF CITY-FUNDED OFFICEHOLDER ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   Compliance with procurement requirements. Expenses from city-funded
officeholder accounts must comply with the city's administrative directive and
state law regarding procurements.
   (b)   Test for allowable expenses. City-funded officeholder accounts may
only be used for official city business. An expense is for official city
business if the expense:
      (1)   serves a public purpose of the city of Dallas, rather than serving
a personal purpose or campaign purpose;
      (2)   helps to defray the cost of holding public office;
      (3)   is a reasonable amount for the goods or services purchased;
      (4)   is not a prohibited gift or transfer of public funds to an
individual or entity; and
      (5)   is consistent with Texas Election Commission rules, regulations,
and opinions for non-campaign expenses of officeholders.
   (c)   Opinions. City council members may request an opinion from the city
attorney pursuant to Section
12A-33 as to whether an expense is allowed under this article and
Chapter 12A. An opinion issued under this subsection is not binding on the
Texas Election Commission.
   (d)   Permissible expenses. The following list illustrates permissible
expenses for city-funded officeholder accounts (this is not an exhaustive
list):
      (1)   Office supplies and equipment used in the city council member's
office.
      (2)   Duplicating, printing, postage, courier service, and express mail
expenses.
      (3)   Reimbursement for use of personal vehicles that are consistent with
administrative directives.
      (4)   Telephone and cell phone expenses.
      (5)   Conferences, seminars, and training expenses.
      (6)   Reimbursement for mileage charges for use of city vehicles.
      (7)   Membership dues or fees in community service or civic
organizations.
      (8)   Business entertainment expenses that are consistent with
administrative directives.
      (9)   Ceremonial and protocol items.
      (10)   Supplemental temporary help and overtime.
      (11)   Reimbursement of travel expenses that are consistent with
administrative directives.
      (12)   Newsletters to constituents that are not campaign communications,
and determined by Texas Election Commission rules, regulations, or opinions.
      (13)   Nonpolitical advertising.
      (14)   An individual ticket for a city council member to events that are
related to city business where the council member is attending as a
representative of the city.
   (e)   Impermissible expenses. The following list illustrates impermissible
expenses for city-funded officeholder accounts (this is not an exhaustive
list):
      (1)   Purchase of city property, including unclaimed or surplus city
property, and including any furniture or equipment used in the city council
member's office, for personal use by a current city council member or a former
city council member.
      (2)   Membership dues or fees in athletic clubs, social clubs, or any
other organization not allowed by administrative directives.
      (3)   Any type of sponsorship of city or non-city events, such as
purchasing a table at a fundraiser event or providing funds in exchange for
being listed as an event sponsor.
      (4)   Purchase of food, drink, decorations, caterers, audio-visual, or
supplies for non-city events.
      (5)   Hiring individuals or entities to provide products or services,
such as improvements to a park or purchase of street furniture, that are not
related to the cost of holding public office.
      (6)   Promotional items intended primarily to promote the public image of
the city council member.
      (7)   Expenses to acquire or manage software used to maintain mail or
email lists of constituents for personal or campaign purposes.
      (8)   Any campaign expenditure, campaign contribution, political
advertising, or campaign communication as defined in Title 15, "Regulating
Political Funds and Campaigns," of the Texas Election Code and Texas Election
Commission rules, regulations, and opinions.
      (9)   Use of city employees or city supplies for campaign purposes or for
the personal business of the city council member.
   (f)   Deficits and surpluses.
      (1)   Expenditures from a city-funded officeholder account may not exceed
the amount allocated by the city manager for that city-funded officeholder
account. City council members who exceed the budgeted amount of their city-
funded officeholder account shall be personally liable for the amount exceeded.
      (2)   Funds may not be transferred from one city-funded officeholder
account to another city-funded officeholder account.
      (3)   Any surplus remaining in a city-funded officeholder account at the
end of a fiscal year reverts to the fund from which the monies were
appropriated.
   (g)   Campaign contributions and donations.
      (1)   Campaign contributions may not be deposited into the city-funded
officeholder account. Instead, campaign contributions should be deposited into
a campaign account maintained by the city council member separate from the city
financial system.
      (2)   Donations made to the city may not be earmarked for use by specific
city council members. Donations to the city must comply with Section 12A-5.1.
   (h)   Reporting.
      (1)   City council members must file an annual statement with the City
Secretary itemizing expenses paid from city-funded officeholder accounts during
the prior fiscal year. The annual statement must be on a form provided by the
City Secretary and filed with the City Secretary no later than 5:00 p.m. on
April 30 or when the council member vacates office, whichever is sooner. If
April 30 is a Saturday, Sunday, city holiday, or furlough day, the deadline is
extended to 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. The annual statement must
include to whom the expense was paid, the date the expense was paid, a
description of the expense, and the dollar amount of the expense.
      (2)   These reporting requirements are in addition to any reporting
requirements set out in the Dallas City Code or state law. (Ord. 30391)
SEC. 15A-7.5.   ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   If the city secretary receives a written complaint alleging a
violation of this article, the city secretary shall forward this information to
the city attorney for investigation and appropriate enforcement action, if
warranted.
   (b)   The Ethics Advisory Commission shall have jurisdiction to consider a
violation of this article pursuant to the procedures detailed in
Chapter 12A.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if that person discriminates against,
harasses, threatens, harms, damages, penalizes, or otherwise retaliates against
any person for refusing to violate this article; filing a complaint alleging a
violation of this article; or for testifying, assisting, or participating in an
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this article. (Ord. 30391)
ARTICLE II.
ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN FINANCE REPORTS.
SEC. 15A-8.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to require, with certain defenses, that
campaign finance reports and supplemental reports required to be filed with the
city secretary by a city officeholder, a candidate for city elective office, or
a political committee (whether general purpose or specific purpose) be filed in
an electronic format, and to require that filers indicate the amount of
officeholder contributions used for campaign expenditures, distinguish between
campaign and officeholder contributions, and distinguish between campaign and
officeholder expenditures. It is the intent of this article that the
requirement of filing campaign finance reports and supplemental reports in an
electronic format will not inconvenience those required to file such reports
and will afford persons interested in the information contained in the reports
easier access and an efficient means by which such information may be examined
or extracted. (Ord. Nos. 27146; 29663)
SEC. 15A-9.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this article:
      (1)   ELECTRONIC FORMAT means:
         (A)   for a filer other than a general purpose political committee, a
format approved by the Texas Ethics Commission for use in the city of Dallas
through which a report is entered, sent, and received through an electronic
filing system provided by the city; or
         (B)   for a general purpose political committee, the electronic medium
in which the committee filed its report with the Texas Ethics Commission under
Section 254.036 of the Texas Election Code, as amended.
      (2)   FILER means the holder of a city elective office, any candidate for
a city elective office, a political committee (whether general purpose or
specific purpose) acting through a duly authorized representative, or any
individual required to file a report under this chapter or Chapter 254 of the
Texas Election Code, as amended.
      (3)   REPORT means a campaign finance report required to be filed with
the city secretary under this chapter or Chapter 254 of the Texas Election
Code, as amended, and includes any updates, corrections, or amendments to a
campaign finance report.
      (4)   SUPPLEMENTAL REPORT means a document that:
         (A)   states the total dollar amount of any officeholder contributions
that were used for campaign expenditures during the reporting period;
         (B)   indicates, for each political contribution listed in a report as
received on or after March 1, 2015, whether that contribution is a campaign
contribution or an officeholder contribution; and
         (C)   indicates, for each political expenditure listed in a report as
spent on or after March 1, 2015, whether that expenditure is a campaign
expenditure or an officeholder expenditure.
   (b)   Terms not defined in this article but defined in Title 15 of the Texas
Election Code, as amended, have the meanings ascribed to them in Title 15 of
the Texas Election Code. (Ord. Nos. 27146; 29663)
SEC. 15A-9.1.   SUPPLEMENTAL REPORTS REQUIRED.
   (a)   When this chapter or Chapter 254 of the Texas Election Code, as
amended, requires that a filer file a report, the filer must also file a
supplemental report in the form and manner directed by the city secretary.
   (b)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500. (Ord. 29663)
SEC. 15A-10.   ELECTRONIC FILING REQUIRED; DEFENSES; PENALTY.
   (a)   A filer commits an offense if the filer fails to timely file a report
or a supplemental report with the city secretary in an electronic format. To be
timely, an electronic report must be time and date stamped as having been
received on the city’s server by 5 p.m. on the last day permitted for filing
the particular report under Chapter 254 of the Texas Election Code, as amended.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section
that:
      (1)   the filer:
         (A)   (or an agent of the filer or a person with whom the filer
contracts) does not use computer equipment to keep the current records of
political contributions, political expenditures, or persons making political
contributions to the filer; and
         (B)   does not, in a calendar year, accept political contributions
that in the aggregate exceed $1,000 or make political expenditures that in the
aggregate exceed $1,000; or
      (2)   the filer is an individual not acting in concert with another
person who makes one or more direct campaign expenditures in an election from
the individual’s own property that exceed $100 on any one or more candidates or
measures if the individual complies with Chapter 254 of the Texas Election
Code, as amended, as if the individual were a campaign treasurer of a political
committee and the individual receives no reimbursement for the expenditures.
   (c)   A filer wishing to assert a defense described in Subsection (b) of
this section shall file with the city secretary an affidavit, sworn under
penalty of perjury, identifying the asserted defense and stating that the filer
qualifies for the defense. A separate affidavit must be filed with each report
that is not filed in an electronic format as required by this article.
   (d)   A filer who files an affidavit under Subsection (c) of this section
asserting a defense for a particular report shall file that report with the
city secretary in a non-electronic form prescribed by the Texas Ethics
Commission pursuant to Section 254.036 of the Texas Election Code, as amended.
   (e)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500. (Ord. Nos. 27146; 29663)
SEC. 15A-11.   COMPUTER ACCESS; POSTING OF REPORTS; AVAILABILITY OF PAPER
COPIES.
   (a)   The city will provide publicly accessible computer terminals for
filers to file reports and supplemental reports in an electronic format.
   (b)   The city will post the electronic reports on the city’s website.
   (c)   The city will make available, upon request, a paper copy of a report
that conforms to the same format and paper size as the form prescribed by the
Texas Ethics Commission pursuant to Section 254.036 of the Texas Election Code,
as amended. (Ord. Nos. 27146; 29663)
SECS. 15A-12. THRU 15A-13. RESERVED.  
(Ord. 27146)
ARTICLE III.
TEMPORARY POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
SEC. 15A-14.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   PUBLIC PROPERTY means any property owned or operated by a
governmental entity that is open to the public and used for a public purpose.
“Public property” includes, but is not limited to, a library, park, school, or
government building.
      (2)   TEMPORARY POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGN means a sign that refers only to
the issues or candidates involved in an election that has been ordered by a
governmental entity. (Ord. 28221)
SEC. 15A-15.   TEMPORARY POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGNS ALLOWED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY;
REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   A temporary political campaign sign may be placed in accordance with
this article on public property that serves as an early voting location or
election day voting location for an election that has been ordered by a
governmental entity. Only signs that refer to a candidate or issue that is on
the ballot at a particular voting location may be placed at that voting
location.
   (b)   A temporary political sign placed on public property under this
article may not:
      (1)   have an effective area greater than 20 square feet;
      (2)   be more than eight feet high;
      (3)   be illuminated;
      (4)   have any moving elements;
      (5)   be placed in or over any public right-of- way; or
      (6)   project more than 18 inches from a wall, roof, parapet, or eaves.
   (c)   Nothing in this article authorizes a person to place a temporary
political campaign sign:
      (1)   on public property owned or operated by a governmental entity,
other than the city, if such placement is not allowed by the governmental
entity; or
      (2)   in a form, manner, or location prohibited by another city ordinance
or state or federal law. (Ord. 28221)
SEC. 15A-16.   PLACEMENT AND REMOVAL OF TEMPORARY POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGNS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person:
      (1)   places, or causes the placement of, a temporary political campaign
sign on public property in violation of any provision of Section
15A-15;
      (2)   places, or causes the placement of, a temporary political campaign
sign on public property earlier than:
         (A)   two calendar days before commencement of early voting, if the
sign is being placed at an early voting location; or
         (B)   two calendar days before election day, if the sign is being
placed at an election day voting location;
      (3)   fails to remove all temporary political campaign signs that the
person placed, or caused to be placed, from the public property not later than:
         (A)   two calendar days after the last day of early voting, if the
sign is placed at an early voting location; or
         (B)   two calendar days after election day, if the sign is placed at
an election day voting location; or
      (4)   fails to remove any temporary political campaign sign that the
person placed, or caused to be placed, from the public property within 24 hours
after notification from the city that the sign is in violation of this article.
   (b)   The city may, without notice, confiscate and dispose of any sign that
is:
      (1)   placed in violation of this article; or
      (2)   not removed as required by this article. (Ord. 28221)
SEC. 15A-17.   PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT.
   A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed,
continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500. (Ord. 28221)
CHAPTER 15B
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY CONTRACT COMPLIANCE
Sec.
15B-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
15B-2.   Contract compliance enforcement.
Sec.
15B-3.   Equal employment opportunity clause.
Sec.
15B-4.   Notice to bidders.
Sec.
15B-5.   Contract disposition.
Sec.
15B-6.   Recommendation and hearing before city council.
Sec.
15B-7.   Cancellation provisions.
SEC. 15B-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   AFFIRMATIVE ACTION means the positive steps taken to ensure
compliance with the equal employment opportunity clause described in Section
15B-3 of this chapter.
      (2)   BIDDER means any person, partnership, corporation, association, or
joint venture seeking to be awarded a contract.
      (3)   CITY MANAGER means the city manager of the city of Dallas or the
city manager's designated representative.
      (4)   CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT means any public contract for the
construction, rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, extension, or repair of
city facilities.
      (5)   CONTRACTOR means any person, partnership, corporation, association,
or joint venture that has been awarded a contract by the city.
      (6)   DISCRIMINATE, DISCRIMINATES, OR DISCRIMINATION means to
distinguish, differentiate, separate, or segregate solely on the basis of race,
color, age, religion, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity and
expression, genetic characteristics, national origin, disability, military or
veteran status, sex, political opinions or affiliations.
      (7)   SEXUAL ORIENTATION has the meaning assigned to it in Chapter 34 of
the Dallas City Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 14486; 20989; 24927; 30828)
SEC. 15B-2.   CONTRACT COMPLIANCE ENFORCEMENT.
   The city manager shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement
of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 14486; 20989)
SEC. 15B-3.   EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY CLAUSE.
   All construction contracts entered into by the city involving the
expenditure of more than $10,000 of city funds and all competitively bid
contracts for the procurement of goods and services involving an expenditure of
more than $50,000 of city funds must incorporate an equal employment
opportunity clause, which reads as follows:
      (1)   The contractor shall not discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment because of race, color, age, religion, marital status,
sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, genetic characteristics,
national origin, disability, military or veteran status, sex, political
opinions or affiliations. The contractor shall take affirmative action to
ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during
employment, without regard to race, age, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, or national origin. This action shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
         (A)   employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer;
         (B)   recruitment or recruitment advertising;
         (C)   layoff or termination;
         (D)   rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and
         (E)   selection for training, including apprenticeship.
      (2)   The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to
employees and applicants, notices to be provided by the city setting forth the
provisions of the nondiscrimination clause described in Subsection (1) of this
section.
      (3)   The contractor shall in all solicitations or advertisements for
employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor state that every qualified
applicant will receive consideration for employment without regard to race,
age, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, or national origin.
      (4)   The contractor shall furnish all information and reports required
by the city manager and shall permit the city manager to investigate the
contractor’s payrolls and personnel records that pertain to current contracts
with the city for purposes of ascertaining compliance with this equal
employment opportunity clause.
      (5)   The contractor shall file compliance reports with the city as may
be required by the city manager. Compliance reports must:
         (A)   be filed within the required time period;
         (B)   contain information as to the employment practices, policies,
programs, and statistics of the contractor; and
         (C)    be in the form that the city manager prescribes.
      (6)   If the contractor fails to comply with this equal employment
opportunity clause, it is agreed that the city, at its option, may do either or
both of the following:
         (A)   Cancel, terminate, or suspend the contract in whole or in part.
         (B)   Declare the contractor ineligible for further city contracts
until the contractor is determined to be in compliance.
      (7)   Nothing in the equal opportunity clause requires that employee
benefits be provided to an employee for the benefit of the employee’s domestic
partner. (Ord. Nos. 14486; 20989; 24927; 30828)
SEC. 15B-4.   NOTICE TO BIDDERS.
   All notices to prospective bidders published on behalf of the city must
include as a part of the contract specifications that each bidder will be
required to comply with
Chapter 15B, “Equal Employment Opportunity Contract Compliance,” of the Dallas
City Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 14486; 20989)
SEC. 15B-5.   CONTRACT DISPOSITION.
   (a)   If a contractor fails to cooperate in reaching a mutually satisfactory
solution to any equal employment problem or to implement a contract compliance
agreement previously made, the city manager shall review the case to determine
whether:
      (1)    further efforts or alternative approaches are desirable; or
      (2)    either of the penalties set forth in Section
15B-3(6) is appropriate to the case.
   (b)   If the city manager determines that the contractor has violated or
failed to comply with any requirement of the equal employment opportunity
clause of the contract, after affording the contractor a reasonable time to
correct the situation and where negotiations have been of no avail, the city
manager shall make a finding under Subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
and shall transmit that finding and a recommendation to the city council. (Ord.
Nos. 14486; 20989)
SEC. 15B-6.   RECOMMENDATION AND HEARING BEFORE CITY COUNCIL.
   (a)   Upon receiving the recommendation of the city manager, the city
council shall, within 30 days, set a hearing to consider the recommendation, at
which hearing the contractor will be given an opportunity to be heard. The city
council has authority either to find in favor of the contractor, or if the city
council determines that the contractor has violated or failed to comply with
any requirement of the equal employment opportunity clause of the contract, the
city council may do either or both of the following:
      (1)   Cancel, terminate, or suspend the contract in whole or in part.
      (2)   Declare the contractor ineligible for further city contracts until
the contractor is determined to be in compliance.
   (b)   The decision of the city council is final. (Ord. Nos. 14486; 20989)
SEC. 15B-7.   CANCELLATION PROVISIONS.
   Each construction contract of more than $10,000 and each competitively bid
contract for the procurement of goods and services of more than $50,000 must
contain provisions governing the terms of cancellation or termination. (Ord.
Nos. 14486; 20989)
CHAPTER 15C
EMERGENCY REPORTING EQUIPMENT AND PROCEDURES
ARTICLE I.
ALARMS RESPONDED TO BY THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
Sec.
15C-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
15C-2.   Permit required; application; fees; transferability; false statements.
Sec.
15C-2.1.   Alarm systems in apartment complexes.
Sec.
15C-3.   Permit duration and renewal.
Sec.
15C-4.   Proper alarm system operation and maintenance.
Sec.
15C-5.   Reserved.
Sec.
15C-6.   Requirements for the use of state- licensed alarm companies and
relaying intermediaries.
Sec.
15C-7.   Monitoring procedures.
Sec.
15C-7.1.   Requirements for alarm companies.
Sec.
15C-8.   Direct alarm reporting; automatic alarm notification.
Sec.
15C-9.   Alarm system operating instructions.
Sec.
15C-10.   Alarm dispatch records.
Sec.
15C-11.   System performance reviews.
Sec.
15C-12.   Service fees; payment plan.
Sec.
15C-13.   Revocation of an alarm permit.
Sec.
15C-14.   Notice of denial or revocation of a permit; appeals.
Sec.
15C-14.1.   Reinstatement of permit.
Sec.
15C-15.   Reserved.
Sec.
15C-16.   Violations; penalty; corporations, partnerships and associations.
Sec.
15C-17.   Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
ALARMS RESPONDED TO BY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
Division 1. In General.
Sec.
15C-18.   Purpose.
Sec.
15C-19.   Definitions.
Sec.
15C-20.   Proper alarm system operation and maintenance.
Sec.
15C-21.   Reporting of alarm signals.
Sec.
15C-22.   Indirect alarm reporting.
Sec.
15C-23.   Alarm system operating instructions.
Sec.
15C-24.   Alarm dispatch records.
Sec.
15C-25.   System performance reviews.
Sec.
15C-26.   Violations; penalty; corporations, partnerships and associations.
Sec.
15C-27.   Appeal of service fees.
Division 2. Fire Alarms.
Sec.
15C-28.   Registration of alarm system.
Sec.
15C-29.   Service fee for false fire alarm notification.
Sec.
15C-30.   Waiver of service fee.
Division 3. Medical Alarms.
Sec.
15C-31.   Registration of alarm system.
Sec.
15C-32.   Service fee for false medical alarm notification.
Sec.
15C-33.   Waiver of service fee.
ARTICLE I.
ALARMS RESPONDED TO BY THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
SEC. 15C-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   ALARM COMPANY means any person who sells, installs, services, or
monitors an alarm system.
      (2)   ALARM NOTIFICATION means a notification from an alarm system that
is:
         
         (A)   intended to summon the police; and
         (B)   designed to be initiated either:
            (i)   purposely by a person; or
            (ii)   automatically by a response to a stimulus characteristic of
unauthorized intrusion.
      (3)   ALARM SITE means a single premises or location served by an alarm
system or systems that are under the control of one person.
      (4)   ALARM SYSTEM means a device or system that emits, transmits, or
relays a signal intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to
summon the police services of the city. “Alarm system” includes, but is not
limited to, local alarms. “Alarm system” does not include:
         (A)   an alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is used for
a habitation at a permanent site; or
         (B)   an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises
that does not have a local alarm.
      (5)   CHIEF means the chief of police of the city or an authorized
representative.
      (6)   CONVERSION means the transaction or process by which one alarm
company begins monitoring an alarm system previously monitored by another alarm
company.
      (7)   DURESS ALARM means the deliberate activation of a silent alarm by
entering at a keypad a code that is different from the normal arm/disarm code,
or by a separate deliberate act at another device.
      (8)   FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION means:
         (A)   a burglar alarm notification to the police department from a
commercial or residential alarm site, when the responding officer arrives
within 30 minutes after receipt of the alarm notification and, upon inspection
of the interior or exterior of the premises, finds no evidence of a criminal
offense or attempted criminal offense; or
         (B)   a holdup, panic, or duress alarm notification to the police
department from a commercial or residential alarm site, when the responding
officer arrives after receipt of the alarm notification and finds no evidence
of a holdup, panic, or duress situation.
      (9)   HOLDUP ALARM means a silent alarm generated by the deliberate
activation of a holdup device.
      (10)   KEYPAD means a device that allows control of an alarm system by
the manual entering of a coded sequence of numbers or letters.
      (11)   LOCAL ALARM means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm
site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure.
      (12)   MONITORING means the process by which an alarm company receives
signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm notification to the police.
      (13)   ONE PLUS means a feature of an alarm system that allows the manual
activation of a silent alarm signal by entering, at the keypad, a code that
increases the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code by one.
      (14)   PANIC ALARM means an audible alarm generated by the deliberate
activation of a panic device.
      (15)   PERMIT HOLDER means the person designated in the application as
required in Section
15C-2(d)(1) who is responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to
the site and who is also responsible for proper maintenance and operation of
the alarm system and payment of fees.
      (16)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, partnership, association,
organization, or similar entity. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 19854; 20112; 21026; 22038;
22571; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-2.   PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEES; TRANSFERABILITY; FALSE
STATEMENTS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an
alarm system at a commercial or residential alarm site without a valid alarm
permit issued under this article. A separate permit is required for each alarm
site.
   (b)   The chief shall refuse police response to any alarm notification from
a commercial or residential alarm site that does not have a valid alarm permit,
unless the alarm notification was:
      (1)   a duress alarm;
      (2)   a hold up alarm;
      (3)   a panic alarm; or
      (4)   reported to a 9-1-1 emergency telephone number or to the police
department by a person other than an alarm company.
   (c)   The nonrefundable fee for an annual permit, an annual permit renewal,
or a permit reinstatement is:
      (1)   $50 for a residential alarm site;
      (2)   $50 for a residential unit of an apartment complex;
      (3)   $50 for a master alarm permit for an apartment complex;
      (4)   $50 for the nonresidential areas of an apartment complex; and
      (5)   $100 for a commercial alarm site.
   (d)   An application for an alarm permit must be made on a form provided by
the chief and include the following information:
      (1)   the name, address, telephone number, and driver’s license number
(or, if the person does not have a driver’s license, the number on any other
government-issued personal identification card containing a photograph) of the
person who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper
maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed
under this article;
      (2)   the classification of the alarm site as either residential or
commercial;
      (3)   identification of the alarm system as either a burglar alarm
system, a holdup, panic, or duress alarm system, or a combination of alarm
systems; and
      (4)   other information required by the chief that is necessary for the
enforcement of this article.
   (e)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed application form, the
chief shall approve issuance of an alarm permit to the applicant by the special
collections division of the Dallas water utilities department, unless:
      (1)   the applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under
Section
15C-12 for which a bill had been issued and for which a payment plan has not
been established under Section
15C-12(d);
      (2)   the applicant has had an alarm permit for the alarm site revoked,
and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected;
      (3)   the applicant has made a false statement of a material matter for
the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit; or
      (4)   the alarm system for which a permit is requested has had eight or
more false alarm notifications within the preceding 12-month period.
   (f)   Approval by the chief does not authorize the applicant to operate an
alarm system until the applicant pays the applicable permit fee required in
Subsection (c) to the special collections division of the Dallas water
utilities department and obtains an alarm permit.
   (g)   An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person or to another
alarm site. A permit holder shall inform the chief of any change that alters
any information listed on the permit application within two business days. No
fee will be assessed for such changes. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 19854; 20112; 20736;
21026; 21057; 22038; 22571; 22910; 24743; 26134; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-2.1.   ALARM SYSTEMS IN APARTMENT COMPLEXES.
   (a)   A tenant of an apartment complex shall obtain an alarm permit from the
chief before operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in the
tenant’s residential unit.
   (b)   The owner or property manager of an apartment complex in which an
alarm system is installed in one or more individual residential units shall
obtain a master alarm permit from the chief.
   (c)   For purposes of assessing service fees and enforcing this article
against an individual residential unit of an apartment complex:
      (1)   the tenant is responsible for payment of all service fees for any
false alarm notification emitted from the alarm system in the tenant’s
residential unit; and
      (2)   the master alarm permit holder is responsible for payment of all
service fees for any false alarm notification emitted from an alarm system in
any unoccupied residential unit in the apartment complex.
   (d)   The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a
separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a nonresidential area of
the apartment complex, including, but not limited to, common tenant areas and
office, storage, and equipment areas. (Ord. Nos. 20112; 22038; 22571; 26200;
26919)
SEC. 15C-3.   PERMIT DURATION AND RENEWAL.
   A permit expires one year after the date of issuance and must be renewed
annually by submitting an updated application and a permit renewal fee, when
required, in accordance with Section
15C-2 of this chapter. Before terminating a permit for nonrenewal, the chief
shall provide 30 days prior written notice to the permit holder of the need to
renew the permit and file an updated permit application. (Ord. Nos. 17586;
20112; 21026; 22038; 22571; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-4.   PROPER ALARM SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall:
      (1)   maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that
ensures proper operation of the alarm system;
      (2)   maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false
alarm notifications;
      (3)   respond or cause a representative to respond within 45 minutes
after being notified by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm
system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the
premises; and
      (4)   not intentionally activate an alarm for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   (b)   A person in control of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or
cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal, after being
activated, will sound for no longer than:
      (1)   30 minutes for an alarm system installed before October 1, 1995,
except as otherwise provided in Paragraph (2)(B) of this subsection; and
      (2)   10 minutes for an alarm system:
         (A)   installed on or after October 1, 1995; or
         (B)   installed before October 1, 1995, but to which any improvement
is made on or after October 1, 1995. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 22038; 22571; 26200;
26919)
SEC. 15C-5.   RESERVED.
   (Ord. Nos. 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-6.   REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE OF STATE-LICENSED ALARM COMPANIES AND
RELAYING INTERMEDIARIES.
   (a)   An owner or person in control of property shall not have an alarm
system installed or converted on that property by an alarm company that does
not comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations
promulgated by the chief or that is not licensed by the Texas Department of
Public Safety Private Security Bureau.
   (b)   A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall not
allow alarm signals to be reported through a relaying intermediary that does
not comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations
promulgated by the chief or that is not licensed by the Texas Department of
Public Safety Private Security Bureau. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 19854; 22038; 22571;
26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-7.   MONITORING PROCEDURES.
   Any alarm company engaged in the business of monitoring alarm systems in the
city shall:
      (1)   use only telephone numbers designated by the chief to report:
         (A)   commercial or residential holdup, panic, or duress alarm
notifications; and
         (B)   commercial or residential burglar alarm notifications;
      (2)   before requesting police response to a commercial or residential
alarm site for a burglar alarm notification, attempt to contact an occupant of
the alarm site twice by telephone (using different telephone numbers) in order
to verify the alarm notification;
      (3)   when reporting a commercial or residential burglar alarm
notification to the city, provide the alarm permit number and address of the
alarm site from which the alarm notification originated;
      (4)   when reporting a commercial or residential holdup, panic, or duress
alarm notification to the city, provide the alarm permit number and address of
the alarm site from which the alarm notification originated; and
      (5)   communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form
determined by the chief. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 22038; 22571; 22910; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-7.1.   REQUIREMENTS FOR ALARM COMPANIES.
   (a)   An alarm company shall confirm that a valid alarm permit has been
issued by the city for an alarm site before:
      (1)   performing any alarm system conversion at the alarm site; or
      (2)   activating any alarm system installed at the alarm site.
   (b)   An alarm company that has a contract with a permit holder or person in
control of an alarm system shall send a certification to the chief within 30
days after performing or causing the performance of an alarm system
installation, activation, or conversion. The information contained in the
certification is confidential to the extent required by Section 1702.286 of the
Texas Occupations Code and other law. The certification must state:
      (1)   the date of installation, activation, or conversion of the alarm
system, whichever is applicable;
      (2)   the address of the alarm system location and the name of the
occupant of the alarm system location;
      (3)   whether the alarm system is a burglar alarm system, a holdup,
panic, or duress alarm system, or a combination of alarm systems;
      (4)   the name, address, telephone number, and current state license
number of the alarm company providing the alarm system installation,
activation, or conversion;
      (5)   the name, address, telephone number, and current state license
number of the alarm company providing monitoring for the alarm system, if
different from the alarm company under contract to provide installation,
activation, or conversion of the alarm system;
      (6)   that the applicant has been given a complete set of written
operating instructions for the alarm system, written information on the
applicable law relating to false alarms (including the potential for penalties
and revocation or suspension of an alarm permit), and written guidelines on how
to prevent false alarms; and
      (7)   that the alarm company has trained the applicant in the proper use
of the alarm system, including instructions on how to prevent false alarms.
   (c)   An alarm company representative shall attend a system performance
review required by the chief under Section
15C-11. An alarm company may be issued a citation if its representative fails
to attend a system performance review required by Section
15C-11 after receiving notice of the conference from the chief.
   (d)   On and after February 1, 2006, an alarm company shall not install any
alarm system equipped with the holdup/panic/duress feature known as ONE PLUS.
For alarm systems installed before February 1, 2006, an alarm company shall
disarm the ONE PLUS feature:
      (1)   by February 1, 2006, if the alarm company has line access to the
alarm system; or
      (2)   the next time maintenance, service, or conversion work is performed
on the alarm system, if the alarm company does not have line access to the
alarm system. (Ord. Nos. 22038; 22571; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-8.   DIRECT ALARM REPORTING; AUTOMATIC ALARM NOTIFICATION.
   A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall not transmit
or allow the transmission of automatic alarm notifications directly to the
communications center of the police department. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 21026; 22038;
22571; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-9.   ALARM SYSTEM OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS.
   A person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a
complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special
codes, combinations, or passwords must not be included in these instructions.
(Ord. Nos. 17586; 22038; 22571; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-10.   ALARM DISPATCH RECORDS.
   (a)   When responding to a dispatch resulting from a commercial or
residential holdup, panic, or duress alarm notification or a commercial or
residential burglar alarm notification, the city shall record such information
as necessary to permit the chief to maintain records, including but not limited
to the following information:
      (1)   identification of the permit holder;
      (2)   address of the alarm site;
      (3)   date, arrival time, and dispatch received time; and
      (4)   name of the permit holder's representative on the premises, if any.
   (b)   If the responding police officer determines that the alarm
notification was false, the responding police officer shall leave notice at the
alarm site that the police department has responded to a false alarm
notification. The notice must include the following information:
      (1)   the date and time of police response to the false alarm
notification;
      (2)   the identification number of the responding police officer; and
      (3)   a statement urging the permit holder to ensure that the alarm
system is properly operated and maintained. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 20112; 22038;
22571; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-11.   SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REVIEWS.
   If there is reason to believe that a commercial or residential burglar alarm
system or a commercial or residential holdup, panic, or duress alarm system is
not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation to
suppress false alarms, the chief may require a conference to review the
circumstances of each false alarm with the alarm permit holder and the alarm
company under contract with the alarm permit holder. A person may be issued a
citation for failing to attend a system performance review after receiving
notice of the conference from the chief. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 22038; 22571; 26200;
26919)
SEC. 15C-12.   SERVICE FEES; PAYMENT PLAN.
   (a)   The holder of an alarm permit for, or the person in control of, a
burglar alarm system at a commercial or residential alarm site shall pay a
service fee, in accordance with the following schedule, for each false burglar
alarm notification (in excess of three) that is emitted from the alarm site, or
in the case of an apartment complex from each individual residential unit,
within any 12-month period:
 
FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION SERVICE FEE
Fourth, fifth, and sixth $50
Seventh and eighth       $75
Ninth and subsequent     $100
 
   (b)   The holder of an alarm permit for, or the person in control of, a
holdup, panic, or duress alarm system at a residential alarm site shall pay a
service fee of $100 for each false holdup, panic, or duress alarm notification
that is emitted from the alarm site, or in the case of an apartment complex
from each individual residential unit.
   (c)   The holder of an alarm permit for, or the person in control of, a
holdup, panic, or duress alarm system at a commercial alarm site or at an
apartment complex (but only in the nonresidential areas of the apartment
complex or unoccupied residential units covered by the apartment complex’s
master alarm permit) shall pay a service fee, in accordance with the following
schedule, for each false holdup, panic, or duress alarm notification emitted
from the alarm site within any 12-month period:
 
FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION SERVICE FEE
First                    $100
Second                   $200
Third                    $300
Fourth and subsequent    $400
 
   (d)   The holder of an alarm permit or the person in control of an alarm
system may, at the city’s discretion, enter into an agreement with the city to
pay any outstanding service fees on a scheduled payment plan. (Ord. Nos. 17586;
18411; 19300; 20112; 21026; 22038; 22571; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-13.   REVOCATION OF AN ALARM PERMIT.
   (a)   The chief may revoke an alarm permit if it is determined that:
      (1)   there is a false statement of a material matter in the application
for a permit;
      (2)   the permit holder has failed to pay a service fee assessed under
Section
15C-12 within 90 days after a bill for the assessment was issued and has not
established a payment plan under Section
15C-12(d) for those fees;
      (3)   the permit holder has failed to comply with the terms of a payment
plan established under Section
15C-12(d); or
      (4)   the permitted alarm system has had eight or more false alarm
notifications within the preceding 12-month period.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the
period in which the alarm permit is revoked. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 20112; 21026;
22038; 22571; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-14.   NOTICE OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT; APPEALS.
   (a)   If the chief refuses to issue or renew a permit, or revokes a permit,
the chief shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail,
return receipt requested, written notice of the action and a statement of the
right to an appeal.
   (b)   The applicant or permit holder may appeal a denial, nonrenewal, or
revocation of an alarm permit or the assessment of a service fee to the city
manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing,
setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within 10 days after receipt of the
notice of the chief's action or the bill assessing a service fee. The filing of
a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays an action of the
chief or the assessment of a service fee until the city manager or a designated
representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is
not made within the 10-day period, the action of the chief or the assessment of
the service fee is final.
   (c)   The city manager or a designated representative shall serve as hearing
officer at an appeal and consider evidence by any interested person. The formal
rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing. The hearing officer shall
make a decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within 60 days after
the request for an appeal hearing is filed.
   (d)   The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the
chief or the assessment of the service fee; except, that a hearing officer may
not reduce or increase the amount designated in Section
15C-12(a), (b), or (c), whichever is applicable, for a service fee that is
assessed for a false alarm notification determined by the hearing officer to
have occurred. The decision of the hearing officer is final as to
administrative remedies with the city. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 21026; 22038; 22571;
26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-14.1.   REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT.
   (a)   A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may have the permit
reinstated if the person:
      (1)   submits an updated application and pays a permit reinstatement fee
in accordance with Section
15C-2(c); and
      (2)   pays all outstanding service fees assessed under this article for
which a bill has been issued and for which a payment plan has not been
established under Section
15C-12(d).
   (b)   A reinstated permit expires the same date on which the original permit
would have expired had it not been revoked. (Ord. Nos. 20112; 21026; 22038;
22571; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-15.   RESERVED.
   (Ord. Nos. 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-16.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY; CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS AND
ASSOCIATIONS.
   (a)   An alarm company, an alarm permit holder, or a person in control of an
alarm system commits an offense if he violates any provision of this article by
either commission of an act that is forbidden or omission of a duty or
responsibility imposed upon him by this article.
   (b)   A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense is punishable by a fine of not
more than $500 and not less than:
      (1)   $200 for the first conviction; and
      (2)   $250 for the second and each subsequent conviction.
   (c)   In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of
individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation,
partnership, or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions
performed by an agent acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership, or
other association, and within the scope of employment. (Ord. Nos. 17586; 19854;
19963; 21026; 22038; 22571; 26200; 26919)
SEC. 15C-17.   RESERVED.
   (Ord. Nos. 26200; 26919)
ARTICLE II.
ALARMS RESPONDED TO BY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
Division 1. In General.
SEC. 15C-18.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is not to discourage the use of mechanical,
electro-mechanical, or electronic fire or medical alarm systems. The purpose of
this article is to reduce the number of false fire and medical alarm
notifications by encouraging the proper operation and maintenance of the alarm
systems. False alarm notifications are detrimental to the public safety and
welfare. They require the deployment of available firefighters, paramedics, and
fire and medical equipment, thereby hindering prompt response to true
emergencies. (Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-19.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   ALARM ACTUATING DEVICE means a device that is designed to respond
either manually or automatically to smoke, fire, or activation of a fire
extinguishing system.
      (2)   ALARM SYSTEM means a device or system that emits, transmits, or
relays a signal, at the site or at a remote site, that is intended to summon,
or that would reasonably be expected to summon, fire or emergency medical
services of the city. Alarm systems are classified as follows:
         (A)   Group A means an alarm system with 10 or less alarm actuating
devices;
         (B)   Group B means an alarm system with not less than 11 nor more
than 100 alarm actuating devices;
         (C)   Group C means an alarm system with not less than 101 nor more
than 500 alarm actuating devices; and
         (D)   Group D means an alarm system with 501 or more alarm actuating
devices.
      (3)   ALARM SITE means a single premises or location (one street address)
served by an alarm system or systems that are under the control of one person.
      (4)   CHIEF means the chief of the fire department of the city or his
authorized representative.
      (5)   FALSE FIRE ALARM NOTIFICATION means a fire alarm notification to
the fire department, when the responding firefighters find no evidence of smoke
or fire. The term does not include a manual alarm notification to the fire
department when the responding firefighters determine that the notification was
caused by a person acting under a reasonable belief that smoke or fire existed.
      (6)   FALSE MEDICAL ALARM NOTIFI- CATION means a medical alarm
notification to the fire department, when the responding paramedics find no
evidence of a medical emergency. The term does not include a manual alarm
notification to the fire department when the responding paramedics determine
that the notification was caused by a person acting under a reasonable belief
that a medical emergency existed.
      (7)   FIRE ALARM NOTIFICATION means a notification intended to summon the
fire department that is initiated by an alarm system which is designed either
to be operated manually or to respond automatically to smoke or fire.
      (8)   MEDICAL ALARM NOTIFICATION means a notification intended to summon
the fire department that is initiated by an alarm system which is designed
either to be operated manually or to respond automatically to a medical
emergency.
      (9)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, partnership, association,
organization, or similar entity.
      (10)   PERSON IN CONTROL means the registrant, owner, or operator of an
alarm system.
      (11)   REGISTRANT means the person designated in the application for
registration, as required in Section
15C-28(b)(1), who is responsible for:
         (A)   responding to alarms and giving access to the alarm site;
         (B)   proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system; and
         (C)   payment of all service fees and penalties assessed under this
article. (Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-20.   PROPER ALARM SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The person in control of an alarm system shall:
      (1)   maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that
insures proper operation of the alarm system;
      (2)   maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false
alarm notifications;
      (3)   respond or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable
period of time when notified by the city to repair or inactivate a
malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide
security for the premises; and
      (4)   not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. (Ord.
19854)
SEC. 15C-21.   REPORTING OF ALARM SIGNALS.
   The person in control of an alarm system shall not allow alarm signals to be
reported through a relaying intermediary that does not comply with the
requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the
chief. (Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-22.   INDIRECT ALARM REPORTING.
   A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to
the city shall communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form
determined by the chief. (Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-23.   ALARM SYSTEM OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS.
   A person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a
complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special
codes, combinations, or passwords must not be included in these instructions.
(Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-24.   ALARM DISPATCH RECORDS.
   (a)   The firefighter or paramedic responding to a dispatch resulting from
an automatic or a manual alarm notification shall record such information as
necessary to permit the chief to maintain records, including but not limited to
the following information:
      (1)   identification of the person in control of the alarm system;
      (2)   identification of the alarm site;
      (3)   arrival time and dispatch received time;
      (4)   time of day and date;
      (5)   weather conditions;
      (6)   district; and
      (7)   name of the person in control's representative on the premises, if
any.
   (b)   The responding firefighter or paramedic shall indicate on the dispatch
record whether the alarm notification was caused by smoke, fire, or medical
emergency and whether the alarm notification came from an automatic or a manual
alarm system. (Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-25.   SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REVIEWS.
   If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or
maintained in a manner that insures proper operation and suppresses false alarm
notifications, the chief may require a conference with the person in control of
the alarm system and the individual or association responsible for maintenance
of the alarm system to review circumstances of each false alarm notification.
(Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-26.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY; CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS AND
ASSOCIATIONS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he violates by commission or omission
any provision of this article that imposes upon him a duty or responsibility.
   (b)   A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine of
not more than $2,000, but not less than $50 upon first conviction and not less
than $75 upon second and subsequent convictions.
   (c)   In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of
individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation,
partnership, or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions
performed by an agent acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership, or
other association, and within the scope of his employment. (Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-27.   APPEAL OF SERVICE FEES.
   (a)   A person may appeal a service fee assessed under Section
15C-29 or
15C-32 for a false fire or medical alarm notification if he delivers a written
request for an appeal to the chief not more than 10 business days after notice
of the assessment.
   (b)   The chief shall appoint a hearing panel to hear the appeal. A hearing
panel shall be composed of:
      (1)   one representative from the fire marshal's division of the fire
department;
      (2)   one representative from the emergency operations division of the
fire department; and
      (3)   one person currently licensed by the State of Texas to install or
design alarm systems.
   (c)   The hearing panel shall give the appealing party an opportunity to
present evidence and make argument in his behalf. The formal rules of evidence
do not apply to an appeal under this section, and the hearing panel shall make
its ruling on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the
hearing.
   (d)   The hearing panel may affirm or reverse the assessment of a service
fee, but may not modify the amount of the service fee assessed. The decision of
the hearing panel is final as to available administrative remedies. (Ord.
19854)
Division 2. Fire Alarms.
SEC. 15C-28.   REGISTRATION OF ALARM SYSTEM.
   (a)   Whenever a false fire alarm notification is initiated at an alarm
site, the person in control shall register the alarm system with the chief,
unless the alarm system is currently registered with the chief. Registration
must be made within 10 calendar days after receipt of notice from the chief of
the false fire alarm notification.
   (b)   Each registration must be accompanied by a $10 registration fee and be
made upon a form provided by the chief. The registration application must
include the following information:
      (1)   name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the
registrant, and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the
alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this division;
      (2)   classification of the alarm site as either residential or
commercial;
      (3)   number of alarm actuating devices in the alarm system; and
      (4)   other information required by the chief which is necessary for the
enforcement of this division.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he makes any false statement of a
material matter in his application for alarm registration.
   (d)   Upon receipt of a completed application form, the chief shall issue
proof of alarm registration to an applicant. An alarm registration expires on
December 31 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which
registration was issued. An expired alarm registration is not required to be
renewed unless a false alarm notification is initiated from the alarm system
after the registration expires.
   (e)   An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person. A
registrant shall inform the chief of any changes in the information listed on
the registration application within 10 business days. No fee will be assessed
for such changes. (Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-29.   SERVICE FEE FOR FALSE FIRE ALARM NOTIFICATION.
   (a)   The person in control of an alarm system shall pay a service fee to
the city for each false fire alarm notification in excess of one that is
initiated at the alarm site during any calendar month. The service fee is $50
for a residential alarm site and $100 for a commercial alarm site.
   (b)   If a person submits satisfactory proof of the installation date to the
chief, no service fee will be assessed during the first 30 days after the
installation of a new alarm system, and false fire alarm notifications during
that period will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be
assessed. Registration is still required for false fire alarm notifications
occurring during the first 30 days after installation. (Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-30.   WAIVER OF SERVICE FEE.
   (a)   The fire chief may waive a service fee if, within 14 days after the
date of the false fire alarm notification, maintenance is performed on the
alarm system by, or with the direct supervision and approval of, a person
currently licensed by the State of Texas to install or design fire alarm
systems.
   (b)   Before a fee may be waived, proof of maintenance must be submitted to
the fire chief in the form of an affidavit and must include the following:
      (1)   A statement that system-wide maintenance was performed on the alarm
system.
      (2)   A statement that the alarm system was checked and is operating
properly.
      (3)   The verified signature of the licensed fire alarm system installer
or designer performing, or supervising and approving, the maintenance.
      (4)   The current state license number of the fire alarm system installer
or designer.
   (c)   The number of times a service fee may be waived in any calendar year
for an alarm system may not exceed the following for each classification of
alarm system:
 
Classification Maximum Waivers
Group A        3
Group B        6
Group C        12
Group D        24
 
(Ord. 19854)
Division 3. Medical Alarms.
SEC. 15C-31.   REGISTRATION OF ALARM SYSTEM.
   (a)   Whenever a false medical alarm notification is initiated at an alarm
site, the person in control shall register the alarm system with the chief,
unless the alarm system is currently registered with the chief. Registration
must be made within 10 calendar days after receipt of notice from the chief of
the false medical alarm notification.
   (b)   Each registration must be accompanied by a $10 registration fee and be
made upon a form provided by the chief. The registration application must
include the following information:
      (1)   name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the
registrant, and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the
alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this division;
      (2)   classification of the alarm site as either residential or
commercial;
      (3)   number of alarm actuating devices in the alarm system; and
      (4)   other information required by the chief which is necessary for the
enforcement of this division.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he makes any false statement of a
material matter in his application for alarm registration.
   (d)   Upon receipt of a completed application form, the chief shall issue
proof of alarm registration to an applicant. An alarm registration expires on
December 31 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which
registration was issued. An expired alarm registration is not required to be
renewed unless a false alarm notification is initiated from the alarm system
after the registration expires.
   (e)   An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person. A
registrant shall inform the chief of any changes in information listed on the
registration application within 10 business days. No fee will be assessed for
such changes. (Ord. 19854)
SEC. 15C-32.   SERVICE FEE FOR FALSE MEDICAL ALARM NOTIFICATION.
   (a)   The person in control of an alarm system shall pay a service fee of
$100 to the city for each false medical alarm notification in excess of one
that is initiated at the alarm site during any calendar year.
   (b)   If a person submits satisfactory proof of the installation date to the
chief, no service fee will be assessed during the first 30 days after the
installation of a new alarm system, and false medical alarm notifications
during that period will not be counted in determining when a service fee will
be assessed. Registration is still required for false medical alarm
notifications occurring during the first 30 days after installation. (Ord.
19854)
SEC. 15C-33.   WAIVER OF SERVICE FEE.
   (a)   The chief may waive a service fee if, within 14 days after the date of
the false medical alarm notification, maintenance is performed on the alarm
system by, or with the direct supervision and approval of, a person currently
licensed by the State of Texas to install or design alarm systems.
   (b)   Before a fee may be waived, proof of maintenance must be submitted to
the chief in the form of an affidavit and must include the following:
      (1)   A statement that system-wide maintenance was performed on the alarm
system.
      (2)   A statement that the alarm system was checked and is operating
properly.
      (3)   The verified signature of the licensed alarm system installer or
designer performing, or supervising and approving, the maintenance.
      (4)   The current state license number of the alarm system installer or
designer.
   (c)   No more than two service fees may be waived under this section in any
calendar year. (Ord. 19854)
CHAPTER 15D
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
ARTICLE I.
AMBULANCES.
Division 1. General Provisions.
Sec.
15D-1.   Statement of policy.
Sec.
15D-2.   General authority and duty of director.
Sec.
15D-3.   Establishment of rules and regulations.
Sec.
15D-4.   Definitions.
Division 2. Emergency Medical Services.
Sec.
15D-5.   Emergency ambulance service provided by fire department; fee.
Sec.
15D-5.1.   Mobile community healthcare program provided by fire department.
Sec.
15D-5.2.   Emergency medical service training program.
Sec.
15D-6.   Private emergency ambulance service regulations.
Division 3. Private Ambulance Service License.
Sec.
15D-7.   Private ambulance service license required.
Sec.
15D-8.   Qualification for private ambulance license.
Sec.
15D-9.   Application for license.
Sec.
15D-9.1.   Public hearing; burden of proof.
Sec.
15D-9.2.   License issuance; fee; display; transferability.
Sec.
15D-9.3.   Expiration and renewal of license.
Sec.
15D-9.4.   Refusal to issue or renew license.
Sec.
15D-9.5.   Suspension and revocation of license.
Sec.
15D-9.6.   Appeal from license suspension.
Sec.
15D-9.7.   Appeal from license denial or revocation.
Division 4. Ambulance Personnel Permit.
Sec.
15D-9.8.   Ambulance personnel permit required.
Sec.
15D-9.9.   Qualification for ambulance personnel permit.
Sec.
15D-9.10.   Application for ambulance personnel permit.
Sec.
15D-9.11.   Investigation of application.
Sec.
15D-9.12.   Issuance and denial of ambulance personnel permit.
Sec.
15D-9.13.   Expiration of permit; voidance upon suspension or revocation of
state driver’s license.
Sec.
15D-9.14.   Provisional permit.
Sec.
15D-9.15.   Probationary permit.
Sec.
15D-9.16.   Duplicate permit.
Sec.
15D-9.17.   Display of permit.
Sec.
15D-9.18.   Suspension by a designated representative.
Sec.
15D-9.19.   Suspension of ambulance personnel permit.
Sec.
15D-9.20.   Revocation of ambulance personnel permit.
Sec.
15D-9.21.   Private ambulance operation after suspension, revocation, or denial
of permit renewal.
Sec.
15D-9.22.   Appeal of denial, suspension, or revocation.
Sec.
15D-9.23.   Current mailing address of permittee.
Division 5. Miscellaneous Regulations.
Sec.
15D-9.24.   Duty of licensee and permittee to comply.
Sec.
15D-9.25.   Licensee’s duty to enforce compliance by permittees.
Sec.
15D-9.26.   Insurance.
Division 6. Service Rules and Regulations.
Sec.
15D-9.27.   Private ambulance service.
Sec.
15D-9.28.   Apparel to be worn by ambulance personnel.
Sec.
15D-9.29.   Records and reports of private ambulance service.
Sec.
15D-9.30.   Miscellaneous offenses.
Division 7. Vehicles and Equipment.
Sec.
15D-9.31.   Inspection of private ambulances and equipment.
Sec.
15D-9.32.   Vehicles and equipment.
Sec.
15D-9.33.   Decals.
Division 8. Enforcement.
Sec.
15D-9.34.   Authority to inspect.
Sec.
15D-9.35.   Enforcement by police department.
Sec.
15D-9.36.   Correction order.
Sec.
15D-9.37.   Service of notice.
Sec.
15D-9.38.   Appeal.
Sec.
15D-9.39.   Criminal offenses; defenses.
ARTICLE II.
EMERGENCY WRECKERS.
Division 1. General Provisions.
Sec.
15D-10.   Statement of policy.
Sec.
15D-11.   Powers and duties of the director.
Sec.
15D-12.   Powers and duties of the chief of police.
Sec.
15D-13.   Establishment of rules and regulations.
Sec.
15D-14.   Exceptions.
Sec.
15D-15.   Definitions.
Sec.
15D-16.   Driving wrecker to a police scene prohibited; exception.
Sec.
15D-17.   Soliciting wrecker business at a police scene prohibited; presence at
scene as evidence of violation.
Sec.
15D-18.   Soliciting by advertising.
Sec.
15D-19.   Response to private calls prohibited.
Division 2. Emergency Wrecker Service License.
Sec.
15D-20.   License required; trade name registration; business location.
Sec.
15D-21.   License application; change of zone.
Sec.
15D-22.   License qualifications.
Sec.
15D-23.   License issuance; fee; display; transferability; expiration.
Sec.
15D-24.   Refusal to issue or renew license.
Sec.
15D-25.   Suspension of license.
Sec.
15D-26.   Revocation of license.
Sec.
15D-27.   Appeals.
Division 3. Wrecker Driver’s Permit.
Sec.
15D-28.   Wrecker driver’s permit required.
Sec.
15D-29.   Qualifications for a wrecker driver’s permit.
Sec.
15D-30.   Application for wrecker driver’s permit; fee.
Sec.
15D-31.   Investigation of application.
Sec.
15D-32.   Issuance and denial of wrecker driver’s permit.
Sec.
15D-33.   Expiration of wrecker driver’s permit; voidance upon suspension or
revocation of state driver’s license or state towing operator’s license.
Sec.
15D-34.   Provisional permit.
Sec.
15D-35.   Probationary permit.
Sec.
15D-36.   Duplicate permit.
Sec.
15D-37.   Display of permit.
Sec.
15D-38.   Suspension by a designated representative.
Sec.
15D-39.   Suspension of wrecker driver’s permit.
Sec.
15D-40.   Revocation of wrecker driver’s permit.
Sec.
15D-41.   Wrecker operation after suspension or revocation.
Sec.
15D-42.   Appeal from denial, suspension, or revocation.
Division 4. Miscellaneous Licensee and Driver Regulations.
Sec.
15D-43.   Licensee’s and driver’s duty to comply.
Sec.
15D-44.   Licensee’s duty to enforce compliance by drivers.
Sec.
15D-45.   Apparel to be worn by drivers.
Sec.
15D-46.   Insurance.
Sec.
15D-47.   Information to be supplied upon request of director.
Sec.
15D-48.   Emergency wrecker service records.
Sec.
15D-49.   Failure to pay ad valorem taxes.
Division 5. Service Rules and Regulations.
Sec.
15D-50.   Emergency wrecker service zones; wrecker list procedure.
Sec.
15D-51.   Removal of a vehicle with a wrecker.
Sec.
15D-52.   Requirements and operating procedures.
Sec.
15D-53.   Rapid response program.
Sec.
15D-53.1.   Rapid response locations.
Sec.
15D-54.   Disposition of towed vehicles.
Sec.
15D-55.   Notification of police department; impounded vehicle receipts.
Sec.
15D-56.   City-owned wreckers.
Division 6. Fee Schedule.
Sec.
15D-57.   Maximum fee schedule for emergency wrecker service.
Division 7. Vehicles and Equipment.
Sec.
15D-58.   Vehicles and equipment.
Division 8. Enforcement.
Sec.
15D-59.   Authority to inspect.
Sec.
15D-60.   Enforcement by police department.
Sec.
15D-61.   Correction order.
Sec.
15D-62.   Service of notice.
Sec.
15D-63.   Appeal.
Sec.
15D-64.   Offenses.
ARTICLE III.
PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATIONS.
Sec.
15D-65.   Definitions.
Sec.
15D-66.   Permit required.
Sec.
15D-67.   Application.
Sec.
15D-68.   Permit issuance; standards of operation.
Sec.
15D-69.   Term; posting.
Sec.
15D-70.   Operators to have chauffeur’s license.
ARTICLE IV.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT CLEANUP FEE.
Sec.
15D-71.   Motor vehicle accident cleanup fee.
ARTICLE I.
AMBULANCES.
Division 1. General Provisions.
SEC. 15D-1.   STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide for the protection of the public
interest as it relates to the transportation of the sick, injured, and deceased
within the city, and as it relates to the efficient use of emergency medical
services within the city. To this end, this article provides for the regulation
of emergency ambulance service, emergency medical services, and private
ambulance service to be administered in a manner that protects the public
health and safety and promotes the public convenience and necessity. Nothing in
this article will be construed to conflict with any state or federal law
relating to emergency and private ambulance service. (Ord. Nos. 21861; 29544)
SEC. 15D-2.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this article and may by written
order establish such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article,
as the director determines necessary to discharge any duty under or to effect
the policy of this article. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-3.   ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Before adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule or regulation, the
director shall hold a public hearing on the proposal.
   (b)   The director shall fix the time and place of the hearing and, in
addition to notice required under Article 6252-17, Vernon’s Texas Civil
Statutes, shall notify each licensee and such other persons as the director
determines are interested in the subject matter of the hearing.
   (c)   After the public hearing, the director shall notify the licensees and
other interested persons of the action taken and shall post an order adopting,
amending, or abolishing a rule or regulation on the official bulletin board in
the city hall for a period of not fewer than 10 days. The order becomes
effective immediately upon expiration of the posting period. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-4.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   AMBULANCE means any motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed,
arranged, equipped, or used for the purpose of transporting sick, injured, or
deceased persons.
      (2)   AMBULANCE CALL means the act of responding with an ambulance, for
compensation, to a request for transportation of a sick, injured, or deceased
person.
      (3)   AMBULANCE PERSONNEL means a person who for compensation has the
duty of performing or assisting in the performance of an ambulance call,
including driving or acting as an attendant on an ambulance.
      (4)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (5)   CONVICTION means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any
state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation
that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned.
      (6)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article, or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (7)   EMERGENCY means any circumstance that calls for immediate action
and in which the element of time in transporting a sick or injured person for
medical treatment or in providing treatment for a sick or injured person is
essential to the health, life, or limb of the person. Such circumstances
include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, acts of violence
resulting in personal injury, and sudden illnesses.
      (8)   EMERGENCY AMBULANCE means an ambulance specially designed,
constructed, equipped, and used for transporting the sick or injured in answer
to an emergency call.
      (9)   EMERGENCY CALL means any request for ambulance service that is made
by telephone or other means of communication in circumstances that are, or have
been represented to be, an emergency.
      (10)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES means services used to respond to an
individual’s perceived need for immediate medical care and to prevent death or
aggravation of physiological or psychological illness or injury.
      (11)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES VEHICLE means any motor vehicle
constructed, reconstructed, arranged, equipped, or used in the mobile community
healthcare program by the fire department for the purpose of providing
emergency medical services but not for transporting sick, injured, or deceased
persons.
      (12)   EMERGENCY PATIENT means a person in whom a sickness or injury may
cause a significant risk to the person’s life or limb. Such sickness or injury
may include, but is not limited to, trauma (major injury to the body, head, or
extremities), chest pain, abdominal pain, unconsciousness, delirium, imminent
delivery of a child, and serious infection.
      (13)   EMERGENCY PREHOSPITAL CARE means care provided to the sick or
injured during emergency transportation to a medical facility and includes any
necessary stabilization of the sick or injured in connection with that
transportation.
      (14)   EMERGENCY RUN means an emergency ambulance trip, requiring the use
of warning lights or sirens, to the place where an emergency exists or from the
place of the emergency to a hospital, medical clinic or office, or other
appropriate destination for the patient.
      (15)   FIRE ALARM DISPATCHER means the central communications center of
the fire department.
      (16)   FIRE CHIEF means the chief of the fire department or the chief’s
duly authorized representative.
      (17)   FIRE DEPARTMENT means the fire department of the city of Dallas,
Texas.
      (18)   FIRE DEPARTMENT PARAMEDIC means a fire department employee
certified as a paramedic by the Texas Department of State Health Services.
      (18.1)   HARDSHIP ASSISTANCE means the reduction of ambulance service
charges assessed to a transported patient or the payment-responsible party on
behalf of a transported patient approved by the city manager, department
director, or designee.
      (19)   LAWFUL ORDER means a verbal or written directive issued by the
director in the performance of official duties in the enforcement of this
chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated under this chapter.
      (20)   LICENSE means written authorization issued by the director for a
person to operate a private ambulance service within the city.
      (21)   LICENSEE means a person licensed under this article to engage in
private ambulance service. The term includes any owner, operator, driver,
ambulance personnel, employee, or agent of the licensed business, but does not
include a subcontractor.
      (22)   MEDICAL DIRECTOR means a physician licensed by the Texas Medical
Board who is under contract with the city to be responsible for all aspects of
the provision of emergency medical services within the city under Title 22 of
the Texas Administrative Code Chapter 197, as amended.
      (23)   MUTUAL AID CALL means a request for emergency ambulance service
issued by one political jurisdiction to a neighboring political jurisdiction.
      (24)   NEONATE/ PEDIATRIC TRANSPORT PERSONNEL means a registered nurse,
physician, or respiratory therapist specially trained in the emergency and
transport care of newborn and pediatric patients.
      (25)   OPERATE means to drive or to be in control of an ambulance.
      (26)   OPERATOR means the driver of an ambulance, the owner of an
ambulance, or the holder of a private ambulance service license.
      (27)   OWNER means the person to whom state license plates for a vehicle
were issued.
      (28)   PERMIT means written authorization issued by the director for a
person to act as an ambulance personnel on a private ambulance within the city.
      (29)   PERMITTEE means a person who has been issued an ambulance
personnel permit by the director under this article.
      (30)   PERSON means any individual, corporation, business, trust,
partnership, association, or other legal entity.
      (31)   POLICE CHIEF means the chief of police of the city of Dallas or
the chief’s duly authorized representative.
      (32)   PRIVATE AMBULANCE means an ambulance constructed, equipped, and
used for transporting sick, injured, or deceased persons under circumstances
that do not constitute an emergency and have not been represented as an
emergency.
      (33)   PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICE means the business of transporting, for
compensation, sick, injured, or deceased persons under circumstances that do
not constitute an emergency and have not been represented as an emergency.
      (34)   SPECIAL EVENT means any parade, sporting event, concert, or other
event or gathering requiring on-site standby medical personnel.
      (35)   STREET means any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive, or
highway commonly used for the purpose of travel within the corporate limits of
the city.
(Ord. Nos. 21861; 29544; 31289)
Division 2. Emergency Medical Services.
SEC. 15D-5.   EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDED BY FIRE DEPARTMENT; FEE.
   (a)   The fire department shall provide all emergency ambulance service
within the city.
   (b)   The city shall charge the following fees for emergency ambulance
services in the city provided in response to a call received by the fire
department requesting the services:
      (1)   $1,473 for each transport of a resident of the city of Dallas to a
hospital and $1,868 for each transport of a nonresident of the city of Dallas
to a hospital.
      (2)   $125 for treatment of a person who is not transported by ambulance.
      (3)   The reasonable cost of any expendable items that are medically
required to be used on a person transported by ambulance or treated without
being transported by ambulance, including but not limited to drugs, dressings
and bandages, airways, oxygen masks, intravenous fluids and equipment,
syringes, and needles.
      (4)   The reasonable cost of any EKG/telemetry that is medically required
to be performed on a person transported by ambulance or treated without being
transported by ambulance.
      (5)   The reasonable cost of each additional paramedic over two that is
medically required to respond to an emergency call.
      (6)   $10 for each loaded mile of transport by ambulance, beginning when
the patient is loaded into the ambulance and ending upon arrival at the
hospital.
   (c)   The person receiving emergency ambulance service, whether transported
by ambulance or treated without being transported by ambulance, and any person
contracting for the service shall be responsible for payment of all fees less
any reduction in fees received from hardship assistance. In the case of service
received by a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be responsible
for payment of all fees less any reduction in fees received from hardship
assistance on behalf of the qualifying minor.
   (d)   A current list of charges for the items, services, and personnel
described in Subsections (b)(3), (4), and (5) must be maintained in the office
of the emergency medical services division of the fire department and made
available for public inspection during normal business hours.
   (e)   The city manager or his or her designee shall adopt an ambulance
hardship assistance policy and the procedures for administering the policy.
(Ord. Nos. 21861; 22565; 24743; 26134; 27353; 29879; 30215; 31289; 31332;
32556)
SEC. 15D-5.1.   MOBILE COMMUNITY HEALTHCARE PROGRAM PROVIDED BY FIRE
DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   The city incurs significant expense related to the health
emergencies of its citizens. Fire department paramedics are especially skilled
at providing certain emergency medical services. Many of the emergency medical
services provided by fire department paramedics are beneficial in the transport
of sick or injured persons, as well as in responding to a person’s perceived
need for immediate medical care.
      (2)   The city’s mobile community healthcare program is designed to:
         (A)   support efficient and effective emergency medical services
within the city;
         (B)   provide health education to residents;
         (C)   assess living environments that may be dangerous or detrimental
to a citizen’s health and could contribute to an emergency situation; and
         (D)   respond to certain emergency medical situations by providing
vaccinations and immunizations.
      (3)   The mobile community healthcare program is also intended to promote
health and safety by referring mobile healthcare program participants to
appropriate professionals and organizations in the community.
      (4)   Because police and fire personnel encounter many individuals while
performing their duties, protecting those personnel from communicable diseases
using appropriate vaccines or immunizations reduces the spread of such diseases
and reduces the number of personnel unavailable to protect the safety of the
public.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 773, as amended, and Title 22
of the Texas Administrative Code Chapter 197, as amended, authorize fire
department paramedics that are supervised by a physician licensed to practice
medicine in Texas to provide emergency medical services.
      (2)   Under the mobile community healthcare program, fire department
paramedics that are under the supervision of a physician licensed to practice
medicine in Texas may use emergency medical services vehicles to provide
emergency medical services, including immunization and vaccinations, to:
         (A)   individuals that meet criteria established by the director;
         (B)   individuals identified through a contract executed under
Paragraph (5) below; and
         (C)   police and fire personnel.
      (3)   The director shall promulgate standard operating procedures
regarding emergency medical services provided by fire department paramedics as
part of the mobile community healthcare program.
      (4)   A physician licensed to practice medicine in Texas shall develop,
implement, and revise protocols and standing delegation orders regarding
emergency medical services provided by the fire department paramedics as part
of the mobile community healthcare program.
      (5)   The city may enter into contracts with hospitals within Dallas city
limits authorizing fire department paramedics, through the mobile community
healthcare program, to provide emergency medical services to certain
individuals who reside in the city, meet criteria established by a contract,
and are designated by the contracting hospital. These contracts with hospitals
must:
         (A)   require that any emergency medical services provided by the fire
department paramedics shall be provided under the supervision of the
individual’s treating physician or the appropriate hospital medical staff and
through the exercise of the supervising physician’s independent medical
judgment;
         (B)   require that the hospital develop treatment protocols for their
discharged individuals receiving emergency medical services from fire
department paramedics through the mobile community healthcare program, and that
those treatment protocols are deemed by the medical director to be within the
scope of the fire department paramedics’ certification;
         (C)   require that any medications prescribed to individuals
participating in the mobile community healthcare program will be prescribed by
the individual’s treating physician or the appropriate hospital medical staff
based on the prescribing physician’s relationship with the individual; and
         (D)   be reviewed and approved as to form by the compliance officer
and director of risk management before consideration by city council.
      (6)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict a physician
from delegating administrative and technical or clinical tasks not involving
the exercise of independent medical judgment to those specifically trained
individuals instructed and directed by a licensed physician who accepts
responsibility for the acts of such allied health personnel. Further, nothing
shall be construed to relieve the supervising physician of the professional or
legal responsibility for the care and treatment of his or her patients.
   (c)   Fees. The city shall charge a $252 per hour fee to hospitals utilizing
emergency medical services in the city to provide mobile community healthcare.
(Ord. Nos. 29544; 31332, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 15D-5.2.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE TRAINING PROGRAM.
   (a)   Findings and purpose. The city partners with Emergency Medical Service
("EMS") training programs throughout the city. Through the partnerships, the
city provides students in the programs the opportunity to participate in ride-
outs with Dallas Fire-Rescue EMS personnel for the purpose of attaining the
necessary training hours required for program completion.
   (b)   Fees. The city shall charge the following fees for all training ride-
out services:
      (1)   $75 per emergency medical training internship college district
student.
      (2)   $75 per emergency medical training paramedic corporate student.
(Ord. 31332, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 15D-6.   PRIVATE EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   A person who is not a member of the fire department or of an agency of
the United States commits an offense if he furnishes, operates, conducts,
maintains, advertises, or otherwise engages in or professes to be engaged in
emergency ambulance service within the city, for the purpose of picking up
emergency patients within the city, except in the following circumstances:
      (1)   A person shall operate an emergency ambulance within the city to
render assistance during a catastrophe or major emergency if requested to do so
by the fire alarm dispatcher when city-authorized emergency ambulances are
determined to be insufficient in number or inadequate for other reasons.
      (2)   A person may operate an emergency ambulance within the city to
render assistance to city- authorized emergency ambulances responding to a
mutual aid call if requested to do so by the fire alarm dispatcher.
      (3)   A person may operate an emergency ambulance to a hospital within
the city, if:
         (A)   the emergency patient was picked up by the ambulance outside the
city limits;
         (B)   the ambulance making the emergency run is licensed and operated
in accordance with the Emergency Medical Services Act (Chapter 773, Texas
Health and Safety Code), as amended; and
         (C)   the person first notifies the fire alarm dispatcher of the route
to be used in the emergency run.
      (4)   A licensee or permittee may operate a private ambulance within the
city as a backup emergency ambulance if requested to do so by the fire alarm
dispatcher when city-authorized emergency ambulances are not available.
      (5)   A permittee may operate a private ambulance on an emergency run if,
upon responding to a direct call for nonemergency private ambulance service,
the permittee determines that an emergency exists requiring the sick or injured
person to be transported with all practical speed to a hospital and obtains
permission from the fire alarm dispatcher to make the emergency run.
      (6)   A permittee may operate a private ambulance on an emergency run if,
while performing the service of maintaining a private ambulance at a particular
location for a special event, the permittee determines that an emergency exists
requiring a sick or injured person to be transported with all practical speed
to a hospital and obtains permission from the fire alarm dispatcher to make the
emergency run.
      (7)   A permittee may operate a private ambulance on an emergency run to
transport vital organs, including, but not limited to, hearts, lungs, kidneys,
and eyes, to or from a hospital if the permittee obtains permission from the
fire alarm dispatcher.
      (8)   A permittee may operate a private ambulance on an emergency run to
transport a newborn or pediatric patient from a lower level skill facility to a
higher level skill facility if:
         (A)   the patient’s doctor has determined that an emergency exists;
         (B)   the patient is accompanied by neonate/pediatric transport
personnel; and
         (C)   the permittee obtains permission from the fire alarm dispatcher
to make the emergency run.
   (b)   Any person who operates a licensed private ambulance on an emergency
run under Subsection (a)(5), (6), (7), or (8) shall, within 30 days of each
emergency run, submit to the director a report on a form provided for that
purpose, describing the circumstances requiring the emergency run. (Ord. 21861)
Division 3. Private Ambulance Service License.
SEC. 15D-7.   PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a private ambulance service
within the city without a valid private ambulance service license issued by the
director.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he advertises or causes to be
advertised the operation of a private ambulance service that does not have a
valid license granted under this article when the advertisement is reasonably
calculated to be seen by persons seeking private ambulance service in the city.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he transports or offers to transport,
for compensation, a sick, injured, or deceased person by private ambulance from
a location within the city to a location either inside or outside the city
without holding or being employed by a person holding a valid license issued
under this article.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if he hires or employs a private ambulance
service to pick up a sick, injured, or deceased person in the city when he
knows the private ambulance service does not have a valid license under this
article.
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the person
was the publisher of the advertising material and had no knowledge that the
private ambulance service did not have a valid license under this article.
(Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-8.   QUALIFICATION FOR PRIVATE AMBULANCE LICENSE.
   (a)   To qualify for a private ambulance license, an applicant must:
      (1)   be at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States;
      (3)   be able to communicate in the English language; and
      (4)   not have been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   criminal homicide as described in Chapter 19 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (ii)   kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal
Code;
            (iii)   a sexual offense as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (iv)   robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (v)   burglary as described in Chapter 30 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in private or emergency ambulance service;
            (vi)   theft as described in Chapter 31 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in private or emergency ambulance service;
            (vii)   fraud as described in Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in private or emergency ambulance service;
            (viii)   tampering with a govern- mental record as described in
Chapter 37 of the Texas Penal Code, but only if the offense was committed
against a person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in
private or emergency ambulance service;
            (ix)   public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in
Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (x)   the transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in
violation of Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal Code, or of any comparable state or
federal law, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the
applicable law;
            (xi)   a violation of the Dangerous Drugs Act (Article 4476-14,
Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), or of any comparable state or federal law, that
is punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xii)   a violation of the Controlled Substances Act (Article 4476-
15, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), or of any comparable state or federal law,
that is punishable as a felony under the applicable law; or
            (xiii)   criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in
Subdivision (4)(A)(i) through (xii) of this subsection;
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony
offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the
applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination
of misdemeanor offenses;
   (b)   An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in Subsection
(a)(4), for which the required time period has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
may qualify for a license only if the director determines that the applicant is
presently fit to provide private ambulance service. In determining present
fitness under this section, the director shall consider the following:
      (1)   the extent and nature of the applicant’s past criminal activity;
      (2)   the age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the
crime;
      (3)   the amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant’s last
criminal activity;
      (4)   the conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and
following the criminal activity;
      (5)   evidence of the applicant’s rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort
while incarcerated or following release; and
      (6)   other evidence of the applicant’s present fitness, including
letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional
officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the
applicant; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the applicant
resides; and any other persons in contact with the applicant.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to
secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present
fitness under Subsection (b) of this section. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (a)   To obtain a private ambulance service license, a person must make
written application to the director upon a form provided for that purpose. The
application must be signed and sworn to by an applicant who is the owner of the
private ambulance service. The application must include the following:
      (1)   the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, the trade
name under which the applicant does business, and the street address and
telephone number of the business establishment from which the private ambulance
service will be operated;
      (2)   the form of business of the applicant and, if the business is a
sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or association, a copy of the
documents establishing the business and the name and address of each person
with a direct interest in the business;
      (3)   a statement of the nature and character of the service that the
applicant proposes to provide, the facts showing the demand for the service,
the experience that the applicant has had in providing such service, and the
time period, if any, that the applicant provided such service within the city;
      (4)   an identification and description of any revocation or suspension
of a private ambulance service license held by the applicant or business before
the date of filing the application;
      (5)   the number and description of vehicles to be operated in the
proposed service, including the year, make, model, vehicle identification
number, and state license plate number and the class, size, design, and color
scheme of each ambulance;
      (6)   documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating a
willingness to provide insurance as required by this article;
      (7)   documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes owed on the
real and personal property to be used in connection with the operation of the
proposed service if the business establishment is located in the city;
      (8)   a list, to be current at all times, of the owners and management
personnel of the private ambulance service and of all employees who will
participate in private ambulance service, including names, addresses, dates of
birth, state driver’s license numbers, and social security numbers;
      (9)   a list of any claims or judgments against the applicant, other
owners or management personnel, or employees for damages resulting from the
negligent operation of an ambulance or any other vehicle;
      (10)   proof of financial ability and responsibility of the applicant;
      (11)   proof of a license from the Texas Department of Health to operate
as an emergency medical services provider;
      (12)   any other information determined by the director to be necessary
to the implementation and enforcement of this article or to the protection of
the public safety; and
      (13)   a nonrefundable application processing fee of $123.
   (b)   Reserved.
   (c)   A person desiring to engage in private ambulance service shall
register with the director a trade name that clearly differentiates that
person’s company from all other companies engaging in private ambulance service
and shall use no other trade name for the private ambulance service. (Ord. Nos.
21861; 27695; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 15D-9.1.   PUBLIC HEARING; BURDEN OF PROOF.
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a private ambulance service
license, the director shall promptly call a public hearing to consider the
application. The director shall publish notice of the hearing once in the
official newspaper of the city, and post notice of the hearing on the official
bulletin board in the city hall, not less than five nor more than 15 days
before the date of the hearing and shall give at least five days’ written
notice of the hearing to:
      (1)   the applicant;
      (2)   the fire department; and
      (3)   the city secretary’s office.
   (b)   At the public hearing, the director shall hear evidence from
interested persons on relevant issues.
   (c)   The applicant for a license has the burden of proving that:
      (1)   the public convenience and necessity require the proposed private
ambulance service;
      (2)   the applicant is qualified and financially able to provide the
service proposed in the application;
      (3)   the proposed fares and rates to be charged by the applicant are
reasonable; and
      (4)   the proposed operating procedures and type of service to be offered
will not interfere with, or adversely affect, existing ambulance systems. (Ord.
21861)
SEC. 15D-9.2.   LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEE; DISPLAY; TRANSFERABILITY.
   (a)   The director shall, within a reasonable time after the date of
application, issue a private ambulance
service license to an applicant who complies with the provisions of this
article.
   (b)   A license issued to a private ambulance service authorizes the
licensee and the licensee’s bona fide employees to engage in private ambulance
service.
   (c)   The annual fee for a private ambulance service license is $289. The
fee for issuing a duplicate license for one lost, destroyed, or mutilated is
$53. The fee is payable to the director upon issuance of a license. No refund
of a license fee will be made.
   (d)   A private ambulance service license issued under this article must be
conspicuously displayed in the private ambulance service’s business
establishment.
   (e)   A private ambulance service license, or any accompanying permit,
badge, sticker, ticket, or emblem, is not assignable or transferable. (Ord.
Nos. 21861; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 15D-9.3.   EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (a)   A private ambulance service license expires one year from the date of
issuance. A licensee shall apply for a renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the license. The director shall renew a license without a public
hearing if, after investigation, the director determines that:
      (1)   the licensee has performed satisfactorily under the terms of the
license;
      (2)   the service provided continues to be necessary and desirable; and
      (3)   the licensee continues to comply with all requirements of this
article.
   (b)   If, after investigation of a renewal application, the director
determines that a statement in Subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) is not true, the
director shall call a public hearing and consider the renewal in the same
manner as an original application. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.4.   REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW LICENSE.
   (a)   The director shall refuse to issue or renew a private ambulance
service license if the director determines that the applicant or licensee:
      (1)   made a false statement as to a material matter in an application
for a license or license renewal, or in a hearing concerning the license;
      (2)   was convicted twice within a 12-month period or three times within
a 24-month period for violation of this article;
      (3)   had a private ambulance service license suspended two times within
the preceding 12 months or three times within the preceding 24 months, or
revoked within the preceding 24 months;
      (4)   failed to comply with any requirement of this article or any rule
or regulation established by the director under this article;
      (5)   was convicted for a violation of another city, state, or federal
law or regulation that indicates lack of fitness of the applicant or licensee
to operate a private ambulance service;
      (6)   was convicted of any felony offense while holding a private
ambulance service license;
      (7)   used a trade name for a private ambulance service other than the
one registered with the director; or
      (8)   is not fit, willing, or able to operate a private ambulance service
in accordance with the license, this article, rules and regulations established
by the director under this article, and other applicable state and federal
laws.
   (b)   If the director determines that a license should be denied the
applicant or licensee, the director shall notify the applicant or licensee in
writing that the application is denied and include in the notice the reason for
denial and a statement informing the applicant or licensee of the right of
appeal. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.5.   SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The director may suspend or revoke a private ambulance service license
if the director determines that the licensee:
      (1)   made a false statement as to a material matter in an application
for a license or license renewal, or in a hearing concerning a license;
      (2)   failed to comply with any provision of this article or any rule or
regulation established by the director under this article;
      (3)   was convicted for a violation of another city, state, or federal
law or regulation that indicates lack of fitness of the licensee to operate a
private ambulance service;
      (4)   is under indictment for or was convicted of any felony offense
while holding a private ambulance service license;
      (5)   used a trade name for a private ambulance service other than the
one registered for that service with the director;
      (6)   is not fit, willing, or able to continue to operate a private
ambulance service in accordance with the license, this article, rules and
regulations established by the director under this article, and other
applicable state and federal laws; or
      (7)   failed to pay all fees required by this article.
   (b)   The director may suspend a private ambulance service license for a
period not to exceed 60 days. At the end of the suspension period, the licensee
may file with the director a written request for reinstatement of the license.
The director shall determine if the deficiency causing the suspension has been
corrected by the licensee and approve or deny reinstatement.
   (c)   The director shall notify the licensee in writing of a suspension or
revocation under this section and include in the notice:
      (1)   the reason for the suspension or revocation;
      (2)   the date the suspension or revocation becomes effective;
      (3)   the duration of a suspension; and
      (4)   a statement informing the licensee of the right of appeal.
   (d)   After receipt of a notice of suspension or revocation, the licensee
shall, on the date specified in the notice, surrender the license to the
director and discontinue operating a private ambulance service inside the city.
   (e)   Notwithstanding Subsection (d), if the licensee appeals a suspension
or revocation under this section, the licensee may continue to operate a
private ambulance service pending the appeal unless:
      (1)   the licensee fails to meet the minimum insurance requirements of
Section
15D-9.26 of this article; or
      (2)   the director determines that continued operation by the licensee
would impose a serious and imminent threat to the public safety.
   (f)   A person whose private ambulance service license is revoked shall not,
before the expiration of 24 months from the date the director revokes the
license or, in the case of an appeal, the date the permit and license appeal
board affirms the revocation:
      (1)   apply for another private ambulance service license; or
      (2)   perform as an employee, representative, or ambulance personnel for
a private ambulance service licensee. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.6.   APPEAL FROM LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   (a)   If the director suspends a private ambulance service license, the
action is final unless the licensee files an appeal, in writing, with the city
manager within 10 business days after notice of suspension.
   (b)   The city manager or the city manager’s designated representative shall
act as the appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The
hearing officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present
evidence and make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an
appeal hearing under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling
on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the
action of the director being appealed. The decision of the hearing officer is
final. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.7.   APPEAL FROM LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   If the director denies an application for a license or license renewal, or
revokes a license, the action is final unless the applicant or licensee files
an appeal with the permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. 21861)
Division 4. Ambulance Personnel Permit.
SEC. 15D-9.8.   AMBULANCE PERSONNEL PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he drives or acts as an attendant on a
private ambulance within the city without a valid ambulance personnel permit
issued under this article. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection
that the person was riding in the ambulance solely as an observer or as an
ambulance personnel trainee.
   (b)   A private ambulance service licensee shall not employ, contract with,
or otherwise allow a person to drive or act as an attendant on a private
ambulance owned, controlled, or operated by the licensee unless the person has
a valid ambulance personnel permit issued under this article. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.9.   QUALIFICATION FOR AMBULANCE PERSONNEL PERMIT.
   (a)   To qualify for an ambulance personnel permit, an applicant must:
      (1)   be at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States;
      (3)   hold a valid driver’s license issued by the State of Texas;
      (4)   be able to communicate in the English language;
      (5)   have 20/20 vision in both eyes, with or without corrective lenses,
and not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability that is
likely to prevent the person from exercising ordinary and reasonable control
over a motor vehicle or that is likely to otherwise endanger the public health
or safety;
      (6)   not have been convicted of more than four moving traffic violations
arising out of separate transactions, nor involved in more than two motor
vehicle accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that the applicant
was at fault, within any 12-month period during the preceding 36 months;
      (7)   not have been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   criminal homicide as described in Chapter 19 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (ii)   kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal
Code;
            (iii)   a sexual offense as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (iv)   an assaultive offense as described in Chapter 22 of the
Texas Penal Code;
            (v)   robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (vi)   burglary as described in Chapter 30 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in private or emergency ambulance service;
            (vii)   theft as described in Chapter 31 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in private or emergency ambulance service;
            (viii)   fraud as described in Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in private or emergency ambulance service;
            (ix)   tampering with a govern- mental record as described in
Chapter 37 of the Texas Penal Code, but only if the offense was committed
against a person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in
private or emergency ambulance service;
            (x)   public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in
Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (xi)   the private, carrying, or possession of a weapon in
violation of Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal Code, or of any comparable state or
federal law, that is punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xii)   a violation of the Dangerous Drugs Act (Article 4476-14,
Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), or of any comparable state or federal law, that
is punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xiii)   a violation of the Controlled Substances Act (Article
4476-15, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), or of any comparable state or federal
law, that is punishable as a felony under the applicable law; or
            (xiv)   criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in
Subdivision (7)(A)(i) through (xiii) of this subsection;
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony
offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the
applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination
of misdemeanor offenses;
      (8)   not have been convicted of, or discharged by probation or deferred
adjudication for, driving while intoxicated:
         (A)   within the preceding 12 months; or
         (B)   more than one time within the preceding five years;
      (9)   not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics;
      (10)   be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest;
      (11)   be sanitary and well-groomed in dress and person;
      (12)   be employed by a licensed private ambulance service;
      (13)   have successfully completed within the preceding 36 months a
defensive driving course approved by the Texas Education Agency and be able to
present proof of completion; and
      (14)   meet all standards and requirements for emergency medical services
personnel set forth in the Emergency Medical Services Act (Chapter 773, Texas
Health and Safety Code), as amended, and be currently certified by and
registered with the Texas Department of Health as either a basic emergency
medical technician, a specially skilled emergency medical technician, or a
paramedic emergency medical technician.
   (b)   An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in Subsection
(a)(7) or (8), for which the required time period has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
may qualify for an ambulance personnel permit only if the director determines
that the applicant is presently fit to engage in the occupation of ambulance
personnel for a private ambulance service. In determining present fitness under
this section, the director shall consider the following:
      (1)   the extent and nature of the applicant’s past criminal activity;
      (2)   the age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the
crime;
      (3)   the amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant’s last
criminal activity;
      (4)   the conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and
following the criminal activity;
      (5)   evidence of the applicant’s rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort
while incarcerated or following release; and
      (6)   other evidence of the applicant’s present fitness, including
letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional
officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the
applicant; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the applicant
resides; and any other persons in contact with the applicant.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to
secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present
fitness under Subsection (b) of this section and under Section
15D-9.15 of this article.
   (d)   As an additional qualification for an ambulance personnel permit, the
director may require the applicant to pass an examination testing general
knowledge of traffic laws and the geography of the city. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.10.   APPLICATION FOR AMBULANCE PERSONNEL PERMIT.
   To obtain an ambulance personnel permit or renewal of an ambulance personnel
permit, a person must file with the director a completed written application on
a form provided for that purpose and a nonrefundable application fee of $116.
The director shall require each application to state any information the
director considers necessary to determine whether an applicant is qualified.
(Ord. Nos. 21861; 25048; 27695; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 15D-9.11.   INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.
   (a)   For the purpose of determining qualification under Section
15D-9.9(a)(5) for a permit or permit renewal, the director may require an
applicant to submit to a physical examination conducted by a licensed
physician, at the applicant’s expense, and to furnish to the director a signed
statement from the physician certifying that the physician has examined the
applicant and that in the physician’s professional opinion the applicant is
qualified under Section
15D-9.9(a)(5).
   (b)   Upon request of the director, the police department shall investigate
each applicant and furnish the director a report concerning the applicant’s
qualification under Section
15D-9.9. The municipal court shall furnish the director a copy of the
applicant’s motor vehicle driving record and a list of any warrants of arrest
for the applicant that might be outstanding.
   (c)   The director may conduct any other investigation as the director
considers necessary to determine whether an applicant for an ambulance
personnel permit is qualified. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.12.   ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF AMBULANCE PERSONNEL PERMIT.
   (a)   If the director determines that an applicant is qualified, the
director shall issue an ambulance personnel permit to the applicant. An
ambulance personnel permit, or any accompanying badge, sticker, ticket, or
emblem, is not assignable or transferable.
   (b)   The director shall delay until final adjudication the approval of the
application of any applicant who is under indictment for or has charges pending
for:
      (1)   a felony offense involving a crime described in Section
15D-9.9(a)(7)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) or criminal attempt to commit
any of those offenses; or
      (2)   any offense involving driving while intoxicated.
   (c)   The director shall deny the application for an ambulance personnel
permit if the director determines that the applicant:
      (1)   is not qualified under Section
15D-9.9;
      (2)   refuses to submit to or does not pass a medical examination
authorized under Section
15D-9.11(a) or a written examination authorized under Section
15D-9.9(d);
      (3)   makes a false statement of a material matter in an application for
an ambulance personnel permit or permit renewal, or in a hearing concerning the
permit; or
      (4)   fails to comply with this article or any rule or regulation
established by the director under this article.
   (d)   If the director determines that an ambulance personnel permit should
be denied the applicant, the director shall notify the applicant in writing
that the application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial
and a statement informing the applicant of the right of appeal. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.13.   EXPIRATION OF PERMIT; VOIDANCE UPON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION
OF STATE DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (a)   Except in the case of a provisional or probationary permit, an
ambulance personnel permit expires one year from the date of issuance.
   (b)   If a permittee’s state driver’s license is suspended or revoked by the
state, the ambulance personnel permit automatically becomes void. A permittee
shall notify the director and the licensee for whom the permittee drives within
three days of a suspension or revocation of a state driver’s license and shall
immediately surrender the ambulance personnel permit to the director and cease
to drive or act as an attendant on a private ambulance. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.14.   PROVISIONAL PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may issue a provisional ambulance personnel permit if the
director determines that:
      (1)   the number of ambulance personnel is inadequate to meet the city’s
need for private ambulance service, in which case he may issue the number
necessary to meet the need; or
      (2)   it is necessary to allow the director to complete investigation of
an applicant for an ambulance personnel permit.
   (b)   A provisional ambulance personnel permit expires on the date shown on
the permit, which date shall not exceed 45 days after the date of issuance, or
upon the applicant’s being denied an ambulance personnel permit, whichever
occurs first.
   (c)   The director shall not issue a provisional permit to a person who has
been previously denied an ambulance personnel permit. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.15.   PROBATIONARY PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may issue a probationary ambulance personnel permit to an
applicant who is not qualified for an ambulance personnel permit under Section
15D-9.9 if the applicant:
      (1)   could qualify under Section
15D-9.9 for an ambulance personnel permit within one year from the date of
application;
      (2)   holds a valid state driver’s license or occupation driver’s
license; and
      (3)   is determined by the director, using the criteria listed in Section
15D-9.9(b) of this article, to be presently fit to engage in the occupation of
ambulance personnel.
   (b)   A probationary permit may be issued for a period not to exceed one
year.
   (c)   The director may prescribe appropriate terms and conditions for a
probationary permit as the director determines are necessary. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.16.   DUPLICATE PERMIT.
   If an ambulance personnel permit is lost, destroyed, or mutilated, the
director may issue the permittee a duplicate permit upon receiving payment of a
duplicate permit fee of $53. (Ord. Nos. 21861; 25048; 27695; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 15D-9.17.   DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   A permittee shall keep an ambulance personnel permit in the permittee’s
possession at all times while on duty. The permittee shall allow the director,
the fire chief, or a peace officer to examine the ambulance personnel permit
upon request. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.18.   SUSPENSION BY A DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE.
   (a)   If a representative designated by the director to enforce this article
determines that a permittee has failed to comply with this article (except
Section
15D-9.9) or a regulation established under this article, the representative may
suspend the ambulance personnel permit for a period of time not to exceed three
days by personally serving the permittee with a written notice of the
suspension. The notice must include:
      (1)   the reason for suspension;
      (2)   the date the suspension begins;
      (3)   the duration of the suspension; and
      (4)   a statement informing the permittee of the right of appeal.
   (b)   A suspension under this section may be appealed to the director if the
permittee requests an appeal at the time the representative serves notice of
the suspension. When an appeal is requested, the suspension may not take effect
until a hearing is provided by the director.
   (c)   The director may order an expedited hearing under this section, to be
held as soon as possible after the permittee requests an appeal. The director
may affirm, reverse, or modify the order of the representative. The decision of
the director is final. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.19.   SUSPENSION OF AMBULANCE PERSONNEL PERMIT.
   (a)   If the director determines that a permittee has failed to comply with
this article (except Section
15D-9.9) or a regulation established under this article, the director may
suspend the ambulance personnel permit for a definite period of time not to
exceed 60 days.
   (b)   If at any time the director determines that a permittee is not
qualified under Section
15D-9.9, or is under indictment or has charges pending for any offense
involving driving while intoxicated or a felony offense involving a crime
described in Section
15D-9.9(a)(7)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) or criminal attempt to commit
any of those offenses, the director shall suspend the ambulance personnel
permit until the director determines that the permittee is qualified or that
the charges against the permittee have been finally adjudicated.
   (c)   A permittee whose ambulance personnel permit is suspended shall not
drive or act as an attendant on a private ambulance within the city during the
period of suspension.
   (d)   The director shall, in writing, notify the permittee and the licensee
employing the permittee of a suspension under this section. The notice must
include:
      (1)   the reason for the suspension;
      (2)   the date the director orders the suspension to begin;
      (3)   the duration of the suspension or if it is under Subsection (b);
and
      (4)   a statement informing the permittee of the right of appeal.
   (e)   The period of suspension begins on the date specified by the director
or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the appeal hearing
officer. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.20.   REVOCATION OF AMBULANCE PERSONNEL PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may revoke an ambulance personnel permit if the director
determines that the permittee:
      (1)   drove or acted as an attendant on a private ambulance within the
city during a period in which the permittee’s ambulance personnel permit was
suspended;
      (2)   made a false statement of a material matter in an application for
an ambulance personnel permit or permit renewal, or in a hearing concerning the
permit;
      (3)   engaged in conduct that constitutes a ground for suspension under
Section
15D-9.19 and received either a suspension in excess of three days or a
conviction for violation of this article, two times within the 12-month period
preceding the conduct or three times within the 24-month period preceding the
conduct;
      (4)   engaged in conduct that could reasonably be determined to be
detrimental to the public safety;
      (5)   failed to comply with a condition of a probationary permit; or
      (6)   is under indictment for or was convicted of any felony offense
while holding an ambulance personnel permit.
   (b)   A person whose ambulance personnel permit is revoked shall not:
      (1)   apply for another ambulance personnel permit before the expiration
of 12 months from the date the director revokes the permit or, in the case of
an appeal, the date the appeal hearing officer affirms the revocation; or
      (2)   drive or act as an attendant on any private ambulance within the
city.
   (c)   The director shall, in writing, notify the permittee and the licensee
employing the permittee of a revocation. The notice shall include:
      (1)   the reason for the revocation;
      (2)   the date the director orders the revocation; and
      (3)   a statement informing the permittee of the right of appeal. (Ord.
21861)
SEC. 15D-9.21.   PRIVATE AMBULANCE OPERATION AFTER SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR
DENIAL OF PERMIT RENEWAL.
   (a)   After receiving notice of suspension or revocation of a permit or
denial of a permit renewal, the permittee shall, on the date specified in the
notice, surrender the ambulance personnel permit to the director and
discontinue driving or acting as an attendant on a private ambulance within the
city.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Section
15D-9.19(c), Section
15D-9.20(b)(2), and Subsection (a) of this section, if the permittee appeals
the suspension or revocation of an ambulance personnel permit, the permittee
may continue to drive or act as an attendant on a private ambulance within the
city pending the appeal unless:
      (1)   the permittee is not qualified under Section
15D-9.9; or
      (2)   the director determines that continued operation by the permittee
would impose an immediate threat to the public safety. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.22.   APPEAL OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   A person may appeal a denial of an ambulance personnel permit or
permit renewal, suspension of an ambulance personnel permit, or revocation of
an ambulance personnel permit, if the person requests an appeal in writing,
delivered to the city manager not more than 10 business days after notice of
the director’s action is received.
   (b)   The city manager or the city manager’s designated representative shall
act as the appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The
hearing officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present
evidence and make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an
appeal hearing under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling
on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the
action of the director being appealed. The decision of the hearing officer is
final as to available administrative remedies. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.23.   CURRENT MAILING ADDRESS OF PERMITTEE.
   A person issued an ambulance personnel permit shall maintain a current
mailing address on file with the director. The permittee shall notify the
director of any change in this mailing address within 10 business days of the
change. (Ord. 21861)
Division 5. Miscellaneous Regulations.
SEC. 15D-9.24.   DUTY OF LICENSEE AND PERMITTEE TO COMPLY.
   (a)   Licensee. In the operation of a private ambulance service, a licensee
shall comply with the terms and conditions of the license, lawful orders of the
director, this article, rules and regulations established under this article,
and other city ordinances and state and federal laws applicable to the
operation of a private ambulance service.
   (b)   Permittee. While driving or acting as an attendant on a private
ambulance within the city, a permittee shall comply with the terms and
conditions of the permit, this article, rules and regulations established under
this article, other city ordinances and state and federal laws applicable to
the operation of a motor vehicle and applicable to emergency medical services
personnel, lawful orders of the director, and orders issued by the private
ambulance service licensee employing the permittee in connection with the
licensee’s discharge of duties under the license and this article. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.25.   LICENSEE’S DUTY TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE BY PERMITTEES.
   (a)   A private ambulance service licensee shall establish policy and take
action to discourage, prevent, or correct violations of this article by
ambulance personnel who are employed by the licensee.
   (b)   A private ambulance service licensee shall not allow any ambulance
personnel employed by the licensee to operate a private ambulance within the
city if the licensee knows or has reasonable cause to suspect that the
ambulance personnel has failed to comply with this article, rules and
regulations established by the director, or other applicable law. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.26.   INSURANCE.
   (a)   A licensee shall procure and keep in full force and effect automobile
liability insurance, malpractice insurance, and commercial general liability
insurance written by an insurance company approved by the State of Texas and
acceptable to the city and issued in the standard form approved by the Texas
Department of Insurance. All provisions of the policies must be acceptable to
the city. The insured provisions of each policy must name the city and its
officers and employees as additional insureds, and the coverage provisions must
provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or
property by reason of the operation of a private ambulance service by the
licensee.
   (b)   The automobile liability insurance must provide combined single limits
of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not less than $300,000
for each occurrence, or the equivalent, for each ambulance used by the
licensee, with a maximum deductible not to exceed the amount allowed by the
Texas Safety Responsibility Act (6701h, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), as
amended. The insurance must include uninsured and underinsured motorist
coverage in amounts of not less than $20,000 per person and $40,000 per
accident for bodily injury and $15,000 per accident for property damage, or the
equivalent. Aggregate limits of liability are prohibited.
   (c)   The malpractice insurance must provide limits of liability of not less
than $300,000 for each claim, or the equivalent.
   (d)   The commercial general liability insurance must be broad form and
provide limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not less
than $300,000 combined single limit, or the equivalent.
   (e)   If a vehicle is removed from service, the licensee shall maintain the
insurance coverage required by this section for the vehicle until the director
receives satisfactory proof that all evidence of operation as an ambulance has
been removed from the vehicle.
   (f)   Insurance required under this section must include:
      (1)   a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required
to notify the director in writing not fewer than 10 days before canceling,
failing to renew, or making a material change to the insurance policy; and
      (2)   a provision to cover all vehicles, whether owned or not owned by
the licensee, operated under the private ambulance service license.
   (g)   A license will not be granted or renewed unless the applicant or
licensee furnishes the director with such proof of insurance as the director
considers necessary to determine whether the applicant or licensee is
adequately insured under this section.
   (h)   If the insurance of a licensee lapses or is canceled and new insurance
is not obtained, the director shall suspend the license until the licensee
provides evidence that insurance coverage required by this section has been
obtained. A person shall not operate a private ambulance service while a
license is suspended under this section whether or not the action is appealed.
A $47 fee must be paid before a license suspended under this section will be
reinstated. (Ord. 21861; 33232)
Division 6. Service Rules and Regulations.
SEC. 15D-9.27.   PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICE.
   (a)   Each private ambulance service licensee shall:
      (1)   be available to provide private ambulance service at least Monday
through Friday from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except on legal holidays; and
      (2)   have a working, publicly-listed telephone that must be physically
answered by the licensee or an employee 24 hours a day.
   (b)   A licensee shall provide the director with not less than 10 days’
written notice prior to any change in the business address or telephone number
of the private ambulance service.
   (c)   A licensee who experiences interruption of telephone service to the
place of business shall notify the director immediately. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.28.   APPAREL TO BE WORN BY AMBULANCE PERSONNEL.
   (a)   A licensee shall specify and require an item of apparel or an item
placed on the apparel to be worn by ambulance personnel employed by the
licensee, which item must be of such distinctive and uniform design as to
readily identify the licensee’s service and must bear the name of the
licensee’s service. The item specified by each licensee must be approved by the
director to ensure that ambulance personnel of one licensee may be easily
distinguished from ambulance personnel of another and to ensure the neat
appearance of ambulance personnel.
   (b)   While on duty, ambulance personnel shall wear the item specified by
the licensee who employs the ambulance personnel and shall comply with such
other identification regulations prescribed in the private ambulance service
license. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.29.   RECORDS AND REPORTS OF PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICE.
   (a)   Each licensee shall maintain at a single location accurate business
records of the private ambulance service. A licensee shall make records
available for inspection by the director upon request. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.30.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   intentionally follows any police car or fire apparatus that is
traveling in response to an emergency call with red or white lights and siren
or intentionally follows any ambulance to or near the scene of an emergency
call;
      (2)   by word or gesture, solicits on a public street within the city the
business of transporting a sick, injured, or deceased person for compensation;
      (3)   intentionally informs the fire alarm dispatcher, police dispatcher,
or other fire or police official that an ambulance or more than one ambulance
is needed at a location or address when the person knows that such a statement
is false; or
      (4)   operates a private ambulance or uses any equipment in providing
private ambulance service that fails to comply with all minimum safety and
equipment standards required for a basic life support vehicle by the Emergency
Medical Services Act (Chapter 773, Texas Health and Safety Code), as amended,
or by any rule or regulation promulgated under that act.
   (b)   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he:
      (1)   causes, induces, or seeks to induce, without good cause, a change
of destination to or from a hospital or other place specified by the person
requesting private ambulance service; or
      (2)   operates or permits the operation of a private ambulance on an
emergency run or in response to an emergency call or with the use of red or
white lights and sirens, without obtaining permission from the fire alarm
dispatcher. (Ord. Nos. 21861; 32703)
Division 7. Vehicles and Equipment.
SEC. 15D-9.31.   INSPECTION OF PRIVATE AMBULANCES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   A licensee shall only provide private ambulance service with vehicles
designed and constructed to transport sick and injured persons in comfort and
safety. A licensee shall maintain vehicles in safe mechanical condition and
shall maintain the interior and exterior of the vehicles in good repair and in
a clean, sanitary condition.
   (b)   A licensee or applicant for a license shall have each vehicle to be
used in private ambulance service inspected in a manner approved by the
director before issuance of a license and at such other times as may be ordered
by the director. Inspection must determine safety of the vehicle, condition of
maintenance, and compliance with state and federal laws.
   (c)   The fee for each inspection of each vehicle to be operated under a
private ambulance service license is $344.
   (d)   If a vehicle is involved in an accident or collision during the term
of the license, the licensee shall notify the director within five days after
the accident or collision. Before operating the vehicle again under the
license, a licensee shall have the vehicle reinspected for safety and shall
send to the director a sworn affidavit that the vehicle has been restored to
its previous condition.
   (e)   The director shall designate the time and place for annual inspection
of vehicles operated under a license. If the director designates someone other
than a city employee to perform the inspection, the applicant or licensee shall
bear the reasonable cost of inspection.
   (f)   A licensee may contract for maintenance but shall be responsible for
maintaining all vehicles operated under the license in safe operating
condition. (Ord. Nos. 21861; 25048; 30215; https://files.amlegal.com/pdffiles/
Dallas/33232.pdfhttps://files.amlegal.com/pdffiles/Dallas/33232.pdf">33232)
SEC. 15D-9.32.   VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   The licensee, owner, or permittee of a private ambulance shall provide
and maintain in the vehicle all equipment required by the director, which shall
be specified in the private ambulance service license.
   (b)   Each vehicle must have:
      (1)   a paint scheme that has been approved by the director;
      (2)   the trade name of the company and the equipment number permanently
affixed in a manner and location approved by the director; and
      (3)   a decal complying with Section
15D-9.33.
   (c)   Each private ambulance must be licensed as an emergency medical
services vehicle with the Texas Department of Health. Each private ambulance
and all private ambulance equipment must comply with all applicable federal and
state motor vehicle safety standards and with the standards for emergency
medical services vehicles set forth in the Emergency Medical Services Act
(Chapter 773, Texas Health and Safety Code), as amended. All safety mechanisms
on each vehicle must be operative and in good repair, including, but not
limited to, headlights, taillights, turn signals, brakes, brakelights,
emergency lights, windshield wipers, wiper blades, handles opening doors and
windows, tires, and spare tires.
   (d)   Each private ambulance, while on an ambulance call, must be
accompanied by at least two ambulance personnel permitted under this article.
One of the ambulance personnel shall serve as the driver while the other
remains in attendance on the sick or injured patient.
   (e)   Clean and sanitary bed linens must be provided on each private
ambulance for each patient carried. Bed linens must be changed as soon as
practical after the discharge of a patient, but before picking up another
patient. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.33.   DECALS.
   (a)   A licensee shall obtain from the director a decal indicating a private
ambulance’s authority to operate in the city. The decal must be attached to
each vehicle in a manner and location approved by the director.
   (b)   The director may cause a decal to be removed from a private ambulance
that at any time fails to meet the minimum standards for appearance, condition,
age, or equipment. The fee for reissuance of a decal to a private ambulance
from which a decal has been removed by the director is $10. The fee for a
duplicate decal for one lost, destroyed, or mutilated, is $5.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   operates a private ambulance in the city with an expired decal or
with no decal affixed to it; or
      (2)   attaches a decal to a vehicle not authorized to operate as a
private ambulance in the city. (Ord. 21861)
Division 8. Enforcement.
SEC. 15D-9.34.   AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   The director, the fire chief, or a peace officer may inspect a private
ambulance service operating in the city to determine whether the service
complies with this article, rules and regulations established by the director
under this article, and other applicable law. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.35.   ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Officers of the police department shall assist in the enforcement of this
article. A police officer, upon observing a violation of this article or the
rules and regulations established by the director under this article, shall
take necessary enforcement action to insure effective regulation of private
ambulance service. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.36.   CORRECTION ORDER.
   (a)   If the director determines that a licensee is in violation of the
terms of the license, this article, the rules and regulations established by
the director under this article, a lawful order of the director, or other
applicable law, the director may notify the licensee in writing of the
violation and by written order direct the licensee to correct the violation
within a reasonable period of time. In setting the time for correction, the
director shall consider the degree of danger to the public health or safety and
the nature of the violation. If the violation involves equipment that is unsafe
or functioning improperly, the director shall order the licensee to immediately
cease use of the equipment.
   (b)   If the director determines that a violation is an imminent and serious
threat to the public health or safety, the director shall order the licensee to
correct the violation immediately. If the licensee fails to comply, the
director shall promptly take or cause to be taken any action he considers
necessary to the immediate enforcement of the order.
   (c)   The director shall include in a notice issued under this section:
      (1)   an identification of the violation;
      (2)   the date of issuance of the notice;
      (3)   the time period within which the violation must be corrected;
      (4)   a warning that failure to comply with the order may result in
suspension or revocation of the license, imposition of a fine, or both; and
      (5)   a statement indicating that the order may be appealed to the city
manager. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.37.   SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (a)   A private ambulance service licensee shall designate and maintain a
representative to:
      (1)   receive service of notice required under this article to be given a
licensee; and
      (2)   serve notice required under this article to be given an ambulance
personnel permittee employed by a licensee.
   (b)   Notice required under this article to be given:
      (1)   a licensee must be personally served by the director on the
licensee or the licensee’s designated representative or served by certified
United States mail, five-day return receipt requested, to the address last
known to the director of the person to be notified, or to the designated
representative of the licensee;
      (2)   a permittee must be personally served by the director or served by
certified United States mail, five-day return receipt requested, to the address
last known to the director of the person to be notified, or to the designated
representative for the permittee; or
      (3)   a person other than a permittee or a licensee under this article
may be served in the manner prescribed by Subsection (b)(2) of this section.
   (c)   Service executed in accordance with this section constitutes notice to
the person to whom the notice is addressed. The date of service for a notice
that is mailed is the date of receipt. (Ord. 21861)
SEC. 15D-9.38.   APPEAL.
   (a)   A licensee may appeal a correction order issued under Section
15D-9.36 if an appeal is requested in writing not more than 10 days after
notice of the order or action is received.
   (b)   The city manager or the city manager’s designated representative shall
act as the appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The
hearing officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present
evidence and make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an
appeal hearing under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling
on the basis of a preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or a part of
the order of the director. The decision of the hearing officer is final. (Ord.
21861)
SEC. 15D-9.39.   CRIMINAL OFFENSES; DEFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he violates or attempts to violate a
provision of this article applicable to him. A culpable mental state is not
required for the commission of an offense under this article unless the
provision defining the conduct expressly requires a culpable mental state. A
separate offense is committed each time an offense occurs. An offense committed
under this article is punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$2,000.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this article that a person or
vehicle was transporting a deceased person within the city solely for:
      (1)   a funeral home for the purpose of burial or preparation for burial;
or
      (2)   a county medical examiner’s office.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Section
15D-7(a), (c), and (d); Section
15D-9.8; Section
15D-9.32(a), (b), (d), and (e); and Section
15D-9.33(c)(1) that a private ambulance service was only picking up a sick,
injured, or deceased person at a health care facility within the city for the
purpose of transporting that person by private ambulance to a location outside
the city pursuant to the terms of a subscription program for emergency medical
services approved by the Texas Board of Health in accordance with Section
773.011 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, provided that:
      (1)   the sick, injured, or deceased person was a prepaid subscriber to
the program operated by the private ambulance service;
      (2)   the sick, injured, or deceased person was originally transported
from a location outside the city to a health care facility within the city by
the same private ambulance service;
      (3)   the private ambulance service does not have a place of business
located within any county in which the city of Dallas is incorporated;
      (4)   the private ambulance service complies with all state requirements
for emergency medical services providers, emergency medical services personnel,
and private ambulances; and
      (5)   the private ambulance service does not pick up sick, injured, or
deceased persons in the city more than 15 times within any 12-month period.
   (d)   Prosecution of an offense under Subsection (a) does not prevent the
use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person
charged with or the conduct involved in the offense. (Ord. 21861)
ARTICLE II.
EMERGENCY WRECKERS.
Division 1. General Provisions.
SEC. 15D-10.   STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide for the protection of the public
interest as it relates to the removal of wrecked, disabled, and illegally
parked vehicles from public streets and other public property. To this end,
this article provides for the regulation of emergency wrecker service, to be
administered in a manner that protects the public health and safety and
promotes the public convenience and necessity. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-11.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.
   In addition to the powers and duties prescribed elsewhere in this article,
the director is authorized to:
      (1)   administer and enforce all provisions of this article;
      (2)   keep records of all licenses and permits issued, suspended, or
revoked under this article;
      (3)   keep records of all authorized emergency wreckers;
      (4)   by written order establish such rules and regulations, consistent
with this article, as may be determined necessary to discharge the director’s
duty under, or to effect the policy of, this article;
      (5)   adopt new emergency wrecker procedures for experimentation on a
temporary basis, after reasonable notice to the licensees;
      (6)   conduct, when appropriate, periodic investigations of emergency
wrecker companies throughout the city; and
      (7)   require periodic reports as necessary to evaluate each emergency
wrecker company’s operations. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 15612; 16850; 24661)
SEC. 15D-12.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE.
   In addition to the powers and duties prescribed elsewhere in this article,
the chief of police is authorized to:
      (1)   enforce all provisions of this article;
      (2)   by written order establish such rules and regulations, consistent
with this article, as may be determined necessary to discharge the chief of
police’s duty under, or to effect the policy of, this article;
      (3)   adopt new emergency wrecker procedures for experimentation on a
temporary basis, after reasonable notice to the licensees;
      (4)   conduct, when appropriate, periodic investigations of emergency
wrecker companies throughout the city; and
      (5)   keep records of service adequacy and responsiveness of licensees
and provide these records to the director upon request. (Ord. Nos. 13977;
14685; 16850; 24661)
SEC. 15D-13.   ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Before adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule or regulation, the
director or the chief of police shall hold a public hearing on the proposal.
   (b)   The director or the chief of police shall fix the time and place of
the hearing and, in addition to notice required under the Public Information
Act (Chapter 552, Texas Government Code), as amended, shall notify each
licensee and such other persons as the director or chief of police determines
are interested in the subject matter of the hearing.
   (c)   After the public hearing, the director or the chief of police shall
notify the licensees and other interested persons of the action taken and shall
post an order adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule or regulation on the
official bulletin board in the city hall for a period of not fewer than 10
days. The order becomes effective immediately upon expiration of the posting
period. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-14.   EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   This article does not apply to an emergency wrecker company providing
emergency wrecker service within the city of Dallas on behalf of another city
in the performance of the terms of a duly authorized interlocal agreement
between the city of Dallas and the other city if:
      (1)   the emergency wrecker company holds a valid license from and is in
good standing with the other city;
      (2)   the other city’s regulation of emergency wrecker companies and
emergency wrecker service is as strict as or stricter than regulation by the
city of Dallas;
      (3)   the emergency wrecker company would not be disqualified under
Section
15D-22 from holding an emergency wrecker service license under this article;
      (4)   the emergency wrecker company complies with the vehicle and
equipment specifications and the hours of operation required respectively by
Sections
15D-58 and
15D-52;
      (5)   the emergency wrecker company complies with the insurance
requirements of Section
15D-46; and
      (6)   the emergency wrecker company does not charge more for emergency
wrecker service provided in the city of Dallas than is allowed under Section
15D-57.
   (b)   This article does not apply to:
      (1)   a governmental entity when dispatching an emergency wrecker
company, pursuant to Section 545.305 of the Texas Transportation Code or other
applicable state law, to perform a power, duty, or function that is within the
authority and jurisdiction of the governmental entity; or
      (2)   an emergency wrecker company providing emergency wrecker service
within the city of Dallas in response to a dispatch from a governmental entity
as described in Paragraph (1) of this subsection.
   (c)   This article does not apply to Dallas County when dispatching an
emergency wrecker company to an accident or other police scene, or to an
emergency wrecker company providing emergency wrecker service within the city
of Dallas in response to a dispatch from Dallas County, if:
      (1)   the emergency wrecker service is being provided pursuant to a duly
authorized interlocal agreement between the city of Dallas and Dallas County;
      (2)   the emergency wrecker company is currently licensed under this
article to perform emergency wrecker service within the city of Dallas;
      (3)   the emergency wrecker company complies with the vehicle and
equipment specifications and the hours of operation required respectively by
Sections
15D-58 and
15D-52;
      (4)   the emergency wrecker company complies with the insurance
requirements of Section
15D-46; and
      (5)   the emergency wrecker company does not charge more for emergency
wrecker service performed in the city of Dallas than is allowed under Section
15D-57. (Ord. Nos. 21311; 24661; 26992)
SEC. 15D-15.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   ACCIDENT means any occurrence that renders a vehicle wrecked.
      (2)   APPLICANT means:
         (A)   for purposes of Division 2 of this article, a person in whose
name a license to engage in emergency wrecker service will be issued under
Section
15D-23 and each individual who has a 20 percent or greater ownership interest
in the emergency wrecker service business; and
         (B)   for purposes of Division 3 of this article, an individual
applying for a wrecker driver’s permit under Section
15D-30.
      (3)   BUSINESS LOCATION means the place of business, required to be
designated in Section
15D-20, where a licensee’s primary emergency wrecker service business activity
is conducted, which location is staffed by the licensed emergency wrecker
company’s employees and equipped with standard office furniture, equipment, and
other items necessary to conduct the normal activities and business of an
emergency wrecker service.
      (4)   CHIEF OF POLICE means the chief of police for the city of Dallas,
and includes representatives, agents, and department employees designated by
the chief.
      (5)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (6)   CONVICTION means a conviction in a federal court or court of any
state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation
that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned.
      (7)   CUSTODIAL ARREST means an arrest during which a peace officer
employed by the city takes the owner or operator of a vehicle into custody and
determines that it is necessary to cause the person’s vehicle to be removed
from the police scene for storage or for use in a criminal investigation.
      (8)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article, and includes
representatives, agents, and department employees designated by the director.
      (9)   DISABLED VEHICLE means a vehicle that reasonably requires removal
by a wrecker because it:
         (A)   has been rendered unsafe to be driven as the result of some
occurrence other than a wreck, including, but not limited to, mechanical
failure, breakdown, fire, or vandalism; or
         (B)   is in a safe driving condition, but the owner is not present,
able, or permitted to drive.
      (9.1)   DISPATCHER means the chief of police for the City of Dallas, and
includes representatives, agents, and department employees designated by the
chief, as well as third-parties authorized by the chief of police to dispatch
wreckers.
      (10)   DRIVER means an individual who drives or operates a wrecker.
      (11)   EMERGENCY WRECKER COMPANY means a person who owns, controls, or
has a financial interest in an emergency wrecker service.
      (12)   EMERGENCY WRECKER SERVICE means the business of towing or removing
wrecked, disabled, illegally parked, or city-owned vehicles from the streets
upon request of the chief of police.
      (13)   HEAVY DUTY WRECKER means a wrecker that:
         (A)   has a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of not less
than 48,000 pounds;
         (B)   has a power-operated winch, winch line, and boom, with a
factory-rated lifting capacity of not less than 50,000 pounds and a dual line
capacity of not less than 20,000 pounds;
         (C)   has an underlift device with a factory-rated lifting capacity of
not less than 14,000 pounds when extended;
         (D)   has a dual rear axle; and
         (E)   is capable of towing a vehicle that weighs up to 80,000 pounds.
      (14)   ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE means a vehicle that is parked on a
street or other public property in violation of any city ordinance or state law
regulating the parking of vehicles.
      (15)   INCIDENT MANAGEMENT TOWING OPERATOR’S LICENSE means a tow truck
operator’s license issued by the state under Section 2308.153 of the Texas
Occupations Code, as amended.
      (16)   LAWFUL ORDER means a verbal or written directive that:
         (A)   is issued by the director or the chief of police in the
performance of official duties in the enforcement of this article and any rules
and regulations promulgated under this article; and
         (B)   does not violate the United States Constitution or the Texas
Constitution.
      (17)   LICENSEE means a person licensed under this article to engage in
emergency wrecker service. The term includes:
         (A)   any individual who has a 20 percent or greater ownership
interest in the licensed business; and
         (B)   any operator of the licensed business.
      (18)   LIGHT DUTY WRECKER means a wrecker that has:
         (A)   a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of not less than
12,500 pounds; and
         (B)   either:
            (i)   a power-operated winch, winch line, and boom, with a factory-
rated lifting capacity of not less than 8,000 pounds, single line capacity; or
            (ii)   an underlift device with a factory-rated lifting capacity of
not less than 3,000 pounds when extended.
      (19)   LOWBOY UNIT means a vehicle that is designed and equipped so as to
be capable of carrying another vehicle upon itself for the purpose of
transporting the vehicle when it cannot be safely transported by a conventional
wrecker and that:
         (A)   consists of:
            (i)   a dual-axle truck tractor equipped with a power-operated
winch and winch line that has a factory-rated lifting capacity of not less than
20,000 pounds, single line capacity; and
            (ii)   a trailer with a steel or aluminum carrier bed that is at
least 40 feet long, with a load rating of not less than 40,000 pounds; and
         (B)   complies with all applicable state and federal vehicle weight
laws.
      (20)   MEDIUM DUTY WRECKER means a wrecker that has:
         (A)   a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of not less than
18,000 pounds; and
         (B)   a power-operated winch, winch line, and boom, with a factory-
rated lifting capacity of not less than 24,000 pounds and a dual line capacity
of not less than 8,000 pounds.
      (21)   OPERATE means to drive or to be in control of a wrecker.
      (22)   OPERATOR means the holder of an emergency wrecker service license.
      (23)   PARKING BAN means certain hours of the day during which the
standing, parking, or stopping of vehicles is prohibited along designated
streets as indicated by signs authorized by the traffic engineer.
      (24)   PERMITTEE means an individual who has been issued a wrecker
driver’s permit under this article.
      (25)   PERSON means an individual, assumed name entity, partnership,
joint-venture, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
      (26)   POLICE DEPARTMENT means the police department of the city of
Dallas.
      (27)   POLICE SCENE means a location at which:
         (A)   an accident has taken place that is subject to city police field
investigation;
         (B)   city police have recovered a stolen vehicle;
         (C)   a vehicle has been abandoned on a street or other public
property;
         (D)   a custodial arrest has taken place;
         (E)   a disabled vehicle is blocking a traffic lane of a street; or
         (F)   an illegally parked vehicle is subject by law to removal or
impoundment by the chief of police or any other authorized city official.
      (28)   RAPID RESPONSE LOCATION means an area designated under Section
15D-53.1 to which an emergency wrecker must provide rapid removal of wrecked,
disabled, or illegally parked vehicles.
      (29)   RAPID RESPONSE LIST means a list, maintained by the chief of
police as provided for in Section 15D-53 of this article, of licensed emergency
wrecker companies participating in the rapid response program.
      (30)   Reserved.
      (31)   STREET means any public street, road, right-of-way, alley, avenue,
lane, square, highway, freeway, expressway, high occupancy vehicle lane, or
other public way within the corporate limits of the city. The term includes all
paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way.
      (32)   TILT BED/ROLL BACK CARRIER means a motor vehicle that is designed
and equipped so as to be capable of lifting another vehicle upon itself for the
purpose of transporting the vehicle when it cannot be safely transported by a
conventional wrecker and that:
         (A)   has a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of not less
than 15,000 pounds;
         (B)   has a steel or aluminum carrier bed that is at least 17 feet
long, with a load rating of not less than 8,000 pounds;
         (C)   has a power-operated winch and winch line, with a factory-rated
lifting capacity of not less than 8,000 pounds, single line capacity;
         (D)   has a wheel lift tow bar with a factory-rated lifting capacity
of not less than 3,000 pounds; and
         (E)   complies with all applicable state and federal vehicle weight
laws.
      (33)   VEHICLE means a device in, upon, or by which a person or property
may be transported on a public street. The term includes, but is not limited
to, an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational
vehicle, or trailer, but does not include a device moved by human power or used
exclusively upon a stationary rail or track.
      (34)   VEHICLE OWNER OR OPERATOR means a person, or the designated agent
of a person, who:
         (A)   holds legal title to a vehicle, including any lienholder of
record;
         (B)   has legal right of possession of a vehicle; or
         (C)   has legal control of a vehicle.
      (35)   VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY has the meaning given that term in the
Vehicle Storage Facility Act.
      (36)   VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY ACT means Chapter 2303, Texas Occupations
Code, as amended.
      (37)   WRECKED VEHICLE means a vehicle that has been damaged as the
result of overturning or colliding with another vehicle or object so as to
reasonably necessitate that the vehicle be removed by a wrecker.
      (38)   WRECKER means a vehicle designed for the towing or carrying of
other vehicles.
      (39)   WRECKER DRIVER'S PERMIT means a permit issued under this article
to an individual by the director authorizing that individual to operate a
wrecker for an emergency wrecker service in the city.
      (40)   WRECKER LIST means a list of licensed emergency wrecker companies
maintained by the chief of police, as provided for in Section 15D-50 of this
article.
      (41)   Reserved. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 15612; 17226; 21175; 24661;
27487; 31233; 32265)
SEC. 15D-16.   DRIVING WRECKER TO A POLICE SCENE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   A person commits an offense if he drives a wrecker, whether licensed or
unlicensed, to a police scene unless the person has been dispatched to the
scene by the chief of police. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 24661; 32265)
SEC. 15D-17.   SOLICITING WRECKER BUSINESS AT A POLICE SCENE PROHIBITED;
PRESENCE AT SCENE AS EVIDENCE OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he, in any manner, directly or
indirectly solicits on the streets of the city the business of towing a vehicle
in need of emergency wrecker service from a police scene, regardless of whether
the solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing,
removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading, or purchasing the vehicle.
   (b)   Proof of the presence of a person engaged in the wrecker business or
the presence of a wrecker or vehicle owned or operated by a person engaged in
the wrecker business, either as owner, operator, employee, or agent, on a
street in the city at or near a police scene within one hour after the
happening of an incident that resulted in the need for emergency wrecker
service is prima facie evidence of a solicitation in violation of this section,
unless the particular wrecker company has been dispatched to the police scene
by the chief of police. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 24661; 32265)
SEC. 15D-18.   SOLICITING BY ADVERTISING.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he, personally or through an employee
or agent, solicits at or near a police scene any business that deals directly
or indirectly with the towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading,
or purchase of a wrecked, disabled, or illegally parked vehicle on the streets,
sidewalks, or other public place of the city by distributing an advertisement
for, or by otherwise advertising, a repair shop, garage, or place of business
where the wrecked, disabled, or illegally parked vehicle may be repaired,
stored, wrecked, traded, or purchased.
   (b)   Proof of the unauthorized presence of a person engaged in the business
of towing, repairing, wrecking, storing, or offering to purchase or trade for a
wrecked, disabled, or illegally parked vehicle at or near a police scene is
prima facie evidence of solicitation in violation of this section. (Ord. Nos.
13977; 14685; 24661)
SEC. 15D-19.   RESPONSE TO PRIVATE CALLS PROHIBITED.
   A wrecker company shall not respond within the city to a private request for
wrecker service at a police scene, unless specifically authorized by the chief
of police. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 24661)
Division 2. Emergency Wrecker Service License.
SEC. 15D-20.   LICENSE REQUIRED; TRADE NAME REGISTRATION; BUSINESS LOCATION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he, or his agent or employee, engages
in emergency wrecker service in the city without a valid emergency wrecker
service license issued by the director under this article. Only one license may
be issued to each emergency wrecker company.
   (b)   The owner of an emergency wrecker company shall register with the
director a trade name that clearly differentiates that emergency wrecker
company from all other companies engaging in emergency wrecker service and
shall use no other trade name for the emergency wrecker company.
   (c)   A licensee shall maintain a permanent and established place of
business at a location in the city where an emergency wrecker service is not
prohibited by the Dallas Development Code. This location must be either within
the zone in which the licensee is licensed to operate an emergency wrecker
service or within one-half mile outside the established boundaries of that
zone.
   (d)   A licensee shall operate the licensed emergency wrecker service from a
location inside the city. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 15612; 16554; 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-21.   LICENSE APPLICATION; CHANGE OF ZONE.
   (a)   A person desiring to engage in emergency wrecker service in the city
shall file with the director an application upon a form provided for that
purpose, accompanied by a nonrefundable application processing fee of $152. The
application must be signed by an individual who will own, control, or operate
the proposed emergency wrecker service. The application must be verified and
include the following information:
      (1)   The trade name under which the applicant does business and the
street address and telephone number of the emergency wrecker service's business
location.
      (2)   The number and types of wreckers to be operated, including the
year, make, model, vehicle identification number, and state license plate
number of, and the type of winch or lifting device to be operated on, each
wrecker.
      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
      (4)   An agreement that the applicant will participate in the wrecker
list.
      (5)   A list, to be kept current, of the owners (including each owner's
percentage of ownership) and management personnel of the emergency wrecker
service, and of all employees who will participate in emergency wrecker
service, including names, state driver's license numbers, wrecker driver's
permit numbers, and whether the person holds an incident management towing
operator's license.
      (6)   A statement attesting that all property, both real and personal,
used in connection with the emergency wrecker service has been rendered for ad
valorem taxation in the city and that the applicant is current on payment of
those taxes.
      (7)   Documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating a
willingness to provide liability insurance as required by this article.
      (8)   Proof of an ability to provide emergency wrecker service with at
least four wreckers, including a minimum of one conventional light duty wrecker
and one tilt bed/roll back carrier (the other two wreckers may be either
conventional light duty or tilt bed/roll back), that meet the requirements of
this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the director or the
chief of police pursuant to this article.
      (9)   Detailed financial reports for the previous three years that
include income statements and balance sheets covering all wrecker activities
or, if the applicant does not prepare an annual financial report, copies of the
applicant's federal income tax statements for the previous three calendar years
relating to the business.
      (10)   Proof of a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the city in
the name of the company and for the location of the emergency wrecker service
business.
   (b)   If a licensee requests a change of zone, the requirements of an
initial applicant must be met.
   (c)   The director may, at any time, require additional information of an
applicant or licensee to clarify items on the application. (Ord. Nos. 13977;
14685; 15612; 16554; 16578; 17208; 21175; 24661; 27487; 27695; 30215; 32265;
33232)
SEC. 15D-22.   LICENSE QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   To qualify for an emergency wrecker service license, an applicant
must:
      (1)   be at least 19 years of age;
      (2)   be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States;
      (3)   be able to provide all associated drivers with a GPS-enabled
device;
      (4)   be able to communicate in the English Language; and
      (5)   not have been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   criminal homicide as described in Chapter 19 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (ii)   kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal
Code;
            (iii)   a sexual offense as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (iv)   an assaultive offense as described in Chapter 22 of the
Texas Penal Code;
            (v)   robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (vi)   burglary as described in Chapter 30 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in a towing or wrecker service;
            (vii)   theft as described in Chapter 31 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in a towing or wrecker service;
            (viii)   fraud as described in Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in a towing or wrecker service;
            (ix)   tampering with a governmental record as described in Chapter
37 of the Texas Penal Code, but only if the offense was committed against a
person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in a towing or
wrecker service;
            (x)   public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in
Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (xi)   the transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in
violation of Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal Code, or of any comparable state or
federal law, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the
applicable law;
            (xii)   a violation of the Texas Dangerous Drug Act (Chapter 483,
Texas Health and Safety Code), or of any comparable state or federal law, but
only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xiii)   a violation of the Texas Controlled Substances Act
(Chapter 481, Texas Health and Safety Code), or of any comparable state or
federal law, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the
applicable law; or
            (xiv)   criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in
Subdivision (4)(A)(i) through (xiii) of this subsection; and
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony
offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the
applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination
of misdemeanor offenses;
      (6)   not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics;
      (7)   be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest;
      (8)   not employ any person who is not qualified under this subsection;
      (9)   be able to provide emergency wrecker service with at least four
wreckers, including a minimum of one conventional light duty wrecker and one
tilt bed/roll back carrier (the other two wreckers may be either conventional
light duty or tilt bed/roll back), that meet the requirements of this article
and any rules and regulations promulgated by the director or the chief of
police under this article;
      (10)   have at least three years experience in wrecker operations and
provide detailed financial reports for the previous three years that include
income statements and balance sheets covering all wrecker activities or, if the
applicant does not prepare an annual financial report, copies of the
applicant's federal income tax statements for the previous three calendar years
relating to the business; and
      (11)   have an established drug testing policy as required under Chapter
2308 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended.
   (b)   An applicant who has been convicted of, or who employs a person who
has been convicted of, an offense listed in Subsection (a)(4), for which the
required time period has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of
release from confinement imposed for the conviction, may qualify for an
emergency wrecker service license only if the director determines that the
applicant, or the employee, is presently fit to engage in the business of an
emergency wrecker service. In determining present fitness under this section,
the director shall consider the following:
      (1)   the extent and nature of the applicant’s, or employee’s, past
criminal activity;
      (2)   the age of the applicant, or employee, at the time of the
commission of the crime;
      (3)   the amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant’s, or
employee’s, last criminal activity;
      (4)   the conduct and work activity of the applicant, or employee, prior
to and following the criminal activity;
      (5)   evidence of the applicant’s, or employee’s, rehabilitation or
rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; and
      (6)   other evidence of the applicant’s, or employee’s, present fitness,
including letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and
correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility
for the applicant, or employee; the sheriff and chief of police in the
community where the applicant, or employee, resides; and any other persons in
contact with the applicant, or employee.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to
secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present
fitness under Subsection (b) of this section.
   (d)   An applicant for an emergency wrecker service license has the burden
of proving that the applicant is qualified to operate an emergency wrecker
service under this article.
   (e)   In determining whether the applicant is qualified to operate an
emergency wrecker service in the city, the director shall consider, but not be
limited to considering, the fitness of the applicant to perform an emergency
wrecker service as may be indicated by the experience in wrecker operation, the
safety record of the applicant, and the applicant’s compliance with other city,
state, and federal laws. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487; 32265)
SEC. 15D-23.   LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEE; DISPLAY; TRANSFERABILITY; EXPIRATION.
   (a)   The director shall, within 30 days after the date of application,
issue an emergency wrecker service license to an applicant who complies with
this article.
   (b)   A license issued to an emergency wrecker service authorizes the
licensee and any bona fide employee to engage in emergency wrecker service.
   (c)   The annual fee for an emergency wrecker service license is $695,
prorated on the basis of whole months. The fee for issuing a duplicate license
for one lost, destroyed, or mutilated is $27. The fee is payable to the
director upon issuance of a license. No refund of a license fee will be made.
   (d)   An emergency wrecker service license issued pursuant to this article
must be conspicuously displayed in the emergency wrecker service’s business
location.
   (e)   An emergency wrecker service license, or any accompanying permit,
badge, sticker, ticket, or emblem, is not assignable or transferable.
   (f)   An emergency wrecker service license expires June 30 of each year and
may be renewed by applying in accordance with Section
15D-21. Application for renewal must be made not less than 30 days or more than
60 days before expiration of the license and must be accompanied by the annual
license fee.
   (g)   A licensee shall, not less than 10 days before any change of address
or trade name, notify the director of such changes. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685;
15612; 16554; 21175; 24661; 27487; 27695; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 15D-24.   REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW LICENSE.
   (a)   The director shall refuse to issue or renew an emergency wrecker
service license if the applicant or licensee:
      (1)   intentionally or knowingly makes a false statement as to a material
matter in an application for a license or license renewal, or in a hearing
concerning the license;
      (2)   has been convicted twice within a 12- month period or three times
within a 24-month period for violation of this article or has had an emergency
wrecker service license revoked within two years prior to the date of
application;
      (3)   uses a trade name for the emergency wrecker company other than the
one registered with the director;
      (4)   has had an emergency wrecker service license suspended on three
occasions within 12 months for more than three days on each occasion;
      (5)   has been finally convicted for violation of another city, state, or
federal law that indicates a lack of fitness of the applicant to perform
emergency wrecker service;
      (6)   fails to meet the service standards in the rules and regulations
established by the director or the chief of police;
      (7)   is not qualified under Section
15D-22 of this article; or
      (8)   uses a subcontractor to provide emergency wrecker service.
   (b)   If the director determines that a license should be denied the
applicant or licensee, the director shall notify the applicant or licensee in
writing that the application is denied and include in the notice the specific
reason or reasons for denial and a statement informing the applicant or
licensee of the right to, and process for, appeal of the decision. (Ord. Nos.
13977; 14685; 14996; 15612; 16554; 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-25.   SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   A representative of the director or chief of police may suspend an
emergency wrecker service license for a definite period of time not to exceed
three days, and the director or the chief of police may suspend an emergency
wrecker service license for a definite period of time not to exceed 10 days or,
if the deficiency is detrimental to public safety, then for a period of time
until the deficiency is corrected, for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure of the licensee to maintain any wrecker or equipment in a
good and safe working condition.
      (2)   Violation by the licensee or an employee of the licensee of a
provision of this article or of the rules and regulations established by the
chief of police or the director under this article.
      (3)   Failure of the licensee’s wrecker to arrive at a police scene
location or a rapid response location within the prescribed time after having
been notified to do so by the chief of police.
      (4)   Conviction of an emergency wrecker driver of a provision of the
motor vehicle or traffic laws of this state or city while in the scope of
employment in the licensee’s emergency wrecker service.
      (5)   Failure to continuously employ at least four emergency wrecker
drivers who hold valid wrecker driver’s permits issued under this article.
   (b)   Written notice of the suspension must be served on the licensee and
must include the reason for suspension, the date the suspension begins, the
duration of the suspension, and a statement informing the licensee of the right
of appeal.
   (c)   A licensee may appeal a suspension imposed under Subsection (a) in the
following manner:
      (1)   A licensee who is suspended by a representative of the chief of
police may appeal the suspension by written request to the chief of police
within 10 days after written notification of suspension. The chief of police
shall conduct a hearing and may sustain, reverse, or modify the action
appealed. The action of the chief of police is final.
      (2)   A licensee who is suspended by a representative of the director may
appeal the suspension by written request to the director within 10 days after
written notification of suspension. The director shall conduct a hearing and
may sustain, reverse, or modify the action appealed. The action of the director
is final.
      (3)   A licensee who is suspended by the director or the chief of police
may appeal the suspension to an appeals panel consisting of the chief of
police, the director, and a representative of the city manager’s office, in
accordance with the following procedures:
         (A)   A written request to the director must be made within 10 days
after written notice to the licensee.
         (B)   The appeals panel shall set a time, date, and place for a
hearing and the licensee will be notified at least three days prior to the
hearing.
         (C)   The appeals panel may sustain, reverse, or modify the action
appealed. The action of the panel is final.
   (d)   The period of suspension begins on the date specified in the notice of
suspension or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the appeal
hearing officer or panel, whichever applies.
   (e)   A licensee whose emergency wrecker service license is suspended shall
not operate an emergency wrecker service inside the city during the period of
suspension. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 15612; 16554; 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-26.   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The director shall revoke an emergency wrecker service license if the
director determines that the licensee:
      (1)   intentionally or knowingly made a false statement as to a material
matter in an application or hearing concerning the license;
      (2)   used a trade name for the emergency wrecker company other than the
one registered with the director;
      (3)   had the emergency wrecker service license suspended on three
occasions within 12 months for more than three days on each occasion;
      (4)   had the emergency wrecker service license suspended for a
deficiency that is detrimental to public safety and 20 days have elapsed
without a correction of the deficiency;
      (5)   intentionally or knowingly failed to comply with applicable
provisions of this article or with the conditions and limitations of the
license;
      (6)   operated a towing or wrecker service not authorized by the license
or other applicable law;
      (7)   has been finally convicted for violation of another city, state, or
federal law that indicates a lack of fitness of the licensee to perform
emergency wrecker service;
      (8)   is under indictment for or has been convicted of any felony offense
while holding an emergency wrecker service license;
      (9)   does not qualify for a license under Section
15D-22 of this article;
      (10)   failed to pay a fee required under this article; or
      (11)   violated Section
15D-57(c)(1), (2), or (3) of this article. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 14996;
15612; 16554; 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-27.   APPEALS.
   If the director denies issuance or renewal of a license or revokes a
license, the applicant or licensee may file an appeal with the permit and
license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 14996; 16478; 18200; 24661; 27487)
Division 3.  Wrecker Driver’s Permit.
SEC. 15D-28.   WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a wrecker engaged in
emergency wrecker service in the city without a valid wrecker driver’s permit
issued to the person under this division.
   (b)   A licensee commits an offense if he employs or otherwise allows a
person to operate for compensation a wrecker owned, controlled, or operated by
the licensee unless the person has a valid wrecker driver’s permit issued under
this division. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-29.   QUALIFICATIONS FOR A WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   (a)   To qualify for a wrecker driver’s permit, an applicant must:
      (1)   be at least 19 years of age;
      (2)   be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States;
      (3)   hold a valid driver’s license and a valid incident management
towing operator’s license issued by the State of Texas;
      (4)   be able to communicate in the English language;
      (5)   not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability
that is likely to prevent the applicant from exercising ordinary and reasonable
control over a motor vehicle or that is likely to otherwise endanger the public
health or safety, as determined by a medical doctor licensed to practice
medicine in the United States;
      (6)   not have been convicted of more than four moving traffic violations
arising out of separate transactions, nor involved in more than two motor
vehicle accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that the applicant
was at fault, within any 12 month period during the preceding 36 months;
      (7)   not have been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   criminal homicide as described in Chapter 19 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (ii)   kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal
Code;
            (iii)   a sexual offense as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (iv)   an assaultive offense as described in Chapter 22 of the
Texas Penal Code;
            (v)   robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (vi)   burglary as described in Chapter 30 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in a towing or wrecker service;
            (vii)   theft as described in Chapter 31 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in a towing or wrecker service;
            (viii)   fraud as described in Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in a towing or wrecker service;
            (ix)   tampering with a govern- mental record as described in
Chapter 37 of the Texas Penal Code, but only if the offense was committed
against a person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in a
towing or wrecker service;
            (x)   public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in
Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (xi)   the transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in
violation of Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal Code, or of any comparable state or
federal law, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the
applicable law;
            (xii)   a violation of the Texas Dangerous Drug Act (Chapter 483,
Texas Health and Safety Code), or of any comparable state or federal law, that
is punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xiii)   a violation of the Texas Controlled Substances Act
(Chapter 481, Texas Health and Safety Code), or of any comparable state or
federal law, that is punishable as a felony under the applicable law; or
            (xiv)   criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in
Subdivision (7)(A)(i) through (xiii) of this subsection;
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony
offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the
applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination
of misdemeanor offenses;
      (8)   not have been convicted of, or discharged by probation or deferred
adjudication for, driving while intoxicated:
         (A)   within the preceding 12 months; or
         (B)   more than one time within the preceding five years;
      (9)   not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics;
      (10)   be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest;
      (11)   be sanitary and well-groomed in dress and person;
      (12)   be employed by a licensee; and
      (13)   have successfully completed within the preceding 12 months a
defensive driving course approved by the Texas Education Agency and be able to
present proof of completion.
   (b)   An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in Subsection
(a)(7) or (8), for which the required time period has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
may qualify for a wrecker driver’s permit only if the director determines that
the applicant is presently fit to engage in the occupation of a wrecker driver.
In determining present fitness under this section, the director shall consider
the following:
      (1)   the extent and nature of the applicant’s past criminal activity;
      (2)   the age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the
crime;
      (3)   the amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant’s last
criminal activity;
      (4)   the conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and
following the criminal activity;
      (5)   evidence of the applicant’s rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort
while incarcerated or following release; and
      (6)   other evidence of the applicant’s present fitness, including
letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional
officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the
applicant; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the applicant
resides; and any other persons in contact with the applicant.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to
secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present
fitness under Subsection (b) of this section and under Section
15D-35 of this article. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-30.   APPLICATION FOR WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT; FEE.
   To obtain a wrecker driver’s permit, or renewal of a wrecker driver’s
permit, a person must file with the director a completed written application on
a form provided for the purpose and a nonrefundable application fee of $75. The
director shall require each application to state such information as the
director reasonably considers necessary to determine whether an applicant is
qualified. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27695; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 15D-31.   INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.
   (a)   For the purpose of determining qualification under Section
15D-29(a)(5), the director may require an applicant to submit to a physical
examination conducted by a licensed physician, at applicant’s expense, and to
furnish to the director a signed statement from the physician certifying that
the physician has examined the applicant and that in the physician’s
professional opinion the applicant is qualified under Section
15D-29(a)(5).
   (b)   The director shall obtain a current official criminal history report
(issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety within the preceding 12
months) on each applicant to determine the applicant’s qualification under
Section
15D-29. The director shall obtain a copy of the applicant’s motor vehicle
driving record and a list of any warrants of arrest for the applicant that
might be outstanding.
   (c)   The director may conduct such other investigation as the director
considers necessary to determine whether an applicant for a wrecker driver’s
permit is qualified.
   (d)   The director shall provide the applicant, upon written request, a copy
of all materials contained in the applicant’s file to the extent allowed under
the Public Information Act (Chapter 552, Texas Government Code), as amended.
(Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-32.   ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   (a)   The director shall issue a wrecker driver’s permit to an applicant,
unless the director determines that the applicant is not qualified.
   (b)   The director shall delay until final adjudication the approval of the
application of any applicant who is under indictment for or has charges pending
for:
      (1)   a felony offense involving a crime described in Section
15D-29(a)(7)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) or criminal attempt to commit any
of those offenses; or
      (2)   any offense involving driving while intoxicated.
   (c)   The director shall deny the application for a wrecker driver’s permit
if the applicant:
      (1)   is not qualified under Section
15D-29;
      (2)   refuses to submit to or does not pass a medical examination
authorized under Section
15D-31(a); or
      (3)   intentionally or knowingly makes a false statement of a material
fact in an application for a wrecker driver’s permit.
   (d)   If the director determines that a permit should be denied the
applicant, the director shall notify the applicant in writing that the
application is denied and include in the notice the specific reason or reasons
for denial and a statement informing the applicant of the right to, and the
process for, appeal of the decision. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-33.   EXPIRATION OF WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT; VOIDANCE UPON SUSPENSION
OR REVOCATION OF STATE DRIVER’S LICENSE OR STATE TOWING OPERATOR’S LICENSE.
   (a)   Except in the case of a probationary or provisional permit, a wrecker
driver’s permit expires one year from the date of issuance.
   (b)   If a permittee’s state driver’s license or incident management towing
operator’s license is suspended or revoked by the state, the wrecker driver’s
permit automatically becomes void. A permittee shall notify the director and
the licensee for whom the permittee drives within three days after a suspension
or revocation of either state license and shall immediately surrender the
wrecker driver’s permit to the director. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-34.   PROVISIONAL PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may issue a provisional wrecker driver’s permit if the
director determines that it is necessary pending completion of investigation of
an applicant for a wrecker driver’s permit.
   (b)   A provisional wrecker driver’s permit expires on the date shown on the
permit, which date shall not exceed 45 days after the date of issuance, or on
the date the applicant is denied a wrecker driver’s permit, whichever occurs
first.
   (c)   The director shall not issue a provisional permit to a person who has
been previously denied a wrecker driver’s permit. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-35.   PROBATIONARY PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may issue a probationary wrecker driver’s permit to an
applicant who is not qualified for a wrecker driver’s permit under Section
15D-29 if the applicant:
      (1)   could qualify under Section
15D-29 for a wrecker driver’s permit within one year from the date of
application;
      (2)   holds a valid state driver’s license or occupational driver’s
license;
      (3)   holds a valid state incident management towing operator’s license;
and
      (4)   is determined by the director, using the criteria listed in Section
15D-29(b) of this article, to be presently fit to engage in the occupation of a
wrecker driver.
   (b)   A probationary wrecker driver’s permit may be issued for a period not
to exceed one year.
   (c)   The director may prescribe appropriate terms and conditions for a
probationary wrecker driver’s permit as the director determines are necessary.
(Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-36.   DUPLICATE PERMIT.
   If a wrecker driver’s permit is lost or destroyed, the director shall issue
the permittee a duplicate permit upon payment to the city of a duplicate permit
fee of $20. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27695; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 15D-37.   DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   A wrecker driver shall at all times keep a valid wrecker driver’s permit in
the driver’s possession and shall allow the director, the chief of police, or a
peace officer to examine the permit upon request. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-38.   SUSPENSION BY A DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE.
   (a)   If a duly authorized representative designated by the director to
enforce this article determines that a permittee has failed to comply with this
article (except Section
15D-29) or a regulation established under this article, the representative may
suspend the wrecker driver’s permit for a period of time not to exceed three
days by personally serving the permittee with a written notice of the
suspension. The written notice must include the reason for suspension, the date
the suspension begins, the duration of the suspension, and a statement
informing the permittee of the right of appeal.
   (b)   A suspension under this section may be appealed to the director or the
director’s assistant if the permittee requests an appeal at the time the
representative serves notice of suspension or within 10 days after the notice
of suspension is served. When an appeal is requested, the suspension may not
take effect until a hearing is provided by the director or the director’s
assistant.
   (c)   The director may order an expedited hearing under this section, to be
held as soon as possible after the permittee requests an appeal, but at least
10 days advance notice of the hearing must be given to the permittee. The
director may affirm, reverse, or modify the order of the representative. The
decision of the director is final. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-39.   SUSPENSION OF WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   (a)   If the director determines that a permittee has failed to comply with
this article (except Section
15D-29) or any regulation established under this article, the director shall
suspend the wrecker driver’s permit for a definite period of time not to exceed
60 days.
   (b)   If at any time the director determines that a permittee is not
qualified under Section
15D-29, or is under indictment or has charges pending for any offense involving
driving while intoxicated or a felony offense involving a crime described in
Section
15D-29(a)(7)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) or criminal attempt to commit any
of those offenses, the director shall suspend the wrecker driver’s permit until
such time as the director determines that the permittee is qualified or that
the charges against the permittee have been finally adjudicated.
   (c)   A permittee whose wrecker driver’s permit is suspended shall not drive
a wrecker for an emergency wrecker service inside the city during the period of
suspension.
   (d)   The director shall notify the permittee in writing of a suspension
under this section and include in the notice:
      (1)   the reason for the suspension;
      (2)   the date the suspension is to begin;
      (3)   the duration of the suspension; and
      (4)   a statement informing the permittee of the right of appeal.
   (e)   The period of suspension begins on the date specified by the director
or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the appeal hearing
officer. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-40.   REVOCATION OF WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   (a)   The director shall revoke a wrecker driver’s permit if the director
determines that a permittee:
      (1)   operated a wrecker inside the city for an emergency wrecker service
during a period when the wrecker driver’s permit was suspended;
      (2)   intentionally or knowingly made a false statement of a material
fact in an application for a wrecker driver’s permit;
      (3)   engaged in conduct that constitutes a ground for suspension under
Section
15D-39(a) and, at least two times within the 12-month period preceding the
conduct or three times within the 24-month period preceding the conduct, had
received either a suspension in excess of three days or a conviction for a
violation of this article;
      (4)   engaged in conduct that could reasonably be determined to be
detrimental to the public safety;
      (5)   failed to comply with a condition of a probationary permit; or
      (6)   is under indictment for or has been convicted of any felony offense
while holding a wrecker driver’s permit.
   (b)   A person whose wrecker driver’s permit is revoked shall not:
      (1)   apply for another wrecker driver’s permit before the expiration of
12 months from the date the director revokes the permit or, in the case of an
appeal, the date the appeal hearing officer affirms the revocation; or
      (2)   operate a wrecker for an emergency wrecker service inside the city.
   (c)   The director shall notify the permittee and the licensee in writing of
a revocation and include in the notice:
      (1)   the specific reason or reasons for the revocation;
      (2)   the date the director orders the revocation; and
      (3)   a statement informing the permittee of the right to, and process
for, appeal of the decision. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-41.   WRECKER OPERATION AFTER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   After receipt of a notice of suspension, revocation, or denial of
permit renewal, the permittee shall, on the date specified in the notice,
surrender the wrecker driver’s permit to the director and discontinue operating
a wrecker for an emergency wrecker service inside the city.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Section
15D-39(c), Section
15D-40(b), and Subsection (a) of this section, if the permittee appeals a
suspension or revocation under this section, the permittee may continue to
operate a wrecker for an emergency wrecker service pending the appeal unless:
      (1)   the permittee’s wrecker driver’s permit is suspended pursuant to
Section
15D-39(b) or revoked pursuant to Section
15D-40(a)(6) of this article; or
      (2)   the director determines that continued operation by the permittee
would impose a serious and imminent threat to the public safety. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-42.   APPEAL FROM DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   If the director suspends a wrecker driver’s permit, the action is
final unless the permittee files an appeal, in writing, with the city manager
not more than 10 business days after notice of the director’s action is
received.
   (b)   The city manager or a designated representative shall act as the
appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing
officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and
make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing
under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling on the basis of
a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the
action of the director being appealed. The decision of the hearing officer is
final as to available administrative remedies.
   (d)   If the director denies issuance or renewal of a wrecker driver’s
permit or revokes a wrecker driver’s permit, the applicant or permittee may
file an appeal with the permit and license appeal board in accordance with
Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
Division 4.  Miscellaneous Licensee and Driver Regulations.
SEC. 15D-43.   LICENSEE’S AND DRIVER’S DUTY TO COMPLY.
   (a)   Licensee. In the operation of an emergency wrecker service, a licensee
shall comply with the terms and conditions of the emergency wrecker service
license and, except to the extent expressly provided otherwise by the license,
shall comply with this article, rules and regulations established under this
article, and other law applicable to the operation of an emergency wrecker
service.
   (b)   Driver. While on duty, a driver shall comply with this article, rules
and regulations established under this article, other law applicable to the
operation of a motor vehicle in this state, and orders issued by the licensee
employing the driver in connection with the licensee’s discharging of its duty
under its emergency wrecker service license and this article. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-44.   LICENSEE’S DUTY TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE BY DRIVERS.
   (a)   A licensee shall establish policy and take action to discourage,
prevent, or correct violations of this article by drivers who are employed by
the licensee.
   (b)   A licensee shall not permit a driver who is employed by the licensee
to drive a wrecker if the licensee knows or has reasonable cause to suspect
that the driver has failed to comply with this article, the rules and
regulations established by the director or the chief or police, or other
applicable law. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-45.   APPAREL TO BE WORN BY DRIVERS.
   (a)   A licensee shall specify and require an item of apparel or an item
placed on the apparel to be worn by drivers employed by the licensee, which
item must be of such distinctive and uniform design as to readily identify the
licensee’s emergency wrecker company and must bear the name of the licensee’s
emergency wrecker company. The item specified by each licensee must be approved
by the director to ensure that drivers of one licensee may be easily
distinguished from drivers of another.
   (b)   While on duty, a driver shall wear the item specified by the licensee
who employs the driver and shall comply with such other identification
regulations prescribed by the emergency wrecker service license.
   (c)   While on duty, a driver may not wear:
      (1)   apparel with offensive or suggestive language;
      (2)   cut offs;
      (3)   tank tops; or
      (4)   sandals.
   (d)   While on duty, a driver shall wear a traffic safety vest that is
certified by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) for visibility.
(Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-46.   INSURANCE.
   (a)   A licensee shall procure and keep in full force and effect automobile
liability insurance written by an insurance company that:
      (1)   is approved, licensed, or authorized by the State of Texas;
      (2)   is acceptable to the city; and
      (3)   does not violate the ownership/ operational control prohibition
described in Subsection (j) of this section.
   (b)   The insurance must be issued in the standard form approved by the
Texas Department of Insurance, and all provisions of the policy must be
acceptable to the city. The insured provisions of the policy must name the city
and its officers and employees as additional insureds. The coverage provisions
must provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or
property by reason of the operation of an emergency wrecker service by the
licensee, including but not limited to damage to a towed vehicle caused
directly or indirectly by improper hookup or improper towing.
   (c)   The automobile liability insurance must provide combined single limits
of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not less than $500,000
for each occurrence, or the equivalent, for each wrecker used by the licensee.
Aggregate limits of liability are prohibited.
   (d)   The cargo/on hook insurance for vehicles while being loaded, unloaded,
or transported must provide limits of liability of not less than $25,000 for
each light duty wrecker or tilt bed/roll back carrier and $50,000 for each
medium duty wrecker, heavy duty wrecker, or lowboy unit.
   (e)   If a vehicle is removed from service, the licensee shall maintain the
insurance coverage required by this section for the vehicle until the director
receives satisfactory proof that all evidence of operation as an emergency
wrecker has been removed from the vehicle.
   (f)   Insurance required under this section must include:
      (1)   a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required
to notify the director in writing not fewer than 30 days before canceling,
failing to renew, or making a material change to the insurance policy;
      (2)   a provision to cover all vehicles, whether owned or not owned by
the licensee, that are operated under the license; and
      (3)   a provision requiring the insurance company to pay every claim on a
first-dollar basis.
   (g)   Insurance required by this section may be obtained from an assigned
risk pool if all of the policies and coverages are managed by one agent, and
one certificate of insurance is issued to the city.
   (h)   A license will not be granted or renewed unless the applicant or
licensee furnishes the director with such proof of insurance as the director
considers necessary to determine whether the applicant or licensee is
adequately insured under this section.
   (i)   If the insurance of a licensee lapses or is canceled and new insurance
is not obtained, the director shall suspend the license until the licensee
provides evidence that insurance coverage required by this section has been
obtained. A person shall not operate an emergency wrecker service while a
license is suspended under this section whether or not the action is appealed.
A $47 fee must be paid before a license suspended under this section will be
reinstated.
   (j)   No person with any direct or indirect ownership interest in the
licensee’s emergency wrecker service may have any operational control, direct
or indirect, in any insurance company that provides insurance required by this
section to the emergency wrecker service. For purposes of this subsection,
“operational control” means holding any management position with the insurance
company (including, but not limited to, the chief executive officer, the
president, any vice-president, or any person in a decision-making position with
respect to insurance claims) or having the right to control the actions or
decisions of any person in such a management position in the insurance company.
(Ord. Nos. 21175; 21238; 24661; 25215; 27487; 33232)
SEC. 15D-47.   INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED UPON REQUEST OF DIRECTOR.
   Upon request of the director, a licensee shall submit to the director the
following information:
      (1)   A current consolidated list of vehicles.
      (2)   A current financial statement that includes a balance sheet and
income statement.
      (3)   Names of current officers, owners, and managers.
      (4)   A list of current drivers employed by the licensee, with their
wrecker driver’s permit numbers indicated, and a copy of the incident
management towing operator’s license issued by the state to each driver.
      (5)   A copy of the licensee’s drug testing policy established under
Chapter 2308 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended.
      (6)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the director
relating to the operations and activities of the emergency wrecker service.
(Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-48.   EMERGENCY WRECKER SERVICE RECORDS.
   A licensee shall maintain the business records of the emergency wrecker
service, including but not limited to records relating to the activities,
operations, service, and safety record of the emergency wrecker service, at its
business location required by Section
15D-20(c). The licensee shall make the emergency wrecker service records
available for inspection by the director or the chief of police upon reasonable
notice and request. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-49.   FAILURE TO PAY AD VALOREM TAXES.
   A licensee or an applicant for an emergency wrecker service license shall
not allow the payment of ad valorem taxes upon any vehicle, equipment, or other
property used directly or indirectly in connection with the emergency wrecker
service to become delinquent. (Ord. 24661)
Division 5. Service Rules and Regulations.
SEC. 15D-50.   EMERGENCY WRECKER SERVICE ZONES; WRECKER LIST PROCEDURE.
   (a)   The chief of police shall partition the city into zones for emergency
wrecker service and shall place the names of all emergency wrecker companies
licensed under this article on a wrecker list. Notice of the boundary limits of
each zone will be provided to each licensee on the list. Each licensee may
apply for and be assigned to only one zone.
   (b)   When an emergency wrecker is needed at a police scene, the police
officer or other authorized city official at the scene will communicate that
need immediately to the police department. On receiving the first request for
emergency wrecker service, the dispatcher will dispatch the first available
emergency wrecker company on the list assigned to the zone in which the police
scene is located and order removal of the wrecked, disabled, or illegally
parked vehicle to a place designated by the chief of police. On each succeeding
request for emergency wrecker service, the dispatcher will dispatch the next
available emergency wrecker company on the list that is assigned to the zone
involved, or dispatch the nearest available emergency wrecker in an adjacent
zone if none are available in the zone involved. Proper notation of each
dispatch for emergency wrecker service must be made on the master list.
   (c)   The chief of police may direct that an emergency wrecker be dispatched
out of its zone when determined to be in the best interest of the public
health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 15612; 16850; 24661;
27487; 32265)
SEC. 15D-51.   REMOVAL OF A VEHICLE WITH A WRECKER.
   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee or agent, removes a vehicle from a street or other public
property without:
      (1)   using a wrecker; or
      (2)   first completing every procedure required to secure the vehicle to
the wrecker or wrecker equipment, including the attachment of any safety
chains, so that the vehicle may be safely towed. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-52.   REQUIREMENTS AND OPERATING PROCEDURES.
   (a)   A licensee shall comply with the following requirements and
procedures:
      (1)   Maintain a 24 hour emergency wrecker service and operate a two way
communication system on a 24 hour basis. The licensee shall keep the business
location required under Section
15D-20(c) open and staffed from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, except for:
         (A)   holidays recognized by the city; and
         (B)   other times for which the licensee has:
            (i)   obtained prior written approval from the chief of police; and
            (ii)   provided the director with a copy of that approval.
      (2)   Arrive at the police scene, if it is not a rapid response location,
within 30 minutes after having been notified to do so by the chief of police.
      (3)   Deliver, in every instance, the wrecked, disabled, or illegally
parked vehicle directly to a location designated by the chief of police without
stopping at any other location or for any reason other than mechanical
breakdown or problems with the vehicle hookup to the wrecker. In the event of a
mechanical breakdown or problem with the vehicle hookup to the wrecker, the
wrecker driver or the licensee shall immediately notify the chief of police.
      (4)   Report to the director all changes in emergency wreckers and
equipment used in the licensee's emergency wrecker service and render all
additional vehicles for inspection by the director. A wrecker without a valid
emergency wrecker inspection sticker is not allowed to participate in the
wrecker list or the rapid response list.
      (5)   Employ at least four emergency wrecker drivers who hold valid
wrecker driver's permits issued under this article and valid incident
management towing operator's licenses.
      (6)   Upon arrival at the scene of an accident and in a manner that
minimizes the duration of interference with normal traffic flow, promptly clear
the wreckage and debris from the travelled portion of the roadway or confine it
to the smallest possible portion of the travelled roadway while removal is
taking place and, before leaving the accident site, completely remove from the
site all resulting wreckage or debris, including all broken glass, but
excluding truck or vehicle cargoes.
      (7)   Request the police officer or other authorized city official at a
police scene to request the dispatch of another emergency wrecker if additional
wreckers are needed to clear a police scene. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 16554;
21175; 24661; 27487; 32265)
SEC. 15D-53.   RAPID RESPONSE PROGRAM.
   (a)   The chief of police shall create a rapid response list to assign
licensed emergency wrecker companies to city-owned vehicles and rapid response
locations.
   (b)   Participation by a licensed emergency wrecker company in the rapid
response program is voluntary. An emergency wrecker company may request to be
placed on the rapid response list only when applying for license issuance or
renewal or at other times designated by the chief of police. An emergency
wrecker company may request to have its name removed from the rapid response
list at any time.
   (c)   Each participating emergency wrecker company shall provide at least
one conventional light duty wrecker and one tilt bed/roll back carrier to be
available to remove vehicles as directed by the chief of police.
   (d)   Reserved.
   (e)   If a primary emergency wrecker company is unable to respond, it shall
immediately notify the chief of police, and the chief of police will dispatch a
back-up emergency wrecker company to the police scene at the rapid response
location.
   (f)   An emergency wrecker company responding to a dispatch under the rapid
response program shall arrive at the dispatched location within 15 minutes
after notification to do so by the chief of police.
   (g)   An emergency wrecker company may stage its wreckers in strategic
locations (but not on a freeway, highway, or expressway) to facilitate timely
response to a police scene in a rapid response location. An emergency wrecker
company may not respond to a police scene without first being dispatched by the
chief of police.
   (h)   An emergency wrecker company dispatched to a rapid response location
may conduct a "double tow" by loading two vehicles onto a single tilt bed/
rollback carrier, but only when both vehicles are towed from a single police
scene to the same location approved by the chief of police. If the emergency
wrecker company receives a subsequent request for service at a different
location, it must send another wrecker to the other location.
   (i)   All towed vehicles must be disposed of in accordance with Section
15D-54. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 15612; 21175; 24661; 27487; 31233; 32265)
SEC. 15D-53.1   RAPID RESPONSE LOCATIONS.
   The following are rapid response locations:
      (1)   C. F. Hawn Freeway.
      (2)   Central Expressway.
      (3)   East R. L. Thornton Freeway.
      (4)   Interstate Highway 20.
      (5)   John W. Carpenter Freeway.
      (6)   Julius Schepps Freeway.
      (7)   Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway.
      (8)   Marvin D. Love Freeway.
      (9)   S. M. Wright Freeway.
      (10)   South R. L. Thornton Freeway.
      (11)   Stemmons Freeway.
      (12)   Tom Landry Freeway.
      (13)   Walton Walker Boulevard.
      (14)   Woodall Rogers Freeway.
      (15)   All entrance and exit ramps and all adjacent service roads of the
freeways named in Paragraphs (1) through (14) of this section.
      (16)   Any other area designated by the chief of police. (Ord. 27487)
SEC. 15D-54.   DISPOSITION OF TOWED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b) of this section, a vehicle towed
under this article will be kept at a vehicle storage facility designated by the
chief of police until application for the vehicle’s redemption is made by the
vehicle owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, who will be entitled to
possession of the vehicle upon payment of all costs of removal and storage that
may have accrued. If the vehicle is not redeemed by the vehicle owner or the
owner’s authorized agent, the vehicle will be disposed of in a manner
prescribed by law.
   (b)   The owner or operator of a wrecked or disabled vehicle, or the owner
or operator’s authorized agent, may request that an emergency wrecker remove
the vehicle to a location other than one designated in Subsection (a). Removal
of the vehicle to a location designated by the vehicle owner or operator, or
the owner or operator’s authorized agent, must be authorized by the chief of
police, or the chief’s authorized representative at the police scene, and be in
accordance with rules and regulations established by the chief of police.
   (c)   If a licensee or wrecker driver refuses to leave a towed vehicle at
the vehicle owner or operator’s designated delivery location for failure of the
vehicle owner or operator to pay all fees allowed under Section
15D-57, the licensee or wrecker driver shall tow the vehicle to a location
designated by the chief of police under Subsection (a) and report the change in
the delivery location to the police department in accordance with Section
15D-55. (Ord. Nos. 21175; 24661; 27487)
SEC. 15D-55.   NOTIFICATION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT; IMPOUNDED VEHICLE RECEIPTS.
   (a)   A licensee or wrecker driver commits an offense if he fails to notify
and provide all of the following information to the police department or an
approved vehicle storage facility within two hours after removing a vehicle
from a police scene with an emergency wrecker:
      (1)   The location from which the vehicle was removed and the date and
time of removal.
      (2)   The reason for removal of the vehicle.
      (3)   A physical description of the removed vehicle, including the year,
make, model, color, state license plate number, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
      (4)   The trade name of the emergency wrecker service.
      (5)   The name, address, and telephone number of the vehicle storage
facility or other location to which the vehicle was taken.
      (6)   The fee paid to the licensee or wrecker driver for removal of the
vehicle and a copy of the receipt given to the owner or operator of the towed
vehicle, which receipt must be signed by, and list the telephone number of, the
vehicle's owner or operator.
      (7)   The dispatch number assigned by the chief of police to authorize
the removal of the vehicle.
   (b)   A licensee or wrecker driver shall obtain from the chief of police
impounded vehicle receipt forms on which to record the information required in
Subsection (a) and any other information determined necessary by the director
or the chief of police. A licensee or wrecker driver shall complete a separate
impounded vehicle receipt for each vehicle removed by the licensee or wrecker
driver under this article. The licensee or wrecker driver shall return copies
of all completed impounded vehicle receipts to the police department in a
manner and on a schedule required by the chief of police. This subsection does
not apply if a licensee or wrecker driver has provided the required information
to the police department or an approved vehicle storage facility through an
electronic database. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487; 32265)
SEC. 15D-56.   CITY-OWNED WRECKERS.
   Nothing in this article prevents the chief of police from dispatching a
city-owned wrecker to a police scene to render emergency wrecker service in
lieu of dispatching an emergency wrecker from the wrecker list or the rapid
response list. (Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 24661; 27487; 32265)
Division 6. Fee Schedule.
SEC. 15D-57.   MAXIMUM FEE SCHEDULE FOR EMERGENCY WRECKER SERVICE.
   (a)   The following fees are authorized for providing emergency wrecker
service to vehicles (except for vehicles owned by the city):
      (1)   $165 for towage of a vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle
weight rating of not more than 10,000 pounds, plus a fee of $73 for each hour
over two hours that is required to complete the tow, with partial hours paid in
quarter hour increments.
      (2)   $300 for towage of a vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle
weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds but not more than 24,999 pounds, plus
a fee of $109 for each hour over two hours that is required to complete the
tow, with partial hours paid in quarter hour increments.
      (3)   $489 per unit for towage of a vehicle with a manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight rating of more than 25,000 pounds, plus a fee of $182 for each
hour over two hours that is required to complete the tow, with partial hours
paid in quarter hour increments. Maximum tow amount is $978.
      (4)   $73 for any service a wrecker operator or driver performs that
renders a vehicle operable, including, but not limited to, removing or
straightening a bumper or fender, or another similar service.
      (5)   When dispatched by the chief of police to a location more than 100
yards outside the corporate limits of the city to tow a vehicle from the
dispatched location to a location inside the corporate limits of the city, $4
for each loaded one-way mile that the wrecker travels, measured from the
dispatched location to the nearest point of the corporate limits of the city
using the most direct and expeditious route.
      (6)   When dispatched by the chief of police to a location inside the
corporate limits of the city to tow a vehicle to a location more than 100 yards
outside the corporate limits of the city, $4 for each loaded one-way mile that
the wrecker travels, measured from the nearest point of the corporate limits of
the city to the vehicle delivery location using the most direct and expeditious
route.
      (7)   No additional fee may be charged for linkage of a vehicle prior to
a tow or for the use of towing dollies, go-jacks, winching, or air bags.
   (b)   The charges allowed in Subsections (a)(1), (2), and (3) are calculated
from the time a wrecker is dispatched by the chief of police to the time the
vehicle to be towed is delivered to a location designated by the chief of
police.
   (c)   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee or agent:
      (1)   charges more than the maximum towage fee allowed by this section
for the particular vehicle towed;
      (2)   charges any fee in addition to those lawfully charged under this
section; or
      (3)   requests payment of a fee for emergency wrecker service from a
person or in a manner not authorized by this article or rules and regulations
established by the director or the chief of police pursuant to this article.
(Ord. Nos. 13977; 14685; 15612; 16403; 17673; 18566; 21175; 21311; 24661;
27487; 30993; 32362; 33232)
Division 7. Vehicles and Equipment.
SEC. 15D-58.   VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   An applicant or licensee shall submit each wrecker to be used in the
emergency wrecker service for inspection in a manner determined by the
director. Each wrecker must:
      (1)   if used for towing a vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating of not more than 10,000 pounds, meet the requirements for a light
duty wrecker or a tilt bed/roll back carrier;
      (2)   if used for towing a vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds but not more than 26,000 pounds, meet
the requirements for a medium duty wrecker;
      (3)   if used for towing a vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating of more than 26,000 pounds, meet the requirements for a heavy
duty wrecker or a lowboy unit;
      (4)   carry, as standard equipment, a tow bar, towing dollies, safety
chains, a fire extinguisher, a wrecking bar, a broom, a shovel, at least six
flares or three reflective triangles, absorbent material for oil or fuel
leakages, and a container to carry debris, except that:
         (A)   towing dollies are not required on medium duty or heavy duty
wreckers; and
         (B)   towing dollies and tow bars are not required on tilt bed/roll
back carriers or lowboy units;
      (5)   be maintained in a safe and good working condition, contain
equipment that is maintained in a safe and good working condition, and comply
with all minimum safety and equipment standards required for a wrecker by city
ordinance or state or federal law;
      (6)   have permanently affixed to each side of the front doors of the
wrecker legible letters and numbers, at least two inches high, in a color that
contrasts with the front doors, stating the trade name and telephone number
(including area code) of the emergency wrecker service and the motor carrier
registration number of the wrecker; and
      (7)   be capable of providing two-way communication with the licensee’s
base station at all times.
   (b)   An inspection fee of $425 must be paid for each wrecker that is used
in the emergency wrecker service. Upon inspection and approval of each vehicle,
the director shall issue a decal to the applicant or licensee. The decal must
be affixed securely to the lower left corner of the front windshield of the
inspected wrecker.
   (c)   The director, the chief of police, or a peace officer may, at any
time, inspect a wrecker used by a licensee for emergency wrecker service to
determine whether the vehicle complies with this section.
   (d)   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee or agent:
      (1)   uses a light duty wrecker, a tilt bed/roll back carrier, a medium
duty wrecker, a heavy duty wrecker, or a lowboy unit to tow a vehicle that
exceeds the manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating allowed to be towed by
the particular type of wrecker under Subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3), whichever
is applicable; or
      (2)   tows a vehicle using a wrecker that does not have a valid city of
Dallas emergency wrecker decal affixed to the windshield as required by
Subsection (b) of this section. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 25048; 27487; 27695; 30215;
33232)
Division 8. Enforcement.
SEC. 15D-59.   AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   (a)   The director, the chief of police, or a peace officer may inspect any
emergency wrecker service to determine whether a licensee or permittee complies
with this article, rules and regulations established under this article, or
other applicable law.
   (b)   A licensee or permittee, either personally or through an employee or
agent, shall not attempt to interfere or refuse to cooperate with the director,
the chief of police, or a peace officer in the conduct of any investigation or
discharge of any duty pursuant to this article. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-60.   ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Officers of the police department shall assist in the enforcement of this
article. A police officer upon observing a violation of this article, or of any
rule or regulation established by the director or the chief of police pursuant
to this article, shall take necessary enforcement action to ensure effective
regulation of emergency wrecker service. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-61.   CORRECTION ORDER.
   (a)   If the director or the chief of police determines that a licensee,
either personally or through an employee or agent, violates this article, the
terms of its license, a rule or regulation established by the director or the
chief of police, or other law, the director or the chief of police may notify
the licensee in writing of the violation and by written order direct the
licensee to correct the violation within a reasonable period of time. In
setting the time for correction, the director or the chief or police shall
consider the degree of danger to the public health or safety and the nature of
the violation. If the violation involves equipment that is unsafe or
functioning improperly, the director or the chief of police shall order the
licensee to immediately cease use of the equipment.
   (b)   If the director or the chief of police determines that a violation
constitutes an imminent and serious threat to the public health or safety, the
director or the chief of police shall order the licensee to correct the
violation immediately, and, if the licensee fails to comply, the director or
the chief of police shall promptly take or cause to be taken such action as
considered necessary to enforce the order immediately.
   (c)   The director or the chief of police shall include in a notice issued
under this section an identification of the specific violation, the date of
issuance of the notice and the time period within which the violation must be
corrected, a warning that failure to comply with the order may result in
suspension or revocation of license or imposition of a fine or both, and a
statement indicating how the order may be appealed. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-62.   SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (a)   A licensee shall designate and maintain a representative to receive
service of notice required under this article to be given a licensee.
   (b)   Notice required under this article to be given to:
      (1)   a licensee must be personally served by the director on the
licensee or the licensee’s designated representative; or
      (2)   a driver permitted by the city under Division 3 of this article
must be personally served or sent by certified United States Mail, five day
return receipt requested, to the address, last known to the director, of the
person to be notified.
   (c)   Notice required under this article to be given a person other than a
driver permitted under Division 3 of this article or a licensee may be served
in the manner prescribed by Subsection (b)(2).
   (d)   Service executed in accordance with this section constitutes notice to
the person to whom the notice is addressed. The date of service for notice that
is mailed is the date received. (Ord. 24661)
SEC. 15D-63.   APPEAL.
   (a)   A licensee may appeal a correction order issued under Section
15D-61 if an appeal is requested in writing not more than 10 days after notice
of the order or action is received.
   (b)   The city manager or a designated representative shall act as the
appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing
officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and
make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing
under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling on the basis of
a preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or a part of
the order of the director. The decision of the hearing officer is final. (Ord.
24661)
SEC. 15D-64.   OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he violates a provision of this article
applicable to him.
   (b)   A separate offense is committed each day in which an offense occurs.
An offense committed under this article is punishable by a fine of not less
than $200 or more than $1,000 as provided by Section 2308.505 of the Texas
Occupations Code, as amended. The minimum fine established in this subsection
will be doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-
month period and trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same
offense within any 24-month period. At no time may the minimum fine exceed the
maximum fine established in this subsection.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this article is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (d)   Prosecution for an offense under Subsection (a) does not prevent the
use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person
charged with the conduct or involved in the offense. (Ord. Nos. 24661; 27487)
ARTICLE III
PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATIONS.
SEC. 15D-65.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (2)   PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATION means a corporation that provides a
general public service under a franchise from the city and that has a need to
dispatch vehicles to the scene of accidents, fires, explosions, or other
disasters on an emergency basis. (Ord. Nos. 19312; 24661)
SEC. 15D-66.   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated a vehicle for a public
service corporation as an emergency vehicle without first obtaining a permit.
(Ord. Nos. 14586; 19312; 24661)
SEC. 15D-67.   APPLICATION.
   (a)   A public service corporation which desires to have a vehicle
designated as an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply to the director for a
permit for each vehicle to be designated.
   (b)   The application shall be on a form provided by the director and shall
contain all information reasonably necessary to enable him to determine whether
the vehicle meets the requirements of this article. (Ord. Nos. 14586; 19312;
24661)
SEC. 15D-68.   PERMIT ISSUANCE; STANDARDS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   The director shall consider each application and shall issue a permit
designating the vehicle of a public service corporation as an authorized
emergency vehicle if he finds that:
      (1)   it is necessary to have vehicles owned by the public service
corporation at the scene of accidents, fires, explosions, or other disasters in
the shortest possible time to protect public health, safety, and welfare of
persons and property and that they should be permitted to travel as authorized
emergency vehicles during these emergencies;
      (2)   the vehicle is properly equipped with siren and flashing red lights
as required by Section 124, Article 6701d, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes; and
      (3)   the vehicle has a current state inspection sticker of the state
department of public safety.
   (b)   If the director finds that these three conditions do not exist, he
shall deny the permit.
   (c)   The director may establish rules or standards of operation regarding
public service emergency vehicles. (Ord. Nos. 14586; 19312; 24661)
SEC. 15D-69.   TERM; POSTING.
   The permit required by this article expires the first day of April following
its issuance and shall be renewed annually. The permit must be posted in the
interior of the emergency vehicle in a place accessible to inspection. (Ord.
Nos. 14586; 19312; 24661)
SEC. 15D-70.   OPERATORS TO HAVE CHAUFFEUR’S LICENSE.
   A public service corporation operating a permitted vehicle as an authorized
emergency vehicle shall allow only persons possessing a chauffeur’s license
from the state department of public safety to operate the emergency vehicle.
(Ord. Nos. 14586; 19312; 24661)
ARTICLE IV.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT CLEANUP FEE.
SEC. 15D-71.   MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT CLEANUP FEE.
   (a)   Whenever the fire-rescue department provides services to clean up
contaminants, debris, and other materials discharged onto a public right-of-way
as a result of a motor vehicle accident, a motor vehicle accident cleanup fee
will be charged by the city in accordance with this article. The purpose of the
fee is to recover the costs incurred by the fire-rescue department in
preventing the contaminants, debris, and other materials from entering the
city’s storm water system and in returning the public right-of-way to its
condition immediately prior to the accident.
   (b)   The fee amount will be calculated based on the following rates:
      (1)   $213 per hour for the use of each ambulance/rescue vehicle
(including personnel) necessary to provide bio-hazardous cleanup services.
      (2)   $275 per hour for the use of each fire engine (including personnel)
necessary to provide general cleanup services.
      (3)   $275 per hour for the use of each aerial fire truck (including
personnel) necessary to provide general cleanup services.
      (4)   $161 per hour for the use of each battalion chief vehicle
(including personnel) necessary to provide general cleanup services.
      (5)   $16 per accident for absorbent materials used to provide general
cleanup services.
      (6)   $5 per accident for consumable supplies (including, but not limited
to, brooms, scoops, gloves, and bags) used to provide general cleanup services.
      (7)   $2 per accident for the disposal of bio- hazardous waste.
      (8)   $7 per accident for the disposal of contaminated waste.
   (c)   The driver of the motor vehicle determined to be liable for the motor
vehicle accident shall be responsible for payment of the motor vehicle accident
cleanup fee assessed under this article. If more than one driver is determined
to be liable for the motor vehicle accident, then the fee will be apportioned
among the drivers based on each driver’s percentage of liability. If a driver
is a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be responsible for
payment of any fee or portion of a fee assessed to the minor driver under this
article.
   (d)   Any fee or portion of a fee assessed to a driver under this article
will be waived by the city if the driver provides proof that, at the time of
the motor vehicle accident, the driver was a city of Dallas resident. (Ord.
27354)
CHAPTER 16
DALLAS FIRE CODE
Note: Chapter 16, “Dallas Fire Code” of the Dallas City Code, as amended, is
composed of the most recently adopted editions of the International Fire Code
Institute, as adopted and amended by the Dallas City Council. The text of
Chapter 16 has been removed from the bound three-volume set of the Dallas City
Code and may be obtained by purchasing the Uniform Fire Code, together with
City of Dallas amendments, from the Dallas Fire Department, Fire Prevention
Education and Inspection Division.
CHAPTER 17
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
ARTICLE I.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS GENERALLY.
Sec.
17-1.1.   Purpose.
Sec.
17-1.2.   Cooperation among departments.
Sec.
17-1.3.   General authority and duty of the director, city health authority,
and environmental health officer.
Sec.
17-1.4.   Chapter cumulative.
Sec.
17-1.5.   Definitions.
Sec.
17-1.6.   Defenses for certain types of activities.
ARTICLE II.
MANAGEMENT AND PERSONNEL.
Sec.
17-2.1.   Adoption of Subchapter B, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-2.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE III.
FOOD.
Sec.
17-3.1.   Adoption of Subchapter C, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-3.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE IV.
EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, AND LINENS.
Sec.
17-4.1.   Adoption of Subchapter D, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-4.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE V.
WATER, PLUMBING, AND WASTE.
Sec.
17-5.1.   Adoption of Subchapter E, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-5.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE VI.
PHYSICAL FACILITIES.
Sec.
17-6.1.   Adoption of Subchapter F, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-6.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE VII.
POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS.
Sec.
17-7.1.   Adoption of Subchapter G, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-7.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE VIII.
MOBILE FOOD UNITS.
Sec.
17-8.1.   Adoption of Section 228.221, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-8.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE IX.
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND CATERING SERVICES.
Sec.
17-9.1.   Election not to adopt Section 228.222, Texas Food Establishment
Rules.
Sec.
17-9.2.   Requirements for temporary food establishments.
Sec.
17-9.3.   Requirements for catering services.
ARTICLE X.
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT.
Sec.
17-10.1.   Adoption of Subchapter I, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-10.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE XI.
HEIMLICH MANEUVER POSTER.
Sec.
17-11.1.   Adoption of Section 229.173, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-11.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE XII.
BED AND BREAKFAST EXTENDED ESTABLISHMENTS.
Sec.
17-12.1.   Adoption of Section 228.223, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-12.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE XIII.
OUTFITTER OPERATIONS.
Sec.
17-13.1.   Adoption of Section 228.224, Texas Food Establishment Rules.
Sec.
17-13.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE XIV.
SELF SERVICE FOOD MARKET.
Sec.
17-14.1.   Adoption of Chapter 228, Subchapter H, Section 225.
Sec.
17-14.2.   Additional requirements.
ARTICLE I.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS GENERALLY.
SEC. 17-1.1.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose set forth in Section 228.1 of the Texas Food Establishment Rules
is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. Nos.
26023; 30134)
SEC. 17-1.2.   COOPERATION AMONG DEPARTMENTS.
   The regulation of food establishments is a complex task that may involve
various fields of enforcement and administration; accordingly, cooperation
among city departments to provide effective regulation is encouraged. (Ord.
26023)
SEC. 17-1.3.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF THE DIRECTOR, CITY HEALTH
AUTHORITY, AND ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICER.
   In accordance with state law the director, city health authority, or
environmental health officer, or an officer or employee designated by the
director, city health authority, or environmental health officer, may enforce
any city ordinance applicable to a food establishment. The director, city
health authority, or environmental health officer may also enforce a state or
federal statute or regulation applicable to a food establishment operating
within the city if that enforcement is not contrary to law. The director, city
health authority, or environmental health officer shall implement and enforce
this chapter. (Ord. 26023)
SEC. 17-1.4.   CHAPTER CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions of this chapter and other city ordinances are cumulative law,
and this chapter does not prevent enforcement of another city ordinance that
regulates an area covered by this chapter and is otherwise applicable. (Ord.
26023)
SEC. 17-1.5.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Except for the terms defined in Subsection (b), the definitions set
forth in Section 228.2 of the Texas Food Establishment Rules are hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter by reference.
   (b)   In addition to the definitions adopted in Subsection (a), the
following terms have the following meanings in this chapter:
      (1)   ADULTERATED means the condition of food that:
         (A)   contains a poisonous or deleterious substance in a quantity that
may render it injurious to health; or
         (B)   contains an added poisonous or deleterious substance:
            (i)   for which no safe tolerance has been established or accepted
by a governmental agency; or
            (ii)   in excess of a safe tolerance, established or accepted by a
governmental agency; or
         (C)   consists in whole or part of a filthy, putrid, or decomposed
substance; or
         (D)   is unsafe for human consumption; or
         (E)   was processed, prepared, or otherwise handled under an
unsanitary condition that may have contaminated the food or rendered it
injurious to health; or
         (F)   is in whole or part the product of a diseased animal or an
animal that did not die by slaughter; or
         (G)   the container of which is composed in whole or part of a
poisonous or deleterious substance that may render the food injurious to
health; or
         (H)   is not in a safe, sound condition, free from spoilage, filth,
and other contamination.
      (2)   CATERING SERVICE means a food establishment, other than a mobile
food preparation vehicle, that:
         (A)   prepares or serves food on premises in control of another; or
         (B)   prepares food on the premises of a fixed food establishment and
delivers the food to a different location to be served.
      (3)    COMMERCIALLY-MANUFACTURED means the vehicle or trailer was
manufactured, converted, or retrofitted for use as a mobile food preparation
vehicle or trailer by a person regularly in the business of manufacturing,
converting, or retrofitting motorized vehicles or trailers as mobile food
preparation vehicles or trailers for sale or compensation.
      (4)   COMMISSARY means a food establishment that serves as an operating
base for a mobile food unit and where:
         (A)   food, containers, or supplies are kept, handled, prepared,
packaged, or stored for use by a mobile food unit; and
         (B)   a mobile food unit is stored, parked, serviced, cleaned,
supplied, and maintained.
      (5)   DEPARTMENT means the department designated by the city manager to
enforce and administer this chapter.
      (6)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department, the city health
authority, or the environmental health officer and includes representatives,
agents, or city employees designated by the director of the department, the
city health authority, or the environmental health officer to enforce or
administer this chapter; except that, in Section
17-10.2(p), the term refers only to the director of the department.
      (7)   EXTENSIVELY REMODELED means the expenditure of at least $25,000 or
an amount equal to at least 10 percent of the assessed value of the facility,
whichever is more, for the purpose of repairs or remodeling, but does not
include:
         (A)   expenditures for the replacement of movable equipment; or
         (B)   remodeling that does not affect the construction or operation of
food storage or food preparation areas or areas used to store or clean utensils
and equipment used in food storage or food preparation.
      (8)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT:
         (A)   The term means an operation that:
            (i)   sells, stores, prepares, packages, serves, or otherwise
provides food for human consumption such as: a food service establishment;
retail food store; mobile food unit; satellite or catered feeding location;
catering operation if the operation provides food directly to a consumer or to
a conveyance used to transport people; market; remote catered operations;
conveyance used to transport people; institution; or food bank; and
            (ii)   relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly, or
indirectly through a delivery service, such as home delivery of grocery orders
or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided by common
carriers.
         (B)   The term includes an element of the operation such as a
transportation vehicle or a central preparation facility that supplies a
vending location or satellite feeding location unless the vending or feeding
location is permitted by the regulatory authority; a restaurant; a grocery
store; an operation that is conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary, or
permanent facility or location; where consumption is on or off premises; and
regardless of whether there is a charge for the food.
         (C)   The term does not include a produce stand that only offers
whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables or an establishment that offers only
prepackaged foods that are not time/temperature control for safety, except that
the term does include an establishment that sells ice cream, frozen custard,
soft serve dairy products, gelato, or other frozen desserts.
         (D)   The term does not include a stand that only offers the
occasional sale of lemonade or other nonalcoholic beverages on private property
or in a public park by an individual younger than 18 years of age.
      (9)   MOBILE FOOD PREPARATION TRAILER means a commercially-manufactured
enclosed or partly enclosed mobile food unit that complies with the
construction and operation standards of this article for a Class IV mobile food
unit and is readily movable by means of pulling to locations for operations as
a mobile food preparation trailer.
      (10)   MOBILE FOOD PREPARATION VEHICLE means a commercially-manufactured,
motorized mobile food unit in which food is cooked, wrapped, packaged,
processed, or portioned for service, sale, or distribution.
      (11)   MOBILE FOOD UNIT means a vehicle-mounted, self or otherwise
propelled, self-contained food service operation designed to be readily
moveable (including catering trucks, trailers, and pushcarts) and used to
store, prepare, display, serve, or sell food to an ultimate consumer. The term
includes, but is not limited to, Class I and Class II pushcarts and Class III
and Class IV mobile food preparation trailers and vehicles. A mobile food unit
does not include a stand or a booth.
         (A)   Mobile food unit classifications:
            (i)   Class I units may only sell pre-packaged foods and beverages
from a pushcart. This class includes vegetable and fruit vendors.
            (ii)   Class II units are any mobile food unit that is not a Class
I, Class III, or Class IV mobile food unit. Class II units may only have a hot
or cold holding display for unpackaged foods. Limited cooking and preparation
are allowed onboard the pushcart such as boiling, heating, and steaming. Flat
top grilling is prohibited.
            (iii)   Class III units are a mobile food preparation trailer that
may cook in an external covered area such as a barbeque pit or wood fired pizza
ovens, where all food preparation, assembly, and service is done in an enclosed
area on board the unit. This class includes a non-motorized mobile food unit
that is readily movable such as a trailer or shipping container.
            (iv)   Class IV units are units that are fully enclosed that meet
all the safety equipment and standards as a brick and mortar unit. This class
includes a restaurant on wheels or a mobile food preparation vehicle.
      (12)   NON-FOOD CONTACT SURFACE means a surface (including, but not
limited to, a shelf, counter, fan, or an exterior part of equipment) that does
not normally come into contact with food in the operation of a food
establishment.
      (13)   PERMIT means the document issued by the department that authorizes
a person to operate a food establishment.
      (14)   PERSON IN CHARGE means the individual present in a food
establishment who is the apparent supervisor of the food establishment at the
time of inspection. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then any
employee present is the person in charge.
      (15)   PREMISES means:
         (A)   the physical facility, its contents, and the contiguous land or
property under the control of the permit holder; or
         (B)   the physical facility, its contents, and the contiguous land or
property and its facilities and contents that are under the control of the
permit holder that may impact food establishment personnel, facilities, or
operations, if a food establishment is only one component of a larger
operation.
      (16)   RECONSTITUTED means the recombining of dehydrated food products
with water or other liquids.
      (17)   REGULATORY AUTHORITY means the director.
      (18)   RISK LEVEL ONE ESTABLISHMENT means an establishment with no
cooking processes of any kind, no heat holding, no open exposed food handling
(including handling mixed drinks), or only holds refrigerated and frozen foods
packaged from the manufacture.
      (19)   RISK LEVEL THREE ESTABLISHMENT means an establishment that cooks
time and temperature control products from the raw state, heat hold, and reheat
food items. These establishments may have an extensive menu and/or extensive
handling of food ingredients. This includes food establishments that engage in
special processes, have a hazard analysis critical control point (HACCP) plan,
or serves a highly susceptible population.
      (20)   RISK LEVEL TWO ESTABLISHMENT means an establishment that has a
limited menu selection, serves only commercially processed time and temperature
control foods, heats and serves food items with no cooking or reheating
process, or has minimal heat holding.
      (21)   SAFE TEMPERATURE means a temperature of not more than 41 degrees
Fahrenheit if held cold (5 degrees Centigrade) or not less than 135 degrees
Fahrenheit if held hot (60 degrees Centigrade). The symbols "°F." and "°C." are
used in this chapter to refer, respectively, to degrees Fahrenheit and degrees
Centigrade.
      (22)   SEAL means to close the junction between surfaces in a way that
prevents entry of moisture.
      (23)   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT means:
         (A)   a food establishment that operates at a fixed location for a
limited period of time in conjunction with:
            (i)   a plaza event for which a permit has been issued by the city
under
Chapter 35;
            (ii)   a special event for which a permit has been issued by the
city under
Chapter 42A;
            (iii)   a special event conducted with written permission of the
city on property under the control of the park and recreation board, on
property of the "convention center" or "reunion arena" as defined in Section
43-127 of this code, or on property of the "Neighborhood Market" as defined in
Section
42A-2 of this code;
            (iv)   a temporary carnival or circus conducted with written
authorization of the building official under Section
51A-4.206(2) of the Dallas Development Code;
            (v)   an activity or event conducted entirely inside a facility
that is primarily and routinely used to hold exhibitions, conventions,
concerts, symphonies, plays, sporting events, or similar activities or events
at which food is customarily served or offered for sale;
            (vi)   a single event or celebration conducted on any
nonresidential premises as an accessory use under Section
51A-4.217 of the Dallas Development Code; or
            (vii)   a neighborhood market for which a permit has been issued
under
Chapter 42A of this code; or
         (B)   a concessionaire operating under a seasonal contract with the
city on property owned or operated by the city.
      (24)   TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES means the rules of the Texas
Department of State Health Services found in Title 25 Texas Administrative
Code, Chapter 228, as amended.
      (25)   VARIANCE means a written document issued by the department that
authorizes a modification or waiver of one or more requirements of the code if,
in the opinion of the department, a health hazard or nuisance will not result
from the modification or waiver. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 26556; 28046; 30134; 30938;
31375; 32181)
SEC. 17-1.6.   DEFENSES FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF ACTIVITIES.
   (a)   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that, at the time of
the offense, the person charged was:
      (1)   conducting food operations that are licensed, and inspected at
least once a year, under federal or state law (as illustrated by, but not
limited to, milk producers, day care facilities, nursing homes, and meat
processors);
      (2)   selling, distributing, transporting, or storing a raw agricultural
commodity (including, but not limited to, raw vegetables and fruit, and pure
honey) by the original producer, provided that the sale, distribution,
transportation, or storage is on property owned or leased by the original
producer;
      (3)   selling, distributing, or serving food at an event, party, or other
special gathering that is not open to persons other than the members or invited
guests of the sponsor, provided that there is no public advertisement of the
event, public solicitation of funds at or for the event, or participation by
the general public in the event;
      (4)   conducting the retail sale or distribution of non-time/temperature
control for safety food from a fixed facility if the food is acquired and sold
or distributed in cans, bottles, or other prepackaged containers that are not
opened before obtained by a consumer, and no food manufacturing, processing, or
preparing operations are conducted at the facility; or
      (5)   serving or distributing food, without charge, to homeless
individuals on public or private property, provided that the person:
         (A)   sent a notice within the time required by subparagraph (B) to
the director (by United States mail, facsimile, electronic mail to the
addresses or numbers provided by the director, via the City's 311 call center,
or on the City's Code Compliance Department's website) containing the following
information:
            (i)   the name of the individual or organization that was or will
be serving or distributing food to the homeless;
            (ii)   the date or dates when food was or will be served or
distributed to the homeless;
            (iii)   the times of day when food service and distribution is
anticipated to or did begin and end on each date listed in the notice;
            (iv)   the street address or addresses of where food was or is
anticipated to be served or distributed to the homeless or, if the location has
no street address, then a description of the location by street block number or
by naming the nearest intersecting streets; and
            (v)   the approximate or expected number of food preparers and
servers on the site where the food was or will be served or distributed and the
approximate or expected number of individuals that were or will be served,
provided the number of individuals that were or is anticipated to be served
exceeds 75 at a single location;
         (B)   sent the notice required in subparagraph (A) at least 24 hours
before the service or distribution of food to the homeless will commence, if it
is anticipated that more than 75 people will be served, or within 48 hours
after the service or distribution of food to the homeless has concluded, if it
is anticipated that 75 or fewer people will be served at a single location;
         (C)   if the person is an individual, had attended a free city-
sponsored food safety training class within the 24 months preceding the service
or distribution of food to the homeless or, if the person is an organization,
had at least one person who has attended a free city-sponsored food safety
training class or has taken the class to become a certified food handler in the
State of Texas within the 24 months preceding the service or distribution of
food to the homeless present at all times when food was being served or
distributed to the homeless, although this requirement applies only so long as
the city sponsors a free food safety training class at least once during each
three month period during a calendar year;
         (D)   did not serve or distribute time/temperature control for safety
to the homeless, unless the food has been stored at a temperature of:
            (i)   41° F. (5° C.) or below; or
            (ii)   135° F. (57° C.) or above;
         (E)   transported the food in a clean conveyance and, if the food was
a time/temperature control for safety food, as that phrase is defined in the
Texas Food Establishment Rules, as amended, served or distributed it within
four hours after preparation;
         (F)   used one of the following methods of sanitizing hands before
preparing, serving, or distributing food for the homeless:
            (i)   a hand sanitizer containing at least 70 percent alcohol or
another substance capable of killing 99.9 percent of the bacteria on hands
within 30 seconds of application;
            (ii)   disposable gloves; or
            (iii)   handwashing equipment that included at a minimum:
               (aa)   a sink, or a five-gallon container with a spigot that
provides free-flowing water and a catch bucket to collect wastewater from
handwashing; and
               (bb)   soap and individual paper towels;
         (G)   properly disposed of any wastewater generated from any
handwashing equipment used in the preparation, service, or distribution of food
to the homeless into a sanitary sewer system and did not dispose of the
wastewater on the ground or into the stormwater drainage system; and
         (H)   brought a sufficient number of trash bags to dispose of the
solid waste generated by the food provided by the servers and used best efforts
to remove or cause the removal of all trash or debris from the feeding site
that was generated by the service or distribution of food to the homeless, and
deposited the trash or debris in a public trash receptacle, or in a private
trash receptacle if permission from the receptacle owner was obtained. (Ord.
Nos. 26023; 26556; 29595; 30134)
ARTICLE II.
MANAGEMENT AND PERSONNEL.
SEC. 17-2.1.   ADOPTION OF SUBCHAPTER B, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Subchapter B of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference, except that Section 228.32 and
Subsection 228.38(c) are not adopted. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 26556; 30134, eff. 7-1-
16)
SEC. 17-2.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements adopted in Section
17-2.1 of this chapter, the requirements contained in this section govern the
management and personnel of food establishments.
   (b)   Demonstration of knowledge by person in charge of a food
establishment. Based on the risks of foodborne illness inherent to the food
operation, the person in charge shall, during inspections and upon request,
demonstrate to the director knowledge of foodborne disease prevention,
application of the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point principles, and the
requirements of this chapter. The person in charge shall demonstrate this
knowledge by compliance with this chapter, by being a registered food
protection manager who has shown proficiency of required information through
passing a test that is part of an accredited program and by responding
correctly to the inspector's questions as they relate to the specific food
operation. The person in charge may demonstrate such knowledge by:
      (1)   describing the relationship between the prevention of foodborne
disease and the personal hygiene of a food employee;
      (2)   explaining the responsibility of the person in charge for
preventing the transmission of foodborne disease by a food employee who has a
disease or medical condition that may cause foodborne disease;
      (3)   describing the symptoms associated with the diseases that are
transmissible through food;
      (4)   explaining the significance of the relationship between maintaining
the time and temperature of time/temperature control for safety food and the
prevention of foodborne illness;
      (5)   explaining the hazards involved in the consumption of raw or
undercooked meat, poultry, eggs, and fish;
      (6)   stating the required food temperatures and times for safe cooking
of time/temperature control for safety food including meat, poultry, eggs, and
fish;
      (7)   stating the required temperatures and times for safe refrigerated
storage, hot holding, cooling, and reheating of time/temperature control for
safety food;
      (8)   describing the relationship between the prevention of foodborne
illness and the management and control of the following:
         (A)   cross-contamination;
         (B)   hand contact with ready-to-eat foods;
         (C)   handwashing; and
         (D)   maintaining the food establishment in a clean condition and in
good repair;
      (9)   explaining the relationship between food safety and providing
equipment that is:
         (A)   sufficient in number and capacity; and
         (B)   properly designed, constructed, located, installed, operated,
maintained, and cleaned;
      (10)   explaining correct procedures for cleaning and sanitizing utensils
and food-contact surfaces of equipment;
      (11)   identifying the source of water used and measures taken to ensure
that it remains protected from contamination such as providing protection from
backflow and precluding the creation of cross connections;
      (12)   identifying poisonous and toxic material in the food establishment
and the procedures necessary to ensure that they are safely stored, dispensed,
used, and disposed of according to law;
      (13)   identifying critical control points in the operation from
purchasing through sale or service that when not controlled may contribute to
the transmission of foodborne illness and explaining steps taken to ensure that
the points are controlled in accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
      (14)   explaining the details of how the person in charge and food
employees comply with the Hazard Analysis Critical Point (HACCP) plan (if a
plan is required by the law), the Texas Food Establishment Rules, and this
chapter; and
      (15)   explaining the responsibilities, rights, and authorities assigned
by this chapter to:
         (A)   the food employee;
         (B)   the person in charge; and
         (C)   the director.
   (c)   Registered food service managers.
      (1)   Registered food service manager required.
         (A)   A food establishment shall employ at least one person who:
            (i)   is a full-time, on-site supervisory employee of that food
establishment responsible for food preparation and service; and
            (ii)   has a valid and current food manager certificate issued by
the Texas Department of State Health Services.
         (B)   A food establishment must comply with the requirements of
Section 17-2.2(c) before being issued an operating permit.
         (C)   One registered food service manager in a supervisory capacity
may serve up to four food establishments contained within the same building and
under the same ownership and same management.
         (D)   A food establishment shall have one registered food service
manager employed and present in the establishment during all hours of
operation, except that a registered food service manager serving multiple food
establishments as authorized by Section 17-2.2(c)(1)(C) must only be present in
the building in which the food establishment is located during all hours of
operation.
         (E)   A food establishment that serves, sells, or distributes only
prepackaged foods and non-time/temperature control for safety beverages, and a
temporary food service establishment that is in operation fewer than four
consecutive calendar days, are exempt from Section 17-2.2(c)(1).
      (2)   Registered food service manager replacement. If a food
establishment cannot meet the requirements of Section 17-2.2(c)(1) because of
the termination or permanent transfer of a registered food service manager, the
food establishment shall:
         (A)   notify the director, in writing, within 10 days after the
effective date of the termination or permanent transfer of the registered food
service manager; and
         (B)   employ another registered food service manager within 45 days
after the effective date of the termination or permanent transfer of the
previous registered food service manager.
      (3)   Display of certificate of registered food service manager. A food
service establishment shall display the original certificate of each primary
registered food service manager employed by the establishment. Each certificate
must be displayed in a glass-covered frame at a location where it is easily
visible to the public.
   (d)   Food allergen awareness poster requirement.
      (1)   All retail and food establishments shall display a food allergen
awareness poster in an area that is regularly accessible to food service
employees.
      (2)   The poster must be identical or substantially similar to the sample
food allergen awareness poster provided by the Texas Department of State Health
Services (DSHS) and must include, at a minimum, the following information:
         (A)   A list of the eight major food allergens recognized by the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA): milk, eggs, fish, shellfish, tree nuts, peanuts,
wheat, and soy.
         (B)   A description of the health risks associated with food
allergens.
         (C)   Instructions for proper handling of food to prevent cross-
contact with allergens.
      (3)   The food allergen awareness poster must be:
         (A)   clearly visible and legible to all food service employees;
         (B)   located in a designated area such as the kitchen, employee break
room, or food preparation area; and
         (C)   maintained in good condition, with legible text and graphics.
      (4)   The responsibility to ensure the proper display and maintenance of
the food allergen awareness poster lies with the person in charge of the food
establishment.
      (5)   Failure to comply with this subsection constitutes a violation of
the code.
(Ord. Nos. 26023; 26598; 27353; 27695; 28488; 29177; 30134; 30653; 32003;
32673; 33224)
ARTICLE III.
FOOD.
SEC. 17-3.1.   ADOPTION OF SUBCHAPTER C, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Subchapter C [including Figure 1: 25 TAC § 228.71(a)(1)(B), Figure 2: 25 TAC
§ 228.71(a)(2)(A), and Figure 3: 25 TAC § 228.71(a)(2)(B)] of the Texas Food
Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by
reference, except that Section 228.65(a) is not adopted. (Ord. Nos. 26023;
30134)
SEC. 17-3.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements adopted in Section
17-3.1 of this chapter, the requirements contained in this section govern food
at food establishments.
   (b)   Preventing contamination by employees.
      (1)   Preventing contamination from hands.
         (A)   Food employees shall wash their hands as specified under Section
228.38(a) of the Texas Food Establishment Rules (relating to management and
personnel).
         (B)   Except when washing fruits and vegetables as specified in
Section 228.66(e) of the Texas Food Establishment Rules, food employees shall
avoid contact of exposed ready-to-eat food with their bare hands by use of
suitable utensils such as deli tissue, spatulas, tongs, or single-use gloves.
         (C)   Food employees shall minimize bare hand and arm contact with
exposed food that is not in a ready-to-eat form.
      (2)   Preventing contamination when tasting. A food employee may not use
a utensil more than once to taste food that is to be sold or served.
   (c)   Preventing contamination from the premises.
      (1)   Food storage.
         (A)   Except as specified in Section
17-3.2(c)(1)(B) and (C), food must be protected from contamination by storing
the food:
            (i)   in a clean, dry location;
            (ii)   where it is not exposed to splash, dust, or other
contamination; and
            (iii)   at least 15 centimeters (6 inches) above the floor.
         (B)   Food in packages and working containers may be stored less than
15 centimeters (6 inches) above the floor on case lot handling equipment as
specified under Section 228.106(v) of the Texas Food Establishment Rules.
         (C)   Pressurized beverage containers, cased food in waterproof
containers such as bottles or cans, and milk containers in plastic crates may
be stored on a floor that is clean and not exposed to floor moisture.
      (2)   Food storage, prohibited areas. Food may not be stored:
         (A)   in locker rooms;
         (B)   in toilet rooms;
         (C)   in dressing rooms;
         (D)   in garbage rooms;
         (E)   in mechanical rooms;
         (F)   under sewer lines that are not shielded to intercept potential
drips;
         (G)   under leaking water lines, including leaking automatic fire
sprinkler heads, or under lines on which water has condensed;
         (H)   under open stairwells; or
         (I)   under other sources of contamination.
   (d)   Outside distribution of time/temperature control for safety food. A
food establishment that serves, sells, or distributes time/temperature control
for safety food outside the premises of a fixed facility must maintain the food
at a safe temperature.
   (e)   Outdoor bars.
      (1)   An outdoor bar is a food establishment that prepares and serves
only beverages at a location not completely housed inside a fixed facility.
      (2)   An outdoor bar is in compliance with Sections
17-3.1 and
17-3.2 if:
         (A)   the director finds that the outdoor bar will not result in a
health or safety hazard or nuisance; and
         (B)   the outdoor bar is either:
            (i)   limited to a single, fixed structure; or
            (ii)   meets the requirements of this chapter pertaining to a Class
II mobile food unit; and
         (C)   the outdoor bar complies with all other requirements of this
chapter.
      (3)   An outdoor bar in compliance with Section
17-3.2(e)(2)(B)(i) must:
         (A)   have overhead protection of a suitable material that:
            (i)   completely covers the food preparation area;
            (ii)   extends at least 18 inches beyond the edge of the service
counter; and
            (iii)   if the overhead protection extends to or beyond the edge of
a swimming pool, is guttered to prevent the drainage of rainwater into the
swimming pool;
         (B)   have service counters, walls, partitions, and doors constructed
and finished to impede the entrance of rodents;
         (C)   store and dispense utensils, single service articles, and bar
condiments and other unpackaged food only in containers with sealed, self-
closing doors;
         (D)   dispense ice only from automatic ice dispensers or from
containers with sealed, self- closing doors;
         (E)   provide only single service articles for use by the consumer;
and
         (F)   store food (including beverages), utensils, and single service
articles in cabinets that are sealed to adequately protect the stored items
from contamination by dust, water, insects, and rodents during the times the
outdoor bar is not open for business.
   (f)   Labeling of foods. Bulk, unpackaged foods that are apportioned to
consumers with the assistance of food establishment personnel, including bakery
products, need not be labeled if:
      (1)   a health or nutrient content claim, or other claim, is not made;
      (2)   the food is manufactured or prepared on the premises of the food
establishment that is owned by the same person and is licensed by the food
regulatory agency that has primary jurisdiction; and
      (3)   ingredients contained in the food, including potential allergens,
are provided to the consumer on request from a recipe book or by other means.
   (g)   Food transportation.
      (1)   Transportation. A food establishment that transports food shall:
         (A)   comply with the applicable requirements of Section
17-3.2(c) during the transportation of food;
         (B)   transport the food in a clean conveyance;
         (C)   protect food and utensils from contamination by completely
wrapping or packaging, except that foods in original individual packages do not
need to be overwrapped or covered if the original package is intact.
      (2)   Carryout food. A food establishment that prepares food for off
premises consumption shall place the food in a sack or closed container, or
wrap the food in a way that protects it from adulteration, unless:
         (A)   the food is served in an individual serving;
         (B)   the food is intended for immediate consumption; and
         (C)   it is impracticable to enclose or wrap the food (as illustrated
by, but not limited to, a serving of ice cream). (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134;
32181)
ARTICLE IV.
EQUIPMENT, UTENSILS, AND LINENS.
SEC. 17-4.1.   ADOPTION OF SUBCHAPTER D, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Subchapter D [including Figure 1: 25 TAC § 228.101(c)(1) and Figure 2: 25
TAC § 228.111(n)(1)] of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter by reference, except that Section 228.109(c) is
not adopted. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134)
SEC. 17-4.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements adopted in Section
17-4.1 of this chapter, the requirements contained in this section govern
equipment, utensils, and linens at food establishments.
   (b)   Clothes washer and dryer location requirements. If a mechanical
clothes washer or dryer is provided, it shall be located so that the washer or
dryer is protected from contamination and only where there is no exposed food;
clean equipment, utensils, and linens; and unwrapped single-service and single-
use articles. Laundry facilities may not be located in food handling areas.
   (c)   Maintenance of equipment. Equipment shall be maintained in a state of
repair and condition that:
      (1)   meets the requirements specified in Subsection 228.101(a) and
Section 228.102 of the Texas Food Establishment Rules; and
      (2)   enables the equipment to perform the function for which it is used,
intended, or designed. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134)
ARTICLE V.
WATER, PLUMBING, AND WASTE.
SEC. 17-5.1.   ADOPTION OF SUBCHAPTER E, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Subchapter E of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference, except that Paragraphs 228.143(a)(1)
through (3) and Subsections 228.146(b) and Subsection 228.147(e) are not
adopted. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134)
SEC. 17-5.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements adopted in Section
17-5.1 of this chapter, the requirements contained in this section govern
water, plumbing, and waste at food establishments.
   (b)   Hot water. Hot water generation and distribution systems must be
sufficient to meet the peak hot water demands throughout the food
establishment. Such systems must be of not less than 50-gallon water tank
capacity.
   (c)   Handwashing lavatory, water temperature, and flow.
      (1)   A handwashing lavatory must be equipped to provide water at a
temperature of at least 43 degrees Celsius (110 degrees Fahrenheit) through a
mixing valve or combination faucet.
      (2)   A steam-mixing valve may not be used at a handwashing lavatory.
      (3)   Self-closing, slow-closing, sensor-closing, or metering faucets are
prohibited in food preparation areas.
      (4)   For extensively remodeled food establishments, a handwashing
lavatory must be located within 25 linear feet of a food preparation area.
   (d)   Service sink. In new or extensively remodeled food establishments, at
least one free- standing, stainless steel service sink or one curbed cleaning
facility equipped with a floor drain must be provided and conveniently located
for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and for the
disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste.
   (e)   Grease traps/interceptors. For extensively remodeled food
establishments, and unless otherwise approved by the director, a food
establishment must locate grease traps/interceptors outside the food
establishment so that they are easily accessible for cleaning. Grease traps/
interceptors located inside the food establishment with the director's approval
must have a liquid-tight lid flush attached to the floor that prevents
contamination of food or equipment. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134)
ARTICLE VI.
PHYSICAL FACILITIES.
SEC. 17-6.1.   ADOPTION OF SUBCHAPTER F, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Subchapter F of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference, except that Sections 228.172 and
228.173 are not adopted. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134)
SEC. 17-6.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements adopted in Section
17-6.1 of this chapter, the requirements contained in this section govern the
physical facilities of food establishments.
   (b)   Outdoor areas, surface characteristics.
      (1)   Walking and driving areas. The outdoor walking and driving areas
must be:
         (A)   surfaced with concrete, asphalt, or gravel or other materials
that have been effectively treated to minimize dust, facilitate maintenance,
and prevent muddy conditions; and
         (B)   graded to prevent pooling.
      (2)   Exterior surfaces. Exterior surfaces of buildings and mobile food
units must be of weather-resistant materials and must comply with applicable
law.
      (3)   Storage areas. Outdoor storage areas for refuse, recyclables, or
returnables must be of materials specified under Subsections 228.155(a) through
(c) of the Texas Food Establishment Rules, which governs water, plumbing, and
waste. Only articles necessary for the operation and maintenance of a food
establishment and its exterior may be stored on the premises, but only when the
storage does not violate this chapter, other city ordinances, or other
applicable law.
   (c)   Floors, walls, and ceilings.
      (1)   A food establishment containing a food handling area, food
processing area, food preparation area, food storage area, equipment or utensil
washing area, walk-in refrigerating unit, dressing room, locker room, toilet
room, or vestibule shall:
         (A)   construct the walls (including nonsupporting partitions), and
wall covering in these areas of smooth, rigid, non-absorbent, and easily
cleanable material that is light in color and not easily torn or punctured,
such as fiberglass-reinforced plastic; except that walls in dry storage areas
may be finished with a light-colored, oil-based enamel paint that provides a
smooth surface;
         (B)   make the ceiling in these areas light in color and construct it
of smooth, non-absorbent, and easily cleanable material or of a lay-in type
acoustical material in T-type metal grids that can be easily replaced when the
material becomes soiled;
         (C)   prevent exposed construction in these areas, including but not
limited to the exposure of pipes, conduits, ductwork, studs, joists, and
rafters;
         (D)   prevent unnecessary exposure of utility service lines and pipes
on floors, walls, and ceilings in these areas, or if exposure is necessary
install them in a way that does not obstruct cleaning of floors, walls, and
ceilings;
         (E)   attach light fixtures, vent covers, wall-mounted fans,
decorative material, and similar equipment used in these areas, in a manner
that permits easy cleaning; and
         (F)   finish and seal concrete or pumice blocks used for interior wall
construction in these areas to provide an easily cleanable surface.
      (2)   Special requirements for floors. A food establishment shall:
         (A)    construct floors that are water flushed for cleaning, or that
receive discharges of liquid from equipment or pressure sprays, of sealed
concrete, terrazzo, ceramic tile, or similar material that is graded to a
properly installed trapped floor drain;
         (B)   cove and seal junctures between walls and floors in extensively
remodeled establishments and in other cases construct the junctures between
walls and floors so that the seam is not greater than 1/32 inch;
         (C)    use only mats and duckboards that are constructed of
nonabsorbent, grease resistant material of a size, design, and construction
that permits easy cleaning;
         (D)    not use duckboards as storage racks;
         (E)    not use floor carpeting in food preparation areas, food storage
areas, equipment and utensil washing areas, or toilet rooms; and
         (F)    not use sawdust, wood shavings, peanut hulls, or similar
material as a floor covering.
      (3)   Anti-slip floor covering may be used in areas where necessary for
safety. Floor carpeting may be used in areas not listed in Section
17-6.2(c)(2)(E) if it is of closely woven construction, properly installed,
easily cleanable and in good repair.
   (d)   Location of certain equipment. For extensively remodeled food
establishments, a food establishment must:
      (1)   locate equipment used for a work surface on which food is prepared
(e.g., a meat or vegetable cutting block or bakers table) within five feet of a
floor drain so that it may be properly cleaned;
      (2)   maintain unobstructed aisles between equipment of a width
sufficient to permit passage without a likelihood of causing adulteration of
food;
      (3)   position all readily movable storage equipment, including pallets,
racks, and dollies, to provide accessibility to working areas;
      (4)   locate an ice machine, if any, inside a food service or food
preparation area; and
      (5)   not locate equipment, including ice makers and ice storage
equipment, under exposed or unprotected sewer lines or water lines, open
stairwells, or near other sources of contamination, excluding automatic fire
protection sprinkler heads.
   (e)   Auxiliary equipment for extensively remodeled food establishments.
      (1)    Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a food
establishment may not locate non-food service equipment (e.g., water heaters,
laundry machines, remote connected refrigerator compressors, or air
conditioners) inside a food preparation area unless otherwise authorized or
required by law.
      (2)   If a water heater is authorized or required to be located inside a
food handling area, it must be enclosed with walls or partitions constructed of
rigid, smooth, non-absorbent, easily-cleanable materials.
      (3)   If a food establishment uses mechanical laundry equipment, the food
establishment must locate the equipment in a separate room with self-closing,
solid doors that fit tightly at each entrance. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134; 32181)
ARTICLE VII.
POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS.
SEC. 17-7.1.   ADOPTION OF SUBCHAPTER G, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Subchapter G of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134)
SEC. 17-7.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Reserved. (Ord. 26023)
ARTICLE VIII.
MOBILE FOOD UNITS.
SEC. 17-8.1.   ADOPTION OF SECTION 228.221, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Section 228.221 of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference, except that Subsections 228.221(a),
(b), and (c)(2), are not adopted. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 28488; 30134; 32181)
SEC. 17-8.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In general. In addition to the requirements adopted in Section
17-8.1 of this chapter, the requirements contained in this section govern
mobile food units.
   (b)   Categories of mobile food units . Mobile food units in the city are
divided into the following categories:
      (1)   Class I. A Class I mobile food unit is a mobile food unit from
which only the following foods and beverages are served, sold, or distributed:
         (A)   Food that is prewrapped, bottled, or otherwise labeled and
packaged in individual servings.
         (B)   Beverages that are not time/ temperature control for safety and
are dispensed from covered urns or other protected equipment.
         (C)   Raw, uncut vegetables and fruits.
      (2)   Class II. Any mobile food unit that is not a Class I, Class III, or
Class IV mobile food unit is a Class II mobile food unit.
      (3)   Class III. A Class III mobile food unit is a mobile food
preparation trailer meant to be pulled to locations that complies with the
construction and operation standards for operating a mobile unit used for
cooking, keeping, storing, or warming food or beverages.
      (4)   Class IV. A Class IV mobile food unit is an operational, motorized
mobile food preparation vehicle in which food is cooked, wrapped, packaged,
processed, or portioned for service, sale, or distribution.
   (c)   Vehicles.
      (1)   A food establishment that uses a vehicle in the operation of a
mobile food unit shall:
         (A)   identify the vehicle with characters three inches high on both
exterior sides of the vehicle stating the following:
            (i)   the name of the food establishment;
            (ii)   a brief description of the nature of the business if not
included in the name; and
            (iii)   the permit number of the vehicle;
         (B)   secure an inspection of the vehicle by the director on the date
designated by the director;
         (C)   maintain the vehicle in a clean, undamaged condition, both
inside and outside, and in good working order;
         (D)   keep the permit or a copy of the permit on the vehicle at all
times;
         (E)   keep proof of minimum vehicle insurance that is issued in at
least six month increments;
         (F)   display on the vehicle current license plates and a current
vehicle safety inspection sticker issued by the State of Texas, when required
by state law; and
         (G)   not equip the vehicle with any sound amplification device that,
when operated, violates Section
30-2 of this code.
      (2)   In addition to other vehicle requirements of Section
17-8.2(c), a mobile food preparation vehicle must:
         (A)   be equipped with four-way hazard lights; and
         (B)   in addition to the left and right outside rearview mirrors, be
equipped with two outside wide-angle mirrors, one located on the front of the
vehicle and one located on the rear of the vehicle.
      (3)   In addition to other vehicle requirements of Section
17-8.2(c), a Class II mobile food unit must:
         (A)   be constructed of 18 gauge stainless steel (equivalent to .05
inches durable stainless steel);
         (B)   not exceed six feet in length (including any handles measuring
six inches or more in length and any permanently attached trailer hitches),
three feet in width (exclusive of wheels), or four feet in height (exclusive of
wheels);
         (C)   have the bottom of the food service or storage unit at least six
inches above the ground;
         (D)   be equipped with an electrical oven or refrigeration system to
maintain proper food temperature; and
         (E)   not contain a grill or fryer.
      (4)   In addition to other vehicle requirements of Section
17-8.2(c), a Class I mobile food unit must not exceed three feet in length, two
feet in width (exclusive of wheels), or two feet in height (exclusive of
wheels), except for frozen dessert stationary pushcarts, which must not exceed
six feet in length, three feet in width (exclusive of wheels), or four feet in
height (exclusive of wheels).
   (d)   Site of operation of Class II units.
      (1)   All food products, supplies, and equipment necessary for the
operation of a pushcart must be contained on the vehicle or at a permitted
facility.
      (2)   Slicing, dicing, and chopping of vegetables and other food items
are prohibited.
      (3)   No cooking, including but not limited to grilling, baking, and
frying, is allowed on a pushcart. Only the reheating of cooked food by boiling
or steaming is allowed.
      (4)   An operator of a pushcart must have access to restroom facilities
during the hours the pushcart is in operation.
      (5)   The fixed site from which a pushcart is operated must have a valid
food establishment permit issued under Article X of this chapter, unless
otherwise approved by the director.
   (e)   Food served or distributed from a mobile food unit. A person may not
serve or distribute from a mobile food unit any food not specified in the food
establishment permit issued under Article X of this chapter.
   (f)   Ice.
      (1)   Ice used in a beverage served by either a Class I, Class II, Class
III, or Class IV mobile food unit must be:
         (A)   from an approved source;
         (B)   stored in a stainless steel container that:
            (i)   is covered;
            (ii)   is not installed above food equipment or food contact
surfaces; and
            (iii)   drains into the mobile food unit's liquid waste retention
tank; and
         (C)   dispensed with an approved scoop by an employee of the mobile
food unit or from automatic self-service ice dispensing equipment.
      (2)   All ice used to keep food cold must be drained into the mobile food
unit's liquid waste retention tank and properly disposed of at the mobile food
unit's designated commissary or servicing area.
   (g)   Central preparation facility or commissary.
      (1)   Supplies, cleaning, and servicing operations. 
         (A)   Except as provided in this paragraph, a mobile food unit must
operate from a central preparation area, commissary, or other fixed food
establishment and must report to the location for supplies and for cleaning and
servicing operations at the end of each day. Pushcarts must be stored at the
commissary location when not in operation.
         (B)   A mobile food unit may report to the central preparation area,
commissary, or other fixed food establishment for supplies, cleaning, and
servicing operations at least once a week if the following conditions are met:
            (i)   the mobile food unit operator shall apply for a variance on a
form provided by the director and shall include with the application all of the
information required by Section
17-10.2(s) to be able to return to the commissary once per week;
            (ii)   the mobile food unit is enclosed and complies with the
health and safety standards of a fixed food establishment;
            (iii)   all cleaning supplies must be disposable and discarded at
the end of each operating day;
            (iv)   the mobile food unit operator shall demonstrate that
sanitary on-site servicing of the mobile food unit's potable water and
wastewater systems are being conducted;
            (v)   the mobile food unit operator must provide proof of weekly
on-site servicing by a licensed-permitted liquid waste transport vehicle,
otherwise known as a vacuum truck, for the removal and disposal of liquid waste
resulting from the mobile food unit and weekly commissary visits. The mobile
food unit operator shall keep and maintain servicing records on the mobile food
unit for a period of one year from the date of servicing. The servicing records
must be immediately available to the director or a peace officer upon request
for inspection and copying at the mobile food unit during the mobile food
unit's hours of operation;
            (vi)   the commissary from which a mobile food unit operates shall
issue and maintain servicing records for each mobile food unit in a manner and
form prescribed by the director. The permit holder, person in charge, employee,
or representative of any commissary shall keep and maintain servicing records
at the commissary for a period of two years from the date of servicing or until
retrieved by the director, whichever comes first. Servicing records maintained
at the commissary must be made immediately available to the director or a peace
officer upon request for inspection and copying during normal business hours;
            (vii)   servicing operations may be performed by the commissary
operator or by the mobile food unit operator. The commissary operator must
provide resources at the commissary for proper servicing. The mobile food unit
operator shall confirm that the requirements of this section are fulfilled
prior to resuming operations.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for an owner, permit holder, person in charge,
employee, or representative of any commissary to issue a servicing record
without first verifying that the mobile unit has complied with all servicing
requirements. It shall be unlawful for any owner, permit holder, person in
charge, employee, or representative of any commissary or mobile food unit to
knowingly present or issue any false, fraudulent, or untruthful servicing
record for the purpose of demonstrating compliance with this subsection.
      (3)   The director may promulgate rules and procedures regarding
maintenance of the servicing records by the commissaries and mobile food units.
The director may require the use of electronic or other technology to
facilitate or monitor compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   Construction. The central preparation facility, commissary, or
other fixed food service establishment, used as a base of operation for a
mobile food establishment, must be constructed and operated in compliance with
this chapter.
   (h)   Operating requirements for mobile food units.
      (1)   General operating requirements for mobile food units. A food unit
that serves, sells, or distributes any food or beverage from a mobile food unit
shall comply with the following operating requirements:
         (A)   Any person operating a motor vehicle as a mobile food unit must
have a current driver's license. The permit holder must ensure that their
vehicle drivers have a valid driver's license.
         (B)   Garbage storage containers must be maintained on each mobile
food unit in a number sufficient to contain all trash and garbage generated by
the unit. Every garbage container must have a tight-fitting lid. Before a
mobile food unit leaves a vending site, all trash and garbage must be removed
from the site. Excessive trash and garbage may not be allowed to accumulate
inside or around the mobile food unit. All trash and garbage must be disposed
of in an approved garbage receptacle.
      (2)   Class III and Class IV mobile food units. In addition to other
operating requirements of Section
17-8.2(h), a food establishment that serves, sells, or distributes any food or
beverage from a Class III and Class IV mobile food unit must comply with the
following requirements.
         (A)   A Class III and Class IV mobile food unit must have written
authorization from the owner or person in control of each premises from which
the Class III and Class IV mobile food unit will sell or serve food. The
authorization must include the specific dates and times during which the Class
III and Class IV mobile food unit is authorized to be present on the premises.
A separate written agreement granting permission to use the toilet facilities
and garbage receptacles must be obtained from the owner or person in control of
the premises on which the Class III and Class IV mobile food unit will sell or
serve food or from the owner or person in control of a nearby premises. Toilet
facilities may not be located more than 600 feet from the Class III and Class
IV mobile food unit and must be accessible during all times that the Class III
and Class IV mobile food unit is present on the premises. A current copy of
each authorization must be maintained on file with the director and also in the
vehicle for inspection by the director or a peace officer upon request.
         (B)   Before a permit is issued or renewed to a Class III and Class IV
mobile food unit under this chapter, an itinerary for the Class III and Class
IV mobile food unit must be filed with the director. The director must be given
written notice at least two business days before implementation of any changes
to the filed itinerary. The itinerary must include:
            (i)   the address of each premises to be serviced and the name and
telephone number of the owner or person in control of those premises;
            (ii)   the scheduled times of arrival at and departure from each
premises to be serviced, which times must be accurate to within 30 minutes; and
            (iii)   a description of the food to be sold or served at each
premises.
         (C)   No cooking may be conducted while the unit is in motion.
         (D)   All cooking equipment and hot holding units must be located at
the rear of a mobile food preparation unit. All cooking equipment must be
properly vented. An approved automatic fire extinguishing system must be
provided over cooking surfaces that require exhaust ventilation. Covers with
secure latches for deep fryers, steam tables, and similar equipment must be
provided and installed while the unit is in motion.
         (E)   A Class III and Class IV mobile food unit must:
            (i)   be operated only in a location where such operation is
allowed by the Dallas Development Code;
            (ii)   not sell or serve food on any public street, sidewalk, or
other public right-of-way;
            (iii)   park only on an improved surface to sell or serve food;
            (iv)   not stop or remain at any location to sell or serve food
during any time other than the dates and times specified in:
               (aa)   the current itinerary on file with the director for the
Class III and Class IV mobile food unit; and
               (bb)   the current authorization agreement on file with the
director for the use of the premises to sell or serve food;
            (v)   be parked overnight (for at least five consecutive hours)
only at its commissary or at another location approved by the director that
does not violate any applicable city ordinance or state or federal law;
            (vi)   not utilize or park in any off-street parking spaces
required of the premise that authorizes the mobile food unit to sell or serve
food;
            (vii)   comply with all applicable zoning, noise, and smoke
regulations in the Dallas Development Code;
            (viii)   not have any external operational support equipment on the
property including but not limited to tables, chairs, tents, over head
coverings, refrigeration, freezers, generators, or dry storage units. All
operations must be contained within the mobile food unit; or
            (ix)   have signs displayed only on the mobile food unit and the
signs may not extend beyond the length, width, or height of the mobile food
unit.
         (F)   It is a defense to prosecution under Section
17-8.2(h)(2)(F) that a Class III and Class IV mobile food unit was being
operated in compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid special event
permit issued by the city.
   (i)    Structural requirements for a Class II, Class III, or Class IV mobile
food unit.
      (1)   A Class II, Class III, or Class IV mobile food unit must have a
potable water system under pressure that:
         (A)   is equipped with a permanently installed water supply tank of
sufficient capacity to furnish enough hot and cold water for food preparation,
utensil cleaning and sanitizing, and handwashing; the potable water supply tank
must have a minimum capacity of:
            (i)   five gallons for a Class II mobile food unit; and
            (ii)   30 gallons for a Class III and Class IV mobile food unit;
         (B)   is equipped with a water inlet that is:
            (i)   located where it will not be contaminated by waste discharge,
road dust, oil, or grease; and
            (ii)   provided with a connection of a size or type that will
prevent its use for any other service;
         (C)   is constructed and installed in accordance with the Rules on
Food Service Sanitation, as adopted and amended by the Texas Department of
State Health Services, which include National Sanitation Foundation standards,
Underwriter Laboratory standards, and equivalent standards;
         (D)   is equipped with a propane tank installed in accordance with
applicable fire department regulations pursuant to a valid liquid propane gas
(LPG) permit issued by the fire department;
         (E)   is equipped with a water heater, if the vehicle or trailer is a
Class III and Class IV mobile food unit the water heater must be capable of
heating water to at least 110 degrees Fahrenheit, and any tank of the water
heater must have a minimum capacity of three gallons; and
         (F)   provides a minimum water pressure of one gallon per minute.
      (2)   In lieu of the potable water system under pressure required in
Section
17-8.2(i)(1), a Class II mobile food unit may have a potable water system that
is gravity fed with a mixing faucet if the water tanks:
         (A)   are vented for escape or intake of air of sufficient volume to
allow for water flow, and the vent openings are protected;
         (B)   have a smooth interior with no recesses and crevices; and
         (C)   have a combined water capacity of not less than five gallons.
      (3)   If liquid waste results from the operation of a Class II, Class
III, or Class IV mobile food unit, the unit must have a liquid waste retention
system that is:
         (A)   equipped with a permanently installed retention tank of at least
50 percent larger capacity than the potable water supply tank;
         (B)   equipped with servicing connections that are:
            (i)   located lower than the water inlet to prevent contamination
of the potable water system; and
            (ii)   of a different size or type than the connection used for
supplying potable water to the unit; and
         (C)   properly sloped to drain and collect all potential liquid waste.
      (4)   In addition to other structural requirements of Section
17-8.2(i), a Class III or Class IV mobile food unit must meet the following
requirements:
         (A)   Floors must be constructed of durable, easily cleanable
material, including, but not limited to, anodized aluminum, stainless steel, or
tile. All junctures must be properly sealed. All service lines and pipes must
be installed off the floor to allow for easy cleaning.
         (B)   Walls must be durable, easily cleanable, nonabsorbent, and light
in color. Minimum wall covering materials include, but are not limited to,
aluminum or fiberglass-reinforced paneling. Walls at vent hood and grill areas
must be covered with stainless steel panels. Wall covering must be installed to
cover the entire height of each wall. Studs and utility lines may not be
unnecessarily exposed on the wall or prevent cleaning.
         (C)   Ceilings must be light in color, nonabsorbent, and easily
cleanable. The height over the aisle-way portion of the vehicle must be at
least 74 inches and unobstructed. Joists and rafters may not be exposed.
         (D)   The cab of the vehicle must be physically separated from the
food preparation area, and the seats designated for the cook and any passengers
must be located outside of the food preparation area. Aisle space must be
unobstructed and at least 30 inches wide.
         (E)   Construction joints must be tightly fitted and sealed with no
gaps or voids, and all sealant, solder, and weld joints located in the food
contact areas must be smooth and approved for food contact surfaces.
         (F)   The vehicle or trailer must be equipped with a built-in hose
that may be used to wash the interior of the vehicle.
         (G)   All equipment and utensils must meet or exceed the standards
published by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF).
         (H)   All equipment must be placed, installed, stored, and secured on
the vehicle or trailer in a manner that allows for thorough cleaning and
sanitizing around the equipment and prevents movement of the equipment when the
vehicle or trailer is in motion. Counter-mounted equipment must be sealed
directly to the countertop or securely installed to provide a four-inch
clearance under the equipment. Floor-mounted equipment must be sealed directly
to the floor or securely installed to provide a six-inch clearance under the
equipment.
         (I)   The vehicle or trailer must be equipped with a stainless steel,
three-compartment sink, with each compartment measuring at least 12 inches
long, 12 inches wide, and 10 inches deep, to be used for warewashing. The sink
must be equipped with:
            (i)   a mixing faucet with a swivel spigot capable of servicing all
sink compartments; and
            (ii)   an integral stainless steel drainboard at least 12 inches
long, which must be installed with a minimum one-half inch lip or rim to
prevent the draining liquid from spilling onto the floor.
         (J)   The vehicle or trailer must be equipped with a stainless steel
sink measuring at least nine inches long, nine inches wide, and four inches
deep to be used for handwashing. The sink must be:
            (i)   located in an area that is fully accessible and at counter
level;
            (ii)   separated from the warewashing sink by a metal splashguard
at least six inches high; and
            (iii)   equipped with a soap dispenser and paper towel dispenser.
         (K)   The vehicle or trailer must contain at least 20 inches of linear
counter space for each piece of food equipment. Additional counter space must
be provided that is sufficient to allow for safe food preparation.
         (L)   The vehicle or trailer must contain at least 15 cubic feet of
storage space for dry food and utensil storage. No food or utensil storage is
allowed in any plumbing compartment.
         (M)   The vehicle or trailer must be equipped with mechanical
refrigeration equipment if time/temperature control for safety food is stored,
prepared, or served on the vehicle. The mechanical refrigeration equipment must
have at least 15 cubic feet of usable storage space and be capable of ensuring
proper food temperature control during transportation and operation.
         (N)   Outer openings of the vehicle or trailer, including but not
limited to service windows, doors, pop-up vents, and sunroofs, must be insect
and rodent proof and meet the following requirements:
            (i)   Screens must be tightly fitted and in good repair, with a
maximum of 16 mesh per square inch.
            (ii)   Service windows must not be larger than 216 square inches.
The distance between two service windows must not be less than 18 inches. Each
service window must have an overhead protection cover extending at least 12
inches from the vehicle.
            (iii)   Entrance doors and service windows to the food preparation
area must be self-closing and must be kept closed when not in use.
         (O)   The vehicle or trailer must be equipped with a power source,
approved by the director, that is capable of handling the power demands of the
vehicle or trailer and equipment while the vehicle or trailer is stopped or in
motion. The power source must be permanently installed in an area that is
completely separated from food preparation and food storage areas and must be
accessible for proper cleaning and maintenance.
         (P)   Light bulbs and tubes must be covered and completely enclosed in
plastic safety shields or the equivalent.
      (5)   A food establishment may not serve, sell, or distribute any food or
beverage from a Class II, Class III, or Class IV mobile food unit that does not
comply with the requirements of Section
17-8.2(i).
   (j)   Servicing requirements for a Class II, Class III, or Class IV mobile
food unit.
      (1)   A food establishment that serves, sells, or distributes any food or
beverage from a Class II, Class III, or Class IV mobile food unit shall comply
with the following regulations:
         (A)   Servicing area. The food establishment shall provide a servicing
area where every Class II, Class III, or Class IV mobile food unit must report
at least once daily for servicing operations. The servicing area must include:
            (i)   overhead protection for any supplying, cleaning, or servicing
operation;
            (ii)   a location for the flushing and draining of liquid waste
separate from the location provided for water service and the loading and
unloading of food and related supplies; and
            (iii)   a surface constructed of a smooth nonabsorbent material,
including, but not limited to, concrete or machine-laid asphalt, that is
maintained in good repair, kept clean, and graded to drain.
         (B)   Servicing methods and equipment.
            (i)   Potable water servicing equipment must be installed according
to all applicable city ordinances and state and federal law and stored and
handled in a way that protects the water and equipment from contamination.
            (ii)   The liquid waste retention tank for a Class II, Class III,
or Class IV mobile food unit must be thoroughly flushed and drained during the
servicing operation.
            (iii)   All liquid waste must be discharged to a sanitary sewerage
disposal system constructed and operated according to all applicable city
ordinances and state and federal law.
            (iv)   Liquid waste may not be discharged from a Class II, Class
III, or Class IV mobile food unit while it is in motion.
         (C)   Site cleanup. A service site must be left in a clean, waste-free
condition.
         (D)   Food preparation and service. Food may not be prepared or served
while the vehicle is in motion or in an area that exposes any person present to
a health or safety hazard.
      (2)   A food establishment may not serve, sell, or distribute any food or
beverage from a Class II, Class III, or Class IV mobile food unit if the food
establishment does not supply, clean, or service the Class II, Class III, or
Class IV mobile food unit in accordance with Section
17-8.2(j).
   (k)   Annual food permit eligibility. A mobile food unit is eligible for an
annual food permit if the mobile food unit complies with all the construction
standards for its classification. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 28220; 28488; 30134; 30653;
32181)
ARTICLE IX.
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND CATERING SERVICES.
SEC. 17-9.1.   ELECTION NOT TO ADOPT SECTION 228.222, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT
RULES.
   Section 228.222 of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is not adopted. (Ord.
Nos. 26023; 30134, eff. 7-1-16)
SEC. 17-9.2.   REQUIREMENTS FOR TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (a)   Authority. The director shall issue a permit, in accordance with
applicable food establishment permit and fee requirements set forth in Article
X, to a temporary food service establishment if the:
      (1)   director finds that the operation will not result in a health or
safety hazard or a nuisance;
      (2)   operation is limited to a single, fixed location, which may include
one or more facilities at the location;
      (3)   establishment submits proof to the director that it has obtained
all city, state, and federal permits and authorizations necessary to conduct a
temporary food service operation, including, but not limited to the following:
         (A)   A vendor must submit a copy of:
            (i)   its current local health permit and a copy of its last health
inspection from the local health department where the vendor is located or, if
the vendor does not have its own licensed kitchen, then the vendor shall
provide a permission letter from the owner of the kitchen where the food items
will be prepared; and
            (ii)   an invitation or similar document from the event organizer
granting the vendor permission to participate in the event; and
         (B)   a food manufacturer must submit a copy of its state
manufacturer's license;
      (4)   establishment and its location comply with all requirements of this
chapter, the Dallas Development Code, and any other applicable city ordinance
or state or federal law; and
      (5)   completed application for the permit to operate a temporary food
service establishment is received by the director at least five business days
before the scheduled commencement of the activity or event for which the permit
is issued.
   (a-1)   Food booths. A permit issued under this section is valid for up to
five food booths. This permit is in addition to any other requirement in this
chapter, including Section 17-10.2, "Temporary Food Service Fee," of this
chapter, as amended.
   (b)   Exception. A permit is not required for a temporary food service
establishment that does not serve time/temperature control for safety food and
the weekly gross income of which does not exceed $100.
   (c)   Limit on permits issued for same premises or address. No more than one
temporary food service establishment permit may be issued within any calendar
quarter for the same premises or street address, even if the permits are issued
to different temporary food service establishments. This subsection does not
apply if the permit is issued in conjunction with an activity or event
described in Section
17-1.5 (b)(16)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), or (vii) of this chapter.
   (d)   Expiration. A temporary food service establishment permit expires:
      (1)   upon expiration of a special event permit, plaza event permit,
neighborhood farmers market permit, or other written authorization of the city
issued in conjunction with the temporary food service establishment permit for
an activity or event described in Section 17-1.5(b)(16)(A)(i), (ii), (iii),
(iv), or (vii) of this chapter;
      (2)   upon expiration of a concession agreement executed by the city in
conjunction with the temporary food service establishment permit for an
activity or event on property owned or operated by the city; or
      (3)   14 days after the issuance of a temporary food service
establishment permit for an activity or event described in Section
17-1.5(b)(16)(A)(v) or (vi) of this chapter or upon termination of the activity
or event, whichever occurs first.
   (e)   Food and ice preparation and service. A temporary food establishment
required to be permitted under this chapter shall not:
      (1)   prepare, serve, sell, or distribute more than six time/temperature
control for safety menu items within a permitted booth, unless otherwise
approved by the director;
      (2)   prepare, serve, sell, or distribute any food not approved in
advance by the director;
      (3)   prepare time/temperature control for safety food, except that an
establishment may prepare time/temperature control for safety food that is
approved in advance by the director and does not require substantial
preparation prior to consumption (including, but not limited to, pre-formed
hamburgers, beef fajitas, sausages, hotdogs, and frankfurters) or may provide
time/temperature control for safety food that is:
         (A)   obtained by the establishment in precooked, individual servings;
         (B)   stored at a temperature of:
            (i)   41° F. (5° C.) or below using mechanical refrigeration (ice
chests are not allowed for maintaining cold temperatures); or
            (ii)   135° F. (57° C.) or above using mechanical holding units in
each booth to ensure the proper temperature is maintained (canned heat or
Sterno is not allowed for maintaining hot temperatures outdoors); and
         (C)   served to a consumer in the container in which it was originally
packaged;
      (4)   prepare, serve, sell, or distribute raw seafood or poultry, except
when the product is:
         (A)   pre-cut, breaded, and frozen and ready to be directly placed
from the freezer into a fryer; or
         (B)   precooked;
      (5)   allow open and unprotected displays of food (when using chafing
dishes, only hinged lid dishes are allowed so that at least half of the food
remains covered at all times);
      (6)   permit consumption of ice or contact of ice with food unless the
ice is:
         (A)   obtained from a source that is approved as safe by the director;
         (B)   in chipped, crushed, or cubed form;
         (C)   obtained in single-use plastic or wet-strength paper bags that
are sealed by the manufacturer and unopened until used by the establishment;
and
         (D)   dispensed from a container that is continuously drained into a
waste receptacle approved by the director;
      (7)   store food in contact with water or undrained ice, except that wet
storage of a beverage in a pressurized container is permitted if the water
used:
         (A)   contains not less than 50 mg/l of available chlorine; and
         (B)   is maintained in a clean condition; or
      (8)   use water from a source that is not approved as safe by the
director.
   (f)   Operational requirements. An establishment operating under authority
of this article shall comply with all of the following requirements:
      (1)   Limit the booth size to a maximum 15 x 15 square foot space, unless
the event planner provides fixed structures as temporary booths, or as
otherwise approved by the director.
      (2)   Protect each food and food-contact surface from contamination,
including, but not limited to, complying with the following requirements:
         (A)   All condiments, including, but not limited to, onions, relish,
peppers, catsup, and mustard, that are available for customer self-service must
be available in individual packets or from an approved dispenser.
         (B)   All foods, food containers, utensils, napkins, straws, and other
single service articles must be stored at least six inches off the floor and
adequately protected from splash, dust, insects, weather, and other
contamination.
         (C)   When self-service ice dispensers are not used, ice scoops are
required.
         (D)   Effective hair restraints (such as nets and caps) are required
in food preparation and service areas. Food, beverage, and tobacco consumption
is prohibited inside food booths, food preparation areas, and food service
areas. Gum chewing is prohibited in food preparation and food service areas.
         (E)   Food handling personnel must wash their hands as frequently as
necessary to maintain clean hands, even if disposable gloves are used. Nails
must be closely trimmed and maintained. Long fingernails (natural, sculptured,
etc.) or chipped nail polish is prohibited.
         (F)   Animals may not be located within 50 feet of a temporary food
establishment or food service area.
      (3)   Install equipment in a way that permits cleaning and sanitizing and
that is not likely to cause adulteration of food, including, but not limited
to, complying with the following requirements:
         (A)   A container of soapy water solution must be provided for washing
dirty utensils. This is for emergency use only.
         (B)   A sanitizer solution must be provided to sanitize clean utensils
and equipment. The required residual of 50-100 ppm chlorine may be obtained by
placing one tablespoon of bleach in one gallon of water for the sanitizer.
Other approved sanitizers may be used. Test papers must be provided to ensure
that proper sanitizer concentration is achieved. All utensils must be taken to
a commissary location daily to be properly washed, rinsed, and sanitized.
         (C)   Wastewater (including but not limited to wastewater from
handwashing, utensil washing, sinks, and steam tables) must be placed in an
approved container until properly disposed. All wastewater must then be
disposed of into a sanitary sewer system or in a manner that is consistent with
federal, state, and local regulations and requirements relating to liquid waste
disposal.
      (4)   Provide hot and cold running water, under pressure, in a quantity
sufficient to maintain personal hygiene of employees and the cleanliness and
sanitation of the establishment, except that cold running water that is not
under pressure may be used when the establishment will be in operation for
fewer than four consecutive calendar days.
      (5)   Provide a convenient handwashing facility with soap and individual
paper towels for persons preparing and serving food, including, but not limited
to, complying with the following requirements:
         (A)   The handwashing facility must have at least a 5-gallon container
with a spigot that provides free flowing water.
         (B)   The handwashing facility must have a catch bucket to collect
wastewater from hand washing.
      (6)   Comply with federal, state, and local regulations and requirements
relating to liquid waste disposal.
      (7)   Use only equipment and utensils that meet the standards set forth
in Article IV of this chapter, if the establishment will be in operation for
four or more consecutive calendar days.
      (8)   Use only equipment approved by the director if time/temperature
control for safety foods will be served by the establishment.
      (9)   Maintain a full-time, on-site food service manager who is currently
registered under Article II of this chapter if the establishment will be in
operation for four or more consecutive calendar days, except that multiple
establishments under the same ownership and management that are operating at
the same activity or event may use the same full-time, on-site food service
manager.
      (10)   A state approved food handler training class shall be required for
all food handlers that take part in a temporary event that exceeds 14
consecutive calendar days in length. Proof of course completion must be
provided to the director upon request.
      (11)   A temporary event that exceeds four hours, is granted a variance
under this chapter, or where special food handling and preparation processes
are requested, will be required to have one or more food inspector(s) on site,
for a maximum of eight hours each day, at the expense of the event planner.
There is no fee for the first four hours and a non-refundable fee of $57 per
hour will be assessed to the event planner for every hour over four hours that
the event is operational including set-up time.
   (g)   Design and structural requirements. The design and structural material
of a facility that houses a temporary food service establishment must be
approved by the director. Each facility must:
      (1)   be enclosed by barriers at least 32 inches high that prevent
customers from entering food preparation areas;
      (2)   have a serving counter with a depth of at least 12 inches;
      (3)   have floors constructed of concrete, asphalt, tight-fitting wood,
or other similar, easily cleanable material kept in good repair;
      (4)   if the temporary food service establishment is outdoors, have over
every food preparation and serving area a fire resistant overhead covering that
protects the interior of the facility from the weather; and
      (5)   comply with all design and structural standards that may be
established by the director for temporary food service establishments. (Ord.
Nos. 26023; 26556; 28046; 30134; 30653)
SEC. 17-9.3.   REQUIREMENTS FOR CATERING SERVICES.
   (a)   Affiliation with permitted food establishment required. A person shall
not engage in a catering service unless the service is affiliated with a food
establishment operating from a fixed facility that is permitted under
Article X of this chapter.
   (b)   Food preparation. A catering service may prepare food at the service
site. If food requires substantial preparation in addition to cooking at the
service site, a catering service shall not serve the food requiring additional
preparation unless approved as safe by the director.
   (c)   Operational requirements. A catering service shall:
      (1)   notify the director in writing four days in advance of serving to a
group of 500 or more people, stating the location, time, and menu of the
service;
      (2)   take necessary steps to provide facilities and supplies for
maintenance of personal hygiene (including, but not limited to, potable water,
soap, and towels) for employees at the service site;
      (3)   provide refuse containers at the service site that permit disposal
of refuse in a way that does not result in a health or safety hazard;
      (4)   leave a service site in a clean, waste-free condition; and
      (5)   not prepare or serve food in an area that exposes any person
present to a health or safety hazard.
   (d)   Duration of service at same site. A catering service shall not serve
at the same service site on more than two successive days unless the catering
service complies with additional requirements as the director determines are
necessary to protect the public health and safety at the service site.
   (e)   Vehicles. A food establishment that uses a vehicle in the operation of
a catering service shall:
      (1)   identify the vehicle with characters three inches high on both
exterior sides of the vehicle stating the following:
         (A)   the name of the food establishment;
         (B)   a brief description of the nature of the business if not
included in the name; and
         (C)   the permit number of the vehicle;
      (2)   secure an inspection of the vehicle by the director on the date
designated by the director;
      (3)   maintain the vehicle in a clean condition;
      (4)   keep the permit or a copy of the permit on the vehicle at all
times; and
      (5)   not equip the vehicle with any sound amplification device that,
when operated, violates Section
30-2(k) of this code. (Ord. 26023)
ARTICLE X.
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT.
SEC. 17-10.1.   ADOPTION OF SUBCHAPTER I, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Subchapter I of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference, except that Figure 1: 25 TAC §
228.251(f) is not adopted. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134)
SEC. 17-10.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements adopted in Section
17-10.1 of this chapter, the requirements contained in this section govern
compliance and enforcement of this chapter.
   (b)   Documenting information and observations on inspection of food
establishments. The director shall document administrative information about a
food establishment’s legal identity and all other findings and observations on
the inspection report form. A copy of the inspection report must be furnished
to the owner or person in charge, which constitutes written notice of any
violation of this chapter. The inspection report must summarize the
inspectional findings and must set forth a demerit point value for each
classification of inspection items. A food establishment shall provide a copy
of the most recent inspection report to any customer or potential customer upon
request.
   (c)   Permits.
      (1)   Requisite. A person shall not operate a food establishment inside
the city without a permit issued by the director. A separate permit is required
for:
         (A)   each establishment that is under a separate ownership;
         (B)   each separate and distinct fixed facility from which an
establishment operates;
         (C)   each vehicle used to operate a catering service; and
         (D)   each mobile food unit.
      (2)   Facilities that are not separate and distinct. For purposes of this
article, the following facilities are not considered separate and distinct if
they are in the same building and under the same ownership and same management:
         (A)   A restaurant and a bar that is:
            (i)   either located within the restaurant or adjacent to the
restaurant; and
            (ii)   preparing beverages for service in the restaurant.
         (B)   A holding kitchen for a banquet room and a main kitchen
preparing food for service in the banquet room.
         (C)   A main kitchen and any food service area for which the main
kitchen prepares food.
      (3)   Common areas. If several separate and distinct facilities in the
same building or at the same fixed location share common food storage, utensil
storage, dishwashing, cleaning, laundry, or other areas, each facility’s permit
must specify which common areas are to be inspected with the facility. Each
common area specified under a permit must be included in the calculation of the
floor area of the permitted facility for purposes of assessing the annual
inspection fee.
      (4)   Lapse. A permit lapses if the food establishment operating under
the permit:
         (A)   ceases its operation for 12 or more months;
         (B)   fails to pay the annual inspection fee on or before the due
date;
         (C)   extensively remodels the facility from which it operates;
         (D)   constructs a new facility or mobile food preparation vehicle; or
         (E)   changes ownership.
      (5)   Transferability. A permit is not transferable. A person who
acquires an existing food establishment may not operate the establishment
without obtaining a new permit within 30 days of the change of ownership.
      (6)   Operating authority. A permit issued under this article gives only
the person to whom the permit is issued the authority to operate the
establishment identified on the permit. As a lawful condition to the operation
of the establishment, the director may impose in the permit such additional
requirements relating to the operation of the food establishment as the
director determines is necessary to protect the public health and safety.
      (7)   Application. A person who desires a permit for a food establishment
shall apply for the permit on a form provided by the department, requiring such
information as the director determines is necessary to implement or enforce
this chapter. A food establishment shall apply for a new permit if:
         (A)   the facility from which it operates is to be extensively
remodeled;
         (B)   a new facility or mobile food preparation vehicle is to be
constructed; or
         (C)   there is a change of ownership.
      (8)   (Reserved.)
      (9)   Issuance. If the director finds that a food establishment applying
for a permit complies with applicable requirements of this chapter and other
law and is current on the payment of all fees owed to the city under this
chapter, the director shall issue the permit. The director may not issue a
permit for any mobile food unit that is equipped with any sound amplification
device that, when operated, violates Section
30-2(k) of this code.
      (10)   Acceptance. Acceptance of a permit issued by the director
constitutes an agreement by the food establishment to:
         (A)   comply with all conditions of the permit and all applicable
provisions of this chapter; and
         (B)   allow the lawful inspection of its facility, vehicles, and
operations.
      (11)   Display. A food establishment that operates from a fixed facility
shall display its permit in a frame with a glass cover at a prominent place
inside the facility where it can be easily seen by the public.
   (d)   Permit application fee.
      (1)   An applicant for a permit for a food establishment shall pay the
city an application fee for each separate and distinct fixed facility and for
each mobile food unit inside the city from which the establishment is to be
operated.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee according to the
following schedule:
 
                      Fixed Facility Class I and Class II Class III and Class
                                     Mobile Food Unit     IV Mobile Food Unit
Application Fee       $198           $121                 $482
Reinstatement fee
after lapse of permit
for failure to pay
annual inspection fee $221
by due date: existing
facility or vehicle
under same ownership
 
      (3)   Section
17-10.2(d) does not apply to:
         (A)   a temporary food service establishment permitted under this
chapter; or
         (B)   a wholesale produce dealer permitted under Chapter 29 of this
code.
      (4)   The permit application and reinstatement fees required to be paid
under this section are in addition to the annual inspection fees required to be
paid under Section
17-10.2(g) or (h), whichever applies.
   (e)   Plans and specifications.
      (1)   A person shall not begin constructing a fixed facility or
constructing a mobile food preparation vehicle (whether by manufacturing,
retrofitting, or converting), or extensively remodeling a fixed facility,
intended for use in the operation of a food establishment (other than a
temporary food service establishment) before a copy of plans and specifications
of the construction or remodeling are approved, in writing, by the director.
         (A)   In general. Except as provided in this paragraph, a request for
approval of plans and specifications must be accompanied by a nonrefundable
plans review fee of $564 for a mobile food unit.
         (B)   Class II mobile food unit limited to a coffee cart. An
application for approval of plans and specifications for a Class II mobile food
unit limited to a coffee cart must be accompanied by a nonrefundable plan
review fee of $407.
      (2)   The director’s written approval of plans and specifications is
valid until whichever of the following dates or events occurs first:
         (A)   18 months after the date of approval, for new construction of a
fixed facility or construction of a mobile food preparation vehicle;
         (B)   six months after the date of approval, for extensive remodeling
of an existing facility; or
         (C)   completion of construction and issuance of a food establishment
permit.
      (3)   Before construction or remodeling may be continued or recommenced
after an approval of plans and specifications lapses:
         (A)   a new permit application must be made, and an application fee
paid, in accordance with Section
17-10.2(d); and
         (B)   the plans and specifications must be resubmitted to and approved
by the director and a new plans review fee must be paid.
      (4)   Approval of the plans and specifications by the director does not
prevent the director from enforcing an ordinance or other law applicable to the
construction or remodeling.
      (5)   Plans and specifications submitted under this section for a fixed
facility must conform to the requirements for plans and specifications in the
Dallas Building Code.
      (6)   If plans and specifications are approved by all affected
departments of the city and construction has been in accordance with the plans
and specifications, before an inspecting officer from any department may
require a change, written notice must be served to the food establishment in
accordance with Section
17-10.2(n). The notice must state:
         (A)   the required change in the plans and specifications;
         (B)   the reason for the change; and
         (C)   the establishment’s right to appeal the order of change.
      (7)   A food establishment may appeal a change ordered under this section
following the procedures of Section
17-10.2(q).
   (f)   Inspections.
      (1)   Consent to inspection. Application for and operation of a food
establishment inside the city constitutes consent for the director to inspect
the food establishment to determine whether the establishment complies with all
conditions of the permit and applicable requirements of this chapter and other
city ordinances and state and federal law.
      (2)   Inspection procedure. An inspection will be conducted in the
following manner:
         (A)   The director may inspect during business hours or at any other
reasonable time.
         (B)   An inspecting officer shall present official identification to
the manager or person in charge before conducting the inspection.
         (C)   An inspecting officer shall wear appropriate clothing and hair
restraint when entering food preparation or equipment and utensil washing areas
of a food establishment.
         (D)   Upon authorization of the director, photographs of any part of a
food establishment, or of any food handling activities conducted inside or
outside of a food establishment, may be taken during an inspection.
      (3)   Pre-operation inspection. Before issuing a permit under this
article, the director shall inspect a food establishment to determine whether
the establishment complies with applicable requirements of this chapter and
other city ordinances and state and federal law. If the food establishment does
not comply, the director shall notify the permit applicant of the
nonconformance in the manner prescribed by this article.
      (4)   Periodic inspections. The director shall periodically inspect each
separate and distinct facility and vehicle from which a food establishment
operates to determine whether the establishment complies with this chapter and
other applicable city ordinances and state and federal law. The director shall
conduct the periodic inspection as often as the director considers necessary to
enforce this chapter or other applicable law, but at least once each six-month
period for risk level three establishments, once a year for risk level two
establishments, and every other year for risk level one establishments.
Whenever a food establishment is inspected by the director and a violation of
this chapter or other applicable law is found, the director shall, after the
expiration of any time limit for compliance given in a notice or order issued
because of the violation, reinspect the food establishment to determine that
the violation has been eliminated. A $192 fee will be charged for each
reinspection that must be conducted before the violation is determined to be
eliminated.
      (5)   Inspection form. The director shall prepare and use an inspection
form for rating the code compliance of a food establishment.
      (6)   On-site food establishment risk profile assessment inspection. An
on-site food establishment risk profile assessment inspection may be conducted
when the establishment is newly opened, changes ownership, or experiences a
substantial change in menu offerings or food handling processes. Inspection
frequency is based on types of food preparation processes used by the food
establishment, the food served and sold, the average number of meals served,
and the population served. A non-refundable service fee of $106.00 will be
charged for each on-site food establishment risk profile assessment inspection.
      (7)   Entry of persons other than the director. Nothing in this chapter
authorizes the entry of persons other than the director and the director's
authorized representatives into food preparation or equipment and utensil
washing areas of a food establishment.
   (g)   Annual inspection fees: catering services and mobile food units.
      (1)   Catering service. A catering service shall pay the city a
nonrefundable annual inspection fee of $312 for each vehicle used to operate
the service inside the city.
      (2)   Mobile food unit. A food establishment that operates a mobile food
unit inside the city shall pay the city a nonrefundable annual inspection fee
in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Type of Operation                                                  Each Vehicle
Class I mobile food unit (produce trucks, ice cream carts, grocery $409
trucks)
Class II mobile food unit                                          $383
Class III and IV mobile food unit                                  $331
 
   (h)   Annual inspection fee: fixed facilities.
      (1)   Requisite. A food establishment shall pay the city a nonrefundable
annual inspection fee for each separate and distinct, fixed facility inside the
city from which the establishment is operated. If a building contains multiple
facilities, a separate fee will be calculated for each facility required to be
permitted under Section
17-10.2(c).
      (2)   Amount. The amount of the fee for each facility is determined by
the floor area of the facility. In determining the floor area, the director
shall include each interior part of the facility used to manufacture or
process, store, package, prepare, distribute, sell, or serve food. The fees are
as prescribed in the following schedule:
         (A)   For facilities not included in Section
17-10.2(h)(2)(B):
Risk Level One Establishment:
 
Area in square feet Annual fee
1 to 2,000          $284
2,001 or more       $311
 
Risk Level Two Establishment:
 
Area in square feet Annual fee
1 to 2,000          $284
2,001 or more       $309
 
Risk Level Three Establishment:
 
Area in square feet Annual fee
1 to 2,000          $469
2,001 or more       $514
 
         (B)   If a food establishment is being operated from more than one
separate and distinct facility in the same building, for each facility in
excess of one:
Risk Level One Establishment:
 
Area in square feet Annual fee
1 to 2,000          $141
2,001 or more       $155
 
Risk Level Two Establishment:
 
Area in square feet Annual fee
1 to 2,000          $283
2,001 or more       $308
 
Risk Level Three Establishment:
 
Area in square feet Annual fee
1 to 2,000          $468
2,001 or more       $513
 
      (3)   No later than December 31 of each year, a food establishment shall
pay the annual inspection fee for the following calendar year. Failure to pay
all fees by December 31 of the year can result in the establishment being
subject to the preclosure process. Food establishments subject to the
preclosure process shall pay the city a nonrefundable fee of $158 and may
receive citations for operating without a valid permit.
      (4)   The annual inspection fee for a new food establishment will be
prorated from the calendar month in which operations begin to the end of the
calendar year.
      (5)   Exceptions. Section
17-10.2(h) does not apply to:
         (A)   a temporary food service establishment permitted under this
chapter; or
         (B)   a wholesale produce dealer permitted under
Chapter 29 of this code.
   (i)   Temporary food service fee.
      (1)   Before the director issues a permit to a temporary food service
establishment, the applicant for the permit shall pay the city a nonrefundable
permit fee of $218, plus $29 for each day of operation for each facility from
which the establishment is operated.
      (2)   A temporary food service establishment that offers only prepackaged
foods from the manufacturer that are non-time and temperature controlled and
with minimum handling and preparation may request a limited service food
permit. The applicant for the food permit shall pay the city a nonrefundable
permit fee of $205, plus $28 for each day of operation for each facility from
which the establishment is operated.
      (3)   A maximum nonrefundable annual fee of $357 for each facility will
be collected from concessionaires operating under contract with the city park
and recreation department. A maximum nonrefundable annual fee of $389 for each
facility will be collected from concessionaires operating at a school stadium.
A maximum nonrefundable annual fee of $101 for each booth or stall valid at a
single market location or at more than one market location will be collected
from a vendor operating at a neighborhood market permitted under
Chapter 42A of this code, as amended.
      (4)   Section
17-10.2(i)(1) does not apply to a temporary food service establishment that:
         (A)   does not serve time/temperature control for safety food; and
         (B)   the weekly gross income of which does not exceed $100.
   (j)   Registration of food establishments outside the city.
      (1)   A food establishment operating from a facility located outside the
city that sells, distributes, or transports food inside the city may not
conduct operations inside the city unless the establishment annually:
         (A)   registers with the director on a form provided for the purpose;
and
         (B)   furnishes the department with:
            (i)   a certificate from a health authority with jurisdiction over
the establishment indicating that the establishment complies with applicable
public health laws; and
            (ii)   other information that the director determines is necessary
to enable the director to implement or enforce this chapter or otherwise
protect the public health or safety.
      (2)   The director may inspect the operations of a food establishment
specified in Section
17-10.2(j)(1) that are conducted inside the city to determine if the operations
comply with applicable requirements of this chapter or other law.
      (3)   This subsection does not affect the liability of a food
establishment specified in Section
17-10.2(j)(1) for payment of any other fee imposed under this article.
   (k)   Payment of fee. Except as expressly provided by this article, a fee
prescribed by this article is payable on the date and in the manner prescribed
by the director. If in a particular year a food establishment fails to pay the
annual inspection fee required on or before the due date, the permit of that
establishment lapses and the establishment must pay the reinstatement fee
required by Section
17-10.2(d)(2), and all other outstanding fees owed to the city under this
chapter, before the permit will be renewed. Fee payments will be applied to
oldest outstanding balance first, if any.
   (l)   Service fees.
      (1)   If a food establishment changes its name, continuing under the same
ownership, the establishment shall inform the director in writing of the change
and pay the city a service fee of $220, not more than seven days after the
change.
      (2)   To obtain from the director a detailed, written survey or risk
level assessment of an existing food establishment, a prospective operator
must:
         (A)   present to the director written permission for the survey or
risk level assessment from the owner of the food establishment; and
         (B)   pay to the city a nonrefundable service fee of $106.
   (m)   Violations; notification and order to correct.
      (1)   Authority to order correction. If the director determines that a
food establishment is in violation of this chapter or other law, the director
may notify the establishment in writing of the violation and by written order
direct the establishment to correct the violation within a definite period of
time. In setting the time for correction the director shall consider the degree
of danger to the public health or safety and the period of time reasonably
necessary to make the correction.
      (2)   Immediate corrections. Upon determining that a violation
constitutes an imminent and serious threat to the public health or safety, the
director may order the establishment to correct the violation immediately or
cease food operations to the extent the director determines is necessary to
abate the threat until the violation is corrected.
      (3)   Contents of notice. The director shall include in a notice of
violation under this subsection:
         (A)   identification of the violation by code section number and the
name of the issuing officer;
         (B)   the date of issuance of the notice and the time period within
which the violation must be corrected;
         (C)   a warning that failure to comply with the order may result in
one or more of the following:
            (i)   temporary closure of the establishment;
            (ii)   suspension or revocation of the establishment’s permit; or
            (iii)   imposition of a fine; and
         (D)   a statement indicating that the order may be appealed.
      (4)   Closure.
         (A)   If, pursuant to Section
17-10.2(m)(2), the director determines that a food establishment must cease
operations in order to correct a violation that constitutes an imminent and
serious threat to the public health and safety, the director shall:
            (i)   if the establishment voluntarily closes for the required time
period, post a placard that states that the establishment is closed in
cooperation with the city to improve food sanitation in the establishment; or
            (ii)   if the establishment closes only after a written order is
issued by the director, post a placard that states that the establishment is
closed by order of the city to correct food sanitation deficiencies.
         (B)   A person commits an offense if he continues operation of a food
establishment after being ordered by the director to close the establishment.
An offense under this subparagraph is punishable by a fine of not less than
$200 or more than $2,000.
      (5)   Placard requirements.
         (A)   A placard posted in accordance with Section
17-10.2(m)(4) shall:
            (i)   be no larger than nine inches by 12 inches in size;
            (ii)   contain any language and symbols determined appropriate by
the director;
            (iii)   be placed at the main entrance of the establishment where
it is clearly visible to the public;
            (iv)   remain posted until the director determines that the food
sanitation deficiencies are corrected and that the establishment may re-open;
and
            (v)   be removed only by the director.
         (B)   A person commits an offense if, without the consent of the
director, he defaces, removes, or conceals (in whole or in part) a placard
posted in accordance with Section
17-10.2(m)(4). An offense under this subparagraph is punishable by a fine of
not less than $200 nor more than $2,000.
   (n)   Service of notice.
      (1)   The director or an authorized representative shall personally serve
notice required under this article to:
         (A)   the permittee;
         (B)   the registered agent for service of the permittee; or
         (C)   a person in charge of the food establishment.
      (2)   If the permittee, registered agent, or a person in charge cannot be
found after a diligent effort to locate, or if the establishment is located
outside the city, the director may serve notice by certified United States
mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the permittee on file with
the department or to the address of the registered agent.
      (3)   Service of notice executed in accordance with Section
17-10.2(n) constitutes notice to a food establishment.
   (o)   Examination and condemnation of food.
      (1)   Authority to examine. The director may examine food that is to be
served, sold, offered for sale, transported, distributed, or stored inside the
city by a food establishment as often as reasonably necessary to determine if
the food is adulterated or misbranded. The director may take a reasonable
sample of food subject to examination under Section
17-10.2(o).
      (2)   Hold order. If the director has reasonable cause to suspect that
food is adulterated or misbranded, the director by written order may instruct
the food establishment that possesses the food to withhold the food from use or
sale. A hold order takes effect immediately upon issuance. If a hold order is
imposed, the department shall serve notice of that fact in the manner
prescribed by Section
17-10.2(n). The director shall identify the food subject to a hold order in a
reasonable way (including, but not limited to, a note or tag attached to the
food). An establishment that possesses food subject to a hold order shall store
the food as directed by the director and shall not alter the food in any way
without written permission from the director. The director shall take such
samples as may be necessary to examine food subject to a hold order as soon as
reasonably possible to determine if the food is adulterated or misbranded. If
the food is not adulterated or misbranded, the director shall cancel the hold
order.
      (3)   Condemnation order. If the director determines that the food is
adulterated, the director shall order the food condemned and dispose of the
food in a way that does not result in a health hazard. If the director
determines that the food is misbranded, the director shall order the food
condemned and may dispose of the food in a way that does not result in a health
hazard, or order the food establishment in control of the food to put the food
in compliance with applicable law.
   (p)   Suspension and revocation of permits.
      (1)   The director may suspend a permit, for a definite period of time
not to exceed one year, if the director determines that a food establishment
has:
         (A)   made a false statement of a material fact in an application for
a food establishment permit;
         (B)   violated a provision of this chapter;
         (C)   failed to timely comply with a correction order, a hold order,
or a condemnation order;
         (D)   intentionally or knowingly impeded a lawful inspection by the
director or the director’s authorized representative; or
         (E)   failed to pay a fee required under this chapter at the time it
was due.
      (2)   The director may revoke a permit if the director determines that a
food establishment has:
         (A)   been convicted twice within a 12-month period for violations of
this chapter;
         (B)   failed to comply, within the time specified, with an order to
correct or abate an imminent and serious threat to the public health or safety;
         (C)   been closed two or more times within a 12-month period for
conditions that constituted a serious and imminent threat to public health;
         (D)   had a food establishment permit suspended under Section
17-10.2(p)(1) three times within a 24-month period; or
         (E)   operated a food establishment during a period when the food
establishment’s permit was suspended.
      (3)   Upon receipt of written notice of suspension or revocation issued
by the director, the food establishment shall immediately cease operation of
the facility or vehicle for which the permit is suspended or revoked. The
director shall serve notice of suspension or revocation in the manner
prescribed by Section
17-10.2(n). The notice of suspension or revocation must include:
         (A)   the name of the permittee;
         (B)   the location or identification of the food establishment
facility or vehicle for which the permit is suspended or revoked;
         (C)   the reason for the suspension or revocation; and
         (D)   a statement informing the establishment of its right to appeal
the suspension or revocation.
   (q)   Appeal.
      (1)   A decision of the director that is appealable under this chapter is
final unless the applicant, permittee, registrant, certificate holder, or food
establishment to which the decision applies files an appeal with a permit and
license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code.
      (2)   The filing of an appeal in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code stays an action of the director until a final decision is
made by the permit and license appeal board, unless the director determines
that continued operation of a food establishment, or continued employment of a
food service manager or a food handler, constitutes an imminent and serious
threat to public health and safety and gives proper notice of that
determination to the food establishment, the food service manager, or the food
handler.
   (r)   Criminal offenses; presumption.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if he:
         (A)   impedes the lawful inspection of a food establishment; or
         (B)   violates any other provision of this chapter.
      (2)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
      (3)   A person violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which a violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter,
an offense committed under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less
than $50 or more than $2,000; however, a second or subsequent conviction for
the same offense within a period of less than one year from the first
conviction is punishable by a fine of not less than $200 or more than $2,000.
      (4)   If an enforcing officer designated by the director has probable
cause to believe that a person has committed an offense under this chapter, the
enforcing officer may cause the arrest of the person or issue the person a
written citation to appear in municipal court to answer the charge against the
person. If, upon request by the enforcing officer, the person believed by the
officer to have committed the offense or an owner, officer, manager, or other
person in charge of the food establishment believed by the officer to have
violated this chapter, refuses to promise to appear in court by signing the
citation, the enforcing officer shall cause the arrest of the person. The
citation must include:
         (A)   the section of the code violated;
         (B)   the name and location of the establishment;
         (C)   identification of and the date of the offense alleged;
         (D)   the date of the citation; and
         (E)   the signature of the officer issuing the citation.
      (5)   Prosecution for an offense does not prevent the use of other
enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the conduct involved in the
offense.
      (6)   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs that involves a mobile
food unit, it is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle for which
the citation was issued is the person who committed the violation, either
personally or through an agent or employee. Proof of ownership may be made by a
computer-generated record of the registration of the vehicle with the Texas
Department of Transportation showing the name of the person to whom state
license plates were issued. This proof is prima facie evidence of the ownership
of the vehicle by the person to whom the certificate of registration was
issued.
   (s)   Variances.
      (1)   A food establishment may apply to the director for a variance
modifying or waiving the requirements of the Texas Food Establishment Rules or
the requirements of this chapter. The food establishment shall apply for the
variance on a form provided by the director and shall include in the
application all of the information required by Subsection 228.2431(2) of the
Texas Food Establishment Rules. The application must be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee of $592. The fee does not apply to mobile food
units applying for a commissary variance pursuant to Section
17-8.2(g)(B)(i).
      (2)   The director may grant a variance by modifying or waiving the
requirements of Subchapter I, Subsections 228.243(a) through (c), of the Texas
Food Establishment Rules or the requirements of this chapter if, in the opinion
of the director, a health hazard or nuisance will not result from the variance.
      (3)   If a variance is granted, the director shall retain in its records
for the food establishment the information provided by the applicant under
Subchapter I, Subsection 228.243(b), of the Texas Food Establishment Rules. A
food establishment granted a variance shall comply with Subchapter I,
Subsection 228.243(c), of the Texas Food Establishment Rules and any conditions
or standards for the variance established by the director or this chapter.
      (4)   A variance granted under this section is nontransferable, vehicle
specific, event specific, and location specific. If granted, the variance is
valid for at least one year but not for more than two years. The variance
expiration date must be printed on the variance and will remain effective
unless it is sooner revoked by the director or terminated by the food
establishment. A variance may be renewed through the application process set
forth in Paragraph (1) of this subsection.
      (5)   The director shall deny or revoke a variance under this section if:
         (A)   the food establishment made a false statement as to a material
matter on or in connection with the request for the variance or on or in
connection with the permit application for the food establishment;
         (B)   the food establishment does not hold a valid permit issued under
this chapter;
         (C)   the director determines that a health hazard or nuisance will
result or has resulted from the variance;
         (D)   the food establishment failed to pay a fee required under this
chapter at the time it was due; or
         (E)   the food establishment is in violation of any term or condition
of the variance as established by the director, this chapter, or state law.
      (6)   If the director denies or revokes a variance, the director shall
notify the applicant in writing by personal service or regular United States
mail. The notice must include the reasons for the denial or revocation and a
statement informing the applicant of the right to appeal the decision in
accordance with Subsection (q) of this section.
      (7)   Reserved.
      (8)   Reserved.
      (9)   An owner, officer, manager, or other person in charge of a food
establishment commits an offense if he, either personally or through an
employee or agent, violates, allows a violation of, or fails to comply with a
term or condition of a variance granted under this section. (Ord. Nos. 26023;
26134; 26556; 26598; 27190; 27353; 27695; 28046; 28488; 29177; 30134; 30653;
30938; 31376; 32003; 32148; 32181; 32232; 32310; 33224; 33232)
ARTICLE XI.
HEIMLICH MANEUVER POSTER.
SEC. 17-11.1.   ADOPTION OF SECTION 229.173, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Section 229.173 of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. 26023)
SEC. 17-11.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   General. All food establishments that provide dining areas shall post
the Heimlich maneuver sign in a place conspicuous to employees and customers.
   (b)   Specifications: The sign shall:
      (1)   be no smaller than 11 inches wide by 17 inches long;
      (2)   be printed in English and Spanish and in at least two conspicuous
contrasting colors on a white background;
      (3)   provide major title and figure blocks in contrasting color to
remaining copy blocks;
      (4)   provide major headings with a minimum bold 72 point font;
      (5)   provide initial subheadings with a minimum bold italic 60 point
font;
      (6)   provide secondary subheadings with a minimum bold 24 point font;
and
      (7)   provide a body copy in bold 14 point font. (Ord. 30134)
ARTICLE XII.
BED AND BREAKFAST EXTENDED ESTABLISHMENTS.
SEC. 17-12.1.   ADOPTION OF SECTION 228.223, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Section 228.223 of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134)
SEC. 17-12.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Reserved. (Ord. 26023)
ARTICLE XIII.
OUTFITTER OPERATIONS.
SEC. 17-13.1.   ADOPTION OF SECTION 228.224, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES.
   Section 228.224 of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. Nos. 26023; 30134)
SEC. 17-13.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Reserved. (Ord. 26023)
ARTICLE XIV.
SELF SERVICE FOOD MARKET.
SEC. 17-14.1.   ADOPTION OF CHAPTER 228, SUBCHAPTER H, SECTION 225.
   Section 228.225 of the Texas Food Establishment Rules is hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. 30134)
SEC. 17-14.2.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Reserved. (Ord. 30134)
CHAPTER 18
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTES
ARTICLE I.
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
Sec.
18-1.   Scope of chapter.
Sec.
18-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
18-3.   Regulating containers for municipal solid waste materials.
Sec.
18-4.   Regulating the collection of solid waste materials from residences and
duplexes.
Sec.
18-5.   Regulating the collection and removal of solid waste materials from
apartments, institutions, commercial establishments, and mobile home parks.
Sec.
18-5.1.   Collection and removal of recyclable materials from multifamily
sites.
Sec.
18-6.   Regulating the collection and removal of solid waste from the downtown
area.
Sec.
18-7.   Regulating the collection and removal of dead animals.
Sec.
18-8.   Solid waste materials not handled by city sanitation services.
Sec.
18-9.   Specifying charges for sanitation service.
Sec.
18-9.1.   Environmental cleanup fee.
Sec.
18-10.   Regulating the processing and disposal of solid waste materials.
Sec.
18-11.   Specifying charges for disposal of solid waste materials.
Sec.
18-12.   Regulating the collection and removal of illegally dumped solid waste
materials on private premises.
Sec.
18-12.1.   Penalties for violation.
ARTICLE II.
WEEDS, GRASS, AND VEGETATION.
Sec.
18-13.   Growth to certain height prohibited; offenses.
Sec.
18-14.   Duty to prevent weeds, grass, or vegetation from becoming a nuisance
or fire hazard.
Sec.
18-14.1.   Vegetation in alley, street, or sidewalk.
Sec.
18-15.   Enforcement.
Sec.
18-16.   Penalties for violation.
Sec.
18-17.   City removal of weeds and vegetation upon failure of owner, occupant,
or person in control to do so; notice required.
Sec.
18-18.   Charges to be collected from the property owner; lien on premises for
failure to pay charges.
ARTICLE III.
JUNKED VEHICLES.
Sec.
18-19.   Definitions.
Sec.
18-20.   Deemed public nuisance; declared unlawful.
Sec.
18-21.   Exceptions.
Sec.
18-22.   Notice to abate nuisance.
Sec.
18-23.   Motor vehicle description.
Sec.
18-24.   Trial in municipal court—Preliminaries.
Sec.
18-25.   Findings of judge; penalty.
Sec.
18-26.   Removal with permission of owner.
Sec.
18-27.   Removal from public property or occupied or unoccupied premises by
court order.
Sec.
18-28.   Notice to Texas department of highways and public transportation.
Sec.
18-28.1.   Penalties for violation.
ARTICLE IV.
PRIVATE SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE.
Division 1. In General.
Sec.
18-29.   Definitions.
Sec.
18-30.   Authority of director.
Sec.
18-31.   Defenses.
Division 2. Solid Waste Collection Franchises.
Sec.
18-32.   Franchise and decal required.
Sec.
18-33.   Franchise application.
Sec.
18-34.   Franchise grant.
Sec.
18-35.   Franchise fees.
Sec.
18-36.   Issuance and display of vehicle decal; proof of franchise to be shown
upon request.
Sec.
18-37.   Suspension or revocation of franchise; assessment of civil penalties.
Sec.
18-38.   Amendments to and transfer of a franchise.
Sec.
18-39.   Expiration and renewal of franchise; voidance of authority to operate
vehicles.
Sec.
18-40.   Franchisee’s records and reports.
Sec.
18-41.   Annual report.
Sec.
18-42.   Failure to pay ad valorem taxes.
Sec.
18-43.   Notification of change of address or ownership.
Sec.
18-44.   Vehicle inspection.
Division 3. Miscellaneous Requirements relating to Solid Waste Collection,
Disposal, and Vehicles.
Sec.
18-45.   Requirements for solid waste collection vehicles.
Sec.
18-46.   Responsibility of producer of dry or wet solid waste.
Sec.
18-47.   Hazardous waste material.
Sec.
18-48.   Restrictions on removal of solid waste.
Sec.
18-49.   Restrictions on disposal of waste.
Sec.
18-50.   Accumulations and deposit of waste prohibited.
Division 4. Violations and Penalties.
Sec.
18-51.   Penalties for violations.
ARTICLE IV-a.
MULTIFAMILY SITE RECYCLING COLLECTION AND REMOVAL SERVICES.
Sec.
18-52.   Director of sanitation's authority.
Sec.
18-53.   Multifamily site recycling collection service.
Sec.
18-54.   Inspections, suspensions, revocations, and penalties.
ARTICLE V.
TIRES.
Sec.
18-55.   Definitions.
Sec.
18-56.   Tire business license and mobile tire repair unit permit required;
application; transferability.
Sec.
18-57.   License and permit fees.
Sec.
18-58.   Issuance, denial, and display of a license or permit; tire disposal
records.
Sec.
18-59.   Revocation of a license.
Sec.
18-60.   Appeals.
Sec.
18-61.   Expiration and renewal of license; voidance of authority to operate a
mobile tire repair unit.
Sec.
18-61.1.   Required training.
Sec.
18-61.2.   Scrap tire storage methods.
Sec.
18-61.3.   Tire identification.
Sec.
18-62.   Transporting scrap tires.
Sec.
18-63.   Impoundment of vehicles.
Sec.
18-64.   Unauthorized disposal of tires.
Sec.
18-65.   Exemptions.
Sec.
18-65.1.   Required inspections.
Sec.
18-66.   Penalty.
ARTICLE I.
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
SEC. 18-1.   SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter apply to all territory within the city and
are for the benefit and protection of the city, its citizens, and the city's
solid waste collection and disposal utility. (Ord. Nos. 16367; 29881)
SEC. 18-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   (1)   ALLEY. Any public way, generally of less width than a street, used for
public utility purposes and right-of-way and as an alternate secondary or
emergency route for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, generally situated at the
rear of or alongside a tier of lots.
   (2)   APARTMENT. A development with three or more dwelling units on a lot.
   (3)   BRUSH AND BULKY TRASH. Brush and bulky trash originating from the
dwelling unit (residence or duplex) being serviced by sanitation services.
      (A)   BRUSH. Cuttings or trimmings, individual pieces not exceeding eight
inches in diameter or 10 feet in length, from trees, shrubs, or lawns and
similar materials, which also may include yard trash consisting of bagged
leaves, twigs, and other similar objects.
      (B)   BULKY TRASH. Furniture, appliances (freon removed, if applicable),
mattresses, small household trash that is bagged or containerized, and other
household objects too large for routine placement in normal compaction-type
collection vehicles via the provided rollcart. This definition does not include
household garbage (bagged or un-bagged), wet solid waste, construction debris,
automotive parts, soil, rocks, stones, tires, electronics, household hazardous
waste (e.g. chemicals, paints, fuel), or other items designated in writing by
the director of sanitation.
   (4)   BUILDING. A structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.
   (5)   CITY. The city of Dallas, Texas.
   (6)   CODE. The Dallas City Code, as amended.
   (7)   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any structure intended or used for the
purpose of conducting a commercial business enterprise.
   (8)   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Those materials resulting from the alteration,
construction, destruction, rehabilitation, remodeling, or significant repair of
any manmade physical structure including houses, buildings, industrial or
commercial facilities, and roadways. This includes but is not limited to brick,
concrete, other masonry materials, stone, glass, drywall, framing and finishing
lumber, roofing materials, plumbing fixtures, HVAC equipment such as heating
and air conditioning equipment and ductwork, insulation, and wall-to-wall
carpeting. This definition does not include incidental waste from small home
repairs (e.g. replacing a toilet, sink, small amounts of carpet or lumber,
fence panels, or doors).
   (9)   CONTAINER. A receptacle for the deposit of solid waste, including
garbage and recyclable materials (meeting the requirements of Section
18-3 for containers).
   (10)   DESIGNATED ALLEY. An alley that is not paved to city standard with
concrete or asphalt, that has a right-of-way less than 12 feet in width, that
deadends, that serves a dual use as a lined drainage channel, or that involves
other unusual conditions and which has been designated by the director of
sanitation.
   (11)   DIRECTOR OF SANITATION. The head of the department of sanitation
services of the city or any authorized representative.
   (12)   DOWNTOWN AREA. The area within the Dallas city limits bounded by the
west line of Houston Street, the south line of all properties on the south side
of Young Street, the east line of Pearl Street, and the south line of Gaston-
Pacific extension.
   (13)   DRIVE-IN SERVICE. Service involving city sanitation service employees
driving in on private property to collect garbage or recyclable materials.
   (14)   DRY SOLID WASTE. Trash (or rubbish), as defined in this section.
   (15)   DUPLEX. A structure on a lot intended for the use and occupancy as
two family dwelling units.
   (16)   DWELLING UNIT. Dwelling unit has the meaning assigned in Section
51A-2.102 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
   (17)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Cafe, restaurant, or other similar establishment
serving food or food products, including quick service drive- ins where food is
prepared or served.
   (18)   GARBAGE. Solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable
waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage
facilities, handling and sale of produce, and other food products.
   (19)   ILLEGALLY DUMPED SOLID WASTE. Any solid waste placed on property with
or without the consent of the owner or person in control.
   (20)   INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to
any process of industry or manufacturing, or mining or agricultural operations.
   (21)   INSTITUTION OR INSTITUTIONAL. Any church, church building, or
structure housing any charitable or philanthropic undertaking, or any school.
   (22)   MANAGER. The person in charge of real estate used for apartment,
institutional, or commercial purposes.
   (23)   MANUAL COLLECTION. The service rendered in collecting municipal solid
waste, including recyclable materials, in bags or from containers where
sanitation workers pick up the bags and containers manually instead of by
mechanical means.
   (24)   MOBILE HOME PARK. Six or more mobile home type dwelling units or
mobile home parking spaces that are:
      (A)   all located on one lot under single ownership; and
      (B)   only accessible by a private road.
   (25)   MULCH. Cutting grass, weeds, and similar vegetation into fine
particles.
   (26)   MULTIFAMILY SITE RECYCLING COLLECTION SERVICE. The business of
removing recyclable material, for processing, from a multifamily site for
compliance with Section
18-5.1 of this code.
   (27)   MULTIFAMILY SITE. Multifamily site means eight or more dwelling units
on a lot.
   (28)   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to
municipal, community, commercial, and recreational activities, including
garbage, trash (or rubbish), ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and all
other solid waste other than industrial solid waste.
   (29)   OCCUPANT. A person living on premises or in control of premises.
   (30)   OWNER. A person or the person's agent, including a condominium or
homeowner's association, jointly or severally, with an ownership interest in a
commercial establishment, multifamily site, residence, or duplex.
   (31)   OVERSIZED BRUSH AND BULKY TRASH COLLECTION. A collection of brush and
bulky trash greater in volume than the standard limit of 10 cubic yards.
   (32)   PACKOUT SERVICE. Service involving city sanitation service employees
walking in on private property or walking in to a point that is not immediately
adjacent to a location reasonably accessible to the standard city garbage or
recycling truck by route of a public right-of-way to collect garbage or
recyclable materials. Brush and bulky trash collection will not be rendered as
a pack out service.
   (33)   PARKWAY. The area ordinarily intervening between the curb line of a
street and the adjacent property line, or the sidewalk if a sidewalk exists.
   (34)   PERMITTEE. Any person licensed by the city of Dallas to contract to
collect, remove, or dispose of solid waste.
   (35)   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership,
association, or any other legal entity.
   (36)   PROPERTY LINE. The peripheral boundary of real estate.
   (37)   PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT. A right-of-way used or dedicated to be used
by any public utility, including but not limited to services such as
electricity, telephone, gas, solid waste collection, water, sewer, and
drainage.
   (38)   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley, easement, or other right-of-way.
   (39)   RECYCLING. The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating,
and reconstituting recyclable materials for the purpose of using the altered
form in the manufacture of a new product.
   (40)   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Any material or product designated in writing by
the director of sanitation as being suitable for re-use and/or recycling.
   (41)   RESIDENCE. An attached or detached structure on a lot intended for
use and occupancy as a one family dwelling unit, including a mobile type
dwelling unit that is not part of a mobile home park.
   (42)   ROLLCART. A plastic receptacle, which is furnished by the city for
the collection of residential refuse and recyclable materials, that:
      (A)   has two wheels and a lid;
      (B)   is designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically;
      (C)   is too large for handling by manual means; and
      (D)   is from 48 to 96 gallons.
   (43)   ROLLCART SERVICE. The service rendered in collecting municipal solid
waste, including recyclable materials, by mechanical means from rollcart
containers furnished by the city.
   (44)   SANITARY LANDFILL. A method of disposing of municipal solid waste on
land without creating a nuisance or hazard to public health or safety by
utilizing the principles of engineering to confine the solid waste to the
smallest practical area, to reduce it to the smallest practical volume, and to
cover it with a layer of earth at appropriate periodic intervals.
   (45)   SANITATION SERVICES. The department of the city that is responsible
for the operation of the city's solid waste collection and disposal utility,
including, but not limited to, the collection, removal, disposal, and
processing of municipal solid waste (including recyclable materials).
   (46)   STREET. Any public roadway for the passage of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
   (47)   TRASH (OR RUBBISH). Municipal solid wastes other than garbage and
further categorized as:
      (A)   BRUSH AND BULKY TRASH. Has the meaning as defined in Section
18-2(3) of this chapter.
      (B)   YARD TRIMMINGS. Consisting of bagged organic yard waste such as
leaves, grass, twigs, and other small organic waste. Yard trimmings placed in
paper lawn bags or compostable bags is considered brush and yard trimmings
placed in plastic bags is considered bulky trash.
      (C)   HOUSEHOLD TRASH. Paper, wood, glass, metal, cans, rags, cartons,
rubber, plastic, and other similar materials.
      (D)   CONTAINERIZED TRASH. Household or yard trash in containers not
exceeding a combined weight of 50 pounds.
   (48)   UNPAVED ALLEY. Any alley not paved with concrete or asphalt.
   (49)   VEGETATION. Any plant growth.
   (50)   VEHICLES. Every wheeled conveyance or any other device in, or by
which any property may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway,
including devices used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
   (51)   WALKWAY. Any area, paved or unpaved, normally used as a pedestrian
right-of-way.
   (52)   WET SOLID WASTE. Any putrescible animal or vegetable waste materials,
other than waterborne waste material, resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking, or consumption of food, including waste material from markets, storage
facilities, or the handling or sale of produce or other food products. (Ord.
Nos. 16367; 19409; 21058; 21186; 22026; 23694; 24743; 26960; 27697; 29879;
29881; 30879; 31231; 33224)
SEC. 18-3.   REGULATING CONTAINERS FOR MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE MATERIALS.
   (a)   Containers for residences and duplexes. Every occupant of a residence
or duplex shall provide the premises with a sufficient number of solid waste
containers to provide for the peak output of municipal solid wastes from those
premises without overloading the containers. The containers must be rollcarts
and must meet the requirements of this subsection.
      (1)   At a residence or duplex, a person shall use only city owned and
provided rollcarts as solid waste containers, except that blue rollcarts may be
used as solid waste containers for recyclable materials.
      (2)   A person shall comply with the following requirements when using a
rollcart or a blue or clear recycling bag as a solid waste container:
         (A)   A container must not be overloaded to the point where spillage
occurs from overflow, wind, or handling.
         (B)   A container must be closed or secured at the top to prevent
spillage.
         (C)   Glass and other wastes that are dangerous to handle must be
securely wrapped, and the container must be labeled to warn of the need for
careful handling.
         (D)   Ashes must be cold before being placed in a container.
         (E)   Non-recyclable materials must not be placed in a container
(rollcart) designated for recyclable materials. A recycling rollcart that is
used for non-recyclable materials may be removed from the premises at the
direction of the director of sanitation.
      (3)   Unless otherwise specified by the director of sanitation, and in
addition to the requirements of Subsection (a)(3), a person shall comply with
the following requirements when using a rollcart as a solid waste container:
         (A)   A rollcart must be placed for collection so that there is a
minimum clearance of three feet to each side of the rollcart and one and one-
half feet to the rear of the rollcart from any fence, gas meter, telephone
pole, utility box, tree, shrub, additional collection container, or other
potential obstruction. A rollcart must be placed so that its handle faces the
dwelling unit.
         (B)   No person shall block or cause to be blocked access to or hinder
collection of a rollcart that has been placed for curbside collection.
         (C)   Solid waste, including recyclable materials, must be placed in a
rollcart in a manner that prevents the contents from blowing out of the
rollcart when being emptied.
         (D)   The director of sanitation must be promptly notified of any need
for repair or replacement of a rollcart. Cleanliness of a rollcart is the
responsibility of the occupant or owner of the premises to which the rollcart
is provided.
         (E)   A 60 to 65 gallon rollcart may not weigh more than 200 pounds
when loaded, and a 90 to 96 gallon rollcart may not weigh more than 250 pounds
when loaded.
         (F)   Additional rollcarts for garbage and recyclable materials may be
obtained from the director of sanitation for an additional fee set forth in
Section
18-9(c)(1) of this article.
         (G)   A rollcart that is lost or damaged due to a customer's
negligence may be replaced for a fee as set forth in Section
18-9(c)(8) of this article.
   (b)   Containers for apartments, mobile home parks, institutions, and
commercial establishments. Every owner of an apartment, mobile home park,
institution, or commercial establishment shall provide the premises with a
sufficient number of solid waste containers to provide for the peak output of
municipal solid wastes from those premises without overloading the containers.
      (1)   A container must be watertight and constructed of a solid and
durable grade of metal or plastic material. Any container that is manually
collected by city sanitation services employees must not exceed 96 gallons in
capacity, and the combined weight of the waste and the container must not
exceed 250 pounds. A container must not be overloaded to a point where spillage
occurs from overflow, wind, or handling.
      (2)   All containers must meet the following requirements:
         (A)   A container must be provided with suitable lifting handles on
the outside and a close-fitting or other approved cover equipped with a handle.
         (B)   A container must not contain any inside structure, such as a
band or reinforcing angle, or anything within the container to prevent the free
discharge of the contents. A container that has deteriorated or become damaged
to the extent that the cover will not fit securely or that has a jagged or
sharp edge capable of causing injury to a sanitation services employee or other
person whose duty it is to handle the container will be condemned by the city.
If such a container is not replaced after notice to the owner or user, the
container will be removed along with its contents.
   (c)   Underground solid waste containers. Underground solid waste containers
are prohibited for use in the city unless the installation is specifically
approved by the director of sanitation. (Ord. Nos. 16367; 19409; 19991; 21058;
24743; 26960; 28019; 29879; 32310)
SEC. 18-4.   REGULATING THE COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE MATERIALS FROM RESIDENCES
AND DUPLEXES.
   (a)   General. It shall be the duty of every occupant of any residence or
duplex to provide a sufficient number of solid waste containers at the place
designated by the director of sanitation for collection of municipal solid
waste from the particular premises and to provide adequate capacity for the
solid waste placed out for collection without overloading the capacity of the
containers or wedging the contents in the container by compaction.
      (1)   All containers must conform to the requirements of Section
18-3(a).
      (2)   A person commits an offense if he collects dry or wet solid waste,
including salvageable newspaper or any other recyclable material, from a
residence or duplex. It is a defense to prosecution under this paragraph that
the person was:
         (A)   the owner or occupant of the residence or duplex;
         (B)   employed or under contract with the city to provide solid waste
collection services to the residence or duplex and was in the performance of
official duties;
         (C)   a charitable organization that gathers clothes, salvageable
newspapers, or other recyclable material;
         (D)   hauling away brush, bulky trash, or yard trash from the
residence or duplex as a service that was incidental to a maintenance,
delivery, lawn, or home improvement service being provided by the person to the
residence or duplex; or
         (E)   providing recycling services to the premises pursuant to a
written agreement with the owner or occupant of the residence or duplex and was
collecting only recyclable materials that were composed solely of one or more
of the following:
            (i)   newspapers, magazines, catalogs, telephone books, corrugated
cardboard, scrap paper, office paper, or junk mail; or
            (ii)   empty and rinsed aluminum, steel, glass, or recyclable
plastic containers that were only used for the storage or processing of
consumable food or beverage products, medications, or ordinary household
detergents or soaps and that were never used to store or process any hazardous
material or hazardous waste.
      (3)   The city may, through the competitive bid process, contract with a
private solid waste collection service, which is franchised in accordance with
Article IV of this chapter, to provide solid waste collection, including the
collection of recyclable materials, for specific areas designated by the
director of sanitation.
   (b)   Placement of containers for alley collection service. Except as may be
otherwise authorized by the director of sanitation, it shall be unlawful for
any person to place any container within any alley within the city. If a fence
separates the alley from the lot where the container is located, the container
must be placed outside the fence in a manner that protects the container from
overturn or spillage and does not interfere with solid waste collection service
in the alley. A container may not be placed in a rack, and any rack on the
premises may not extend into the alley or interfere with solid waste collection
service in the alley.
   (c)   Placement of garbage or recycling containers for curb collection
service. Where a residence or duplex is designated by the director of
sanitation to be provided with curb collection service, except as may be
authorized by the director of sanitation, each container must be placed just
behind the curbline of the street abutting such property, but may not be placed
in any manner where the container will interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or with solid waste collection service.
      (1)   Where garbage or recyclable materials are collected from the street
curbline adjacent to the property, a container must be placed there no earlier
than 6:00 p.m. of the afternoon preceding the collection day and must be
removed to a point at the side or rear of the structure not later than 8:00
a.m. of the day following collection.
      (2)   A container must be placed in a manner that protects it from
overturn and spillage.
      (3)   A container may not be placed in a rack, and any rack on the
premises may not extend into the street or sidewalk or interfere with solid
waste collection service.
   (d)   Placement of garbage and recycling containers for packout or drive-in
collection service. Garbage containers and recycling containers must be placed
at locations and under such conditions approved by the director of sanitation
for packout or drive-in collection service by the sanitation services of the
city.
   (e)   Placement of brush and bulky trash. Brush and bulky trash must be
placed just behind the curb line of the street abutting the property from which
the brush and trash originated, or as otherwise designated by the director of
sanitation, but must not be placed:
      (1)   in any manner that will interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or with solid waste collection service;
      (2)   out for collection earlier than the Thursday preceding the
collection week or later than 7:00 a.m. on the Monday of the collection week;
      (3)   within five feet from a rollcart, mailbox, fence or wall, water
meter, telephone connection box, or parked cars;
      (4)   under low hanging tree limbs or power lines;
      (5)   in an alley either paved or unpaved; or
      (6)   in front of a vacant lot or business.
   (f)   Allowable quantity of brush and bulky trash.
      (1)   The quantity of brush and bulky trash set out during a collection
week may not exceed 10 cubic yards, unless the service unit has designated
their monthly collection as their one time per year oversized collection.
      (2)   Limits may be temporarily lifted at the discretion of the director
of sanitation for matters concerning public health and safety.
   (g)   Oversized brush and bulky trash collection.
      (1)   In general. The occupant of a residence or duplex may request one
oversized brush and bulky trash collection per year to occur during one of
their normal collection months. This oversized collection will take the place
of one of the 12 monthly brush and bulky trash collections.
      (2)   Dimensions. An oversized collection may not exceed 20 cubic yards
or consist of more than 10 cubic yards of bulky trash.
      (3)   Request. An occupant of a residence or duplex must submit, either
online or by phone, an oversized collection service request through the city's
311 services requests systems before the beginning of an occupant's normally
scheduled collection week in order to avoid an excessive volume service fee.
      (4)   Fee. Where the quantity of the oversized brush and bulky trash set
out for collection exceeds 20 cubic yards, the set out may be collected and a
fee will be assessed on the dwelling unit's water bill pursuant to a fee set
forth in Section
18-4(h).
   (h)   Excessive and non-compliant brush and bulky trash service fees.
      (1)   Excessive brush and bulky trash service fees. Where the quantity of
brush and bulky trash set out for collection exceeds 10 cubic yards and a
request for an oversized brush and bulky trash collection was not submitted,
the set out may be collected and a fee will be assessed on the dwelling unit's
water bill. The fee will be assessed at a rate of $60 per five cubic yards,
billed in five cubic yard increments.
      (2)   Non-compliant brush and bulky trash service fees. A dwelling unit
is subject to a service charge for a collection of a non-compliant brush and
bulky trash set out which contains excluded items as defined in Section
18-2(3), that are with or on top of the set out, or if such items are placed so
close to the set out pile that the items cannot reasonably be removed from the
pile to be collected. A service charge will be placed on the dwelling unit's
water bill. The fee will be assessed at a rate of $60 per five cubic yards,
billed in five cubic yard increments.
      (3)   Violations. Nothing in this subsection prevents the city from
issuing a citation for a violation described in this section. (Ord. Nos. 16367;
19172; 19991; 21058; 21632; 22295; 24000; 24142; 24299; 26960; 28019; 31231;
31332; 32310; 33224)
SEC. 18-5.   REGULATING THE COLLECTION AND REMOVAL OF SOLID WASTE MATERIALS
FROM APARTMENTS, INSTITUTIONS, COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS, AND MOBILE HOME
PARKS.
   (a)   The manual collection of dry or wet solid waste from an apartment,
institution, commercial establishment, or mobile home park shall be performed
by a sanitation services employee only where each container conforms to the
requirements of Section
18-3(b) of this chapter.
   (b)   Brush or trash collection from an apartment, institution, commercial
establishment, or mobile home park shall not be rendered as a packout service
by a sanitation services employee.
   (c)   No person other than a sanitation services employee in the performance
of official duties, shall collect dry or wet solid waste, including salvageable
cardboard, from an area designated by this chapter or by the director of
sanitation as a city waste collection location at an apartment, institution,
commercial establishment, or mobile home park.
   (d)   Solid waste collection from an apartment, institution, commercial
establishment, or mobile home park may be performed by a person who has a solid
waste collection franchise as provided in
Article IV of this chapter.
   (e)   If an apartment, institution, commercial establishment, or mobile home
park has contracted with a solid waste collection service to perform solid
waste collection, the solid waste collection service shall collect solid waste
that contains putrescible material at least once every seven days.
   (f)   If not regulated by this chapter, the placement of any container for
collection from an apartment, institution, commercial establishment, or mobile
home park must be approved by the director of sanitation. (Ord. Nos. 16367;
19409; 19991; 21058; 33224)
SEC. 18-5.1.   COLLECTION AND REMOVAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS FROM MULTIFAMILY
SITES.
   (a)   General regulations. The owner of a multifamily site shall:
      (1)   provide single stream, dual stream, or valet recycling through
persons holding a multifamily site recycling collection service permit pursuant
to Article IV-a of this chapter.
      (2)   provide recycling container(s) through persons holding a
multifamily site recycling collection service permit pursuant to Article IV-
a of this chapter.
      (3)   provide and place recycling containers in locations within
visibility of waste containers. If valet trash service is provided, the
recycling service should be of a similar nature. If trash chute rooms or trash
rooms are utilized, then the recycling service should be of a similar nature or
should be as convenient for the tenant, such as placing a recycling container
adjacent to the trash chute, if there is adequate space.
      (4)   provide information (e.g. posters, signs) in suitable common areas,
such as mail rooms and laundry facilities, that discusses how to recycle at the
property, including information on the types of recyclable materials that are
acceptable using photos or images, the chasing arrows recycling symbol,
locations of recycling containers, and onsite contact information to report
overflowing recycling containers and contamination. If the property utilizes
valet recycling collection services, then only information regarding how to
recycle and materials accepted is required.
      (5)   educate each tenant on recycling program implementation upon lease
commencement and biannually thereafter of the following:
         (A)   the multifamily site provides access to recycling in accordance
with
Chapter 18 of the Dallas City Code;
         (B)   location of recycling containers;
         (C)   types of recycling materials accepted;
         (D)   information related to proper recycling practices, including
that cardboard boxes should be broken down before placed in recycling
containers;
         (E)   onsite contact information to report overflowing recycling
containers and contamination; and
         (F)   information on how to report waste or recycling problems to the
City of Dallas, utilizing 3-1-1, the 311 app or submitting an online service
request.
      (6)   inform each tenant within 30 days of any significant change in
recycling services to the multifamily site.
      (7)   for multifamily sites offering back-of-house and valet recycling,
provide biannual training (or within 30 days of new employee start date) to
those collecting recyclable materials of the following:
         (A)   types of clean and empty materials accepted in recycling
containers;
         (B)   instruction to break down cardboard boxes before depositing into
recycling containers serviced by a permitted multifamily site recycling
collection service business;
         (C)   for multifamily sites providing valet recycling, instruction to
empty plastic bags before depositing contents into recycling containers
serviced by permitted multifamily site recycling collection service businesses
and instruction to place plastic bags into waste or garbage containers to be
landfilled;
         (D)   location of recycling containers; and
         (E)   onsite contact information for reporting overflowing recycling
containers and contamination.
      (8)   submit an annual recycling plan to the director of sanitation as
set forth in Subsection (g) of this section, along with an affidavit of
compliance as part of the owner's annual multi-tenant registration or on a form
approved by the director of sanitation.
   (b)   Recyclable materials for collection. The owner of a multifamily site
must provide collection for recyclable materials that are consistent with those
materials accepted by the city's residential recycling program, unless
otherwise exempted by the director of sanitation.
   (c)   Recycling collection and capacity. The owner of a multifamily site
must provide recycling container collection capacity equal to or greater than
11 gallons per unit, per week.
   (d)   Recycling containers. A recycling container must:
      (1)   be a roll cart, bin, wheelie bin, dumpster, or compactor. Wheelie
bins, dumpsters, and compactors larger than two yards may have restricted
access to prevent gross contamination; and
      (2)   comply with screening and other applicable regulations in the
Dallas Development Code, as amended.
   (e)   Parking reduction. Minimum parking required for a multifamily site may
be reduced in order to provide adequate space for recycling containers.
   (f)   Implementation.
      (1)   An owner of a multifamily site shall implement a multifamily site
recycling program by January 1, 2020.
      (2)   An owner of a multifamily site applying for a certificate of
occupancy after January 1, 2020, shall immediately comply with this section
upon issuance of the property's certificate of occupancy and submit a recycling
plan with their initial multi-tenant registration application.
   (g)   Recycling plans.
      (1)   The owner of a multifamily site shall submit a recycling plan each
year, as part of their annual multi-tenant registration application, to the
city. Initial recycling plans must be submitted upon the first annual multi-
tenant registration after January 1, 2020. Electronic or hard copy of the
recycling plan information should be available for inspection on site after
January 1, 2020. The recycling plan must include the following information:
         (A)   name of permitted multifamily site recycling collection service
business utilized;
         (B)   types of materials recycled;
         (C)   type, size, location(s), and frequency of recycling container(s)
collection;
         (D)   a site map of the property showing current garbage and recycling
locations, unless valet recycling service is provided and no community
recycling containers are available;
         (E)   notation of any changes to the multifamily site recycling
program in the previous calendar year, including but not limited to changes of
the following: multifamily site recycling collection service business utilized
or method of collection, if applicable; and
         (F)   any other information that the director of sanitation deems
necessary, and is reasonable, to verify compliance with this ordinance or to
enhance program reporting capabilities and other information.
      (2)   The owner of a multifamily site shall maintain records and examples
of materials relevant to meeting the requirements of Section
18-5.1(a)(5) and make records available if requested by the city manager's
designee, or that designee's authorized representative during an on-site
inspection.
      (3)   The director of sanitation may reject a recycling plan if it does
not contain the information specified in this section or meet the minimum
requirements as defined in this section. The owner of a multifamily site shall
submit a revised plan no later than 30 days from notification of the director
of sanitation's determination to reject the plan.
   (h)   Inspection. For any multifamily site, the city manager's designee, or
that designee's authorized representative, may conduct an inspection for
compliance with this section and verify the site's provision of access to
recycling services at any time or when an inspection under Section
27-42, of
Chapter 27 of the Dallas City Code, as amended, is conducted, even if the
multifamily site is not a rental property, as defined in
Chapter 27 of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
   (i)   Exemptions and Implementation Extension.
      (1)   Section
18-5.1(a)(8) does not apply to multifamily sites that have a current contract
with the City of Dallas to receive recycling collection services from the city.
      (2)   The owner of a multifamily site may submit to the director of
sanitation, within 90 days of required recycling program implementation, a
written request for an implementation extension and/or exemption from all or
specifics provisions of the regulations of this section because of the owner's
inability to comply. The director of sanitation will conduct a thorough
evaluation on whether the owner demonstrated an inability to comply with the
ordinance. The owner will receive a determination by the director of sanitation
in writing within 60 days. The director of sanitation's decision will be final.
(Ord. 30879)
SEC. 18-6.   REGULATING THE COLLECTION AND REMOVAL OF SOLID WASTE FROM THE
DOWNTOWN AREA.
   (a)   The collection of solid waste materials from the downtown area, as
described herein, shall be governed by all the rules and regulations pertaining
to apartments, institutions and commercial establishments, except that no solid
waste materials or containers of any kind shall be placed for collection on the
public streets, sidewalks, alleys or easements of the city prior to 6:00 p.m.
and all containers must be removed to a location inside the building situated
on the premises by not later than 10:00 p.m.
   (b)   At any of the establishments in the downtown area where there is
sufficient space between any structure and the alley property line, the
easement property line, or street property line to permit the placing of waste
containers as required by the provisions of this chapter relating to residences
and duplexes, the containers may be placed in such public way at the very
boundary thereof so as to permit the passage of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, subject to the approval of the director of sanitation. (Ord. Nos.
16367; 33224)
SEC. 18-7.   REGULATING THE COLLECTION AND REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   The bodies of dead animals may not be placed in solid waste containers or in
any street, alley, easement, or public way. The collection and removal of dead
animal bodies is a service of the city and will be furnished upon request or
notification by any interested party without charge except that:
      (1)   a fee based on a cost plus rate determined by the director of
sanitation will be charged for the collection and removal of dead animal bodies
from animal clinics; and
      (2)   a fee set forth in Section
18-9(c)(9) of this article will be charged for the collection and removal of
the bodies of large dead animals, including but not limited to horses, cattle,
and other animals of similar size. (Ord. Nos. 16367; 26960)
SEC. 18-8.   SOLID WASTE MATERIALS NOT HANDLED BY CITY SANITATION SERVICES.
   (a)   General. The scope of the service rendered by the city sanitation
services in the collection and removal of solid waste materials is intended, in
general, to serve the normal needs of dwelling units and their directly related
activities, operating businesses, and commercial establishments except as
exempted from the provisions of this chapter. It is considered to be beyond the
scope of such service to collect or remove solid waste materials generated by
clearing, construction, or demolition or any other solid waste materials
resulting from an activity beyond the scope described in this subsection.
   (b)   Materials not collected by city. Solid waste materials that will not
be collected and removed by the city sanitation services as a regular service
include:
      (1)   Trash or debris resulting from construction, demolition,
destruction by fire, or clearance of vacant or improved property in preparation
for construction or occupancy, or similar materials as designated by the
director of sanitation, will not be collected and removed by the city as a
regular service, but these materials must be removed at the expense of the
owner or developer.
      (2)   Industrial wastes resulting from manufacturing or processing
operations, including waste from food and vegetable produce houses, poultry
dressing establishments, and meat processing and meat packing plants, must be
disposed of by the owner or occupant of the building, business, or premises
where the wastes originate in the manner prescribed by state law and any other
applicable ordinance. The director of sanitation shall determine what wastes
fall within the industrial classification described in this subsection. (Ord.
Nos. 16367; 16697; 21632; 22306; 28019; 33224)
SEC. 18-9.   SPECIFYING CHARGES FOR SANITATION SERVICE.
   (a)   Method of charging and billing for sanitation services.
      (1)   A sanitation service charge for garbage and recycling will be made
for the following:
         (A)   All dwelling units in the city that are served with water
delivered under an active water account of the water utilities department of
the city.
         (B)   All dwelling units in the city that are served with wastewater
service only under an active account of the water utilities department of the
city.
         (C)   All commercial properties in the city receiving city sanitation
service that can be adequately serviced with no more than 10 garbage rollcarts
and 10 recycling rollcarts and that are served with water delivered under an
active water account of the water utilities department of the city or that are
served with wastewater service only under an active account of the water
utilities department of the city.
         (D)   All commercial properties receiving city sanitation service that
are serviced with a single garbage rollcart. These properties have the option
to receive one recycling rollcart of the same size or greater than the garbage
rollcart, at no additional cost.
         (E)   All property that is served with sanitation services by the city
and that is not specified by Subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this
paragraph. The water utilities department shall bill for sanitation services in
a manner that distinguishes the sanitation charges from water or wastewater
charges.
      (2)   The water utilities department shall bill the person in whose name
the water service or wastewater service account appears. If a sanitation
services customer is not served with water or wastewater service by the city,
the water utilities department shall bill the person in control of the premises
or, if that person is unknown, the owner of the premises. Payment of the fee
for sanitation services is due on or before the date stated on the face of the
customer's bill and is delinquent after that date. A bill is delinquent if not
paid within 15 days from the date it is rendered by the water utilities
department.
      (3)   In addition to all other legal remedies available for the
collection of a debt, the following actions and remedies are authorized for
delinquent payment of the charges authorized in this article:
         (A)   The sanitation services may refuse to pick up and dispose of the
garbage and trash (or rubbish) at the delinquent location;
         (B)   The water and/or wastewater service, if any, serving the
delinquent premises in question may be shut off and terminated.
         (C)   A five percent late payment fee will be added to the total net
bill.
      (4)   All collections by the water utilities department will be applied
first to the water utilities charges, and the customer will be deemed to have
paid such water utilities charges first if any question arises as to how
outstanding balances should be composed and applied.
         (A)   All present water utilities department customers to be billed
under this article will be automatically placed on the billing for sanitation
services charges, regardless of whether or not a written contract exists
between the city and such customers.
         (B)   All present water utilities guaranty deposits upon termination
of wastewater service and/or water service may be applied to any amounts due
either for sanitation services charges or fees of water utilities bills.
         (C)   All water utilities services contracts entered into between the
water utilities department and the customer must contain an agreement that any
guaranty deposit upon termination of wastewater service and/or water service
may be applied to sanitation services fees and charges and to water utilities
charges that have become due.
   (b)   General regulations.
      (1)   Establishment of service charges will be based upon the current use
of the property rather than being based upon the zoning.
      (2)   There will be no proration of service charges for a portion of a
billing period. The initial billing will be made concurrent with the initial
water billing. The final billing for sanitation charges will be for a full
billing period.
      (3)   Except as otherwise set forth in this article, collection service
must be provided by the sanitation services of the city for all residences and
duplexes and for all manual collection from apartments and mobile home parks,
and such service may not be contracted or performed by other than the city's
sanitation services.
      (4)   A commercial property in the city cannot receive service for more
than 10 recycling rollcarts.
         (A)   A commercial property has the option to apply for an exemption
to receive more than 10 recycling rollcarts upon written approval from the
director of sanitation. Approval of the exemption will be at the discretion of
the director of sanitation.
         (B)   The director of sanitation has the discretion to limit a
commercial property to fewer than 10 recycling rollcarts if the property does
not have adequate space or if the property cannot reasonably be provided with
recycling service.
      (5)   A commercial property in the city cannot receive service for more
than 10 garbage rollcarts.
         (A)   A commercial property has the option to apply for an exemption
to receive more than 10 garbage rollcarts upon written approval from the
director of sanitation. Approval of the exemption will be at the discretion of
the director of sanitation.
         (B)   The director of sanitation has the discretion to limit a
property to fewer than 10 garbage rollcarts if the property does not have
adequate space or if the property cannot reasonably be provided with garbage
service.
      (6)   Commercial establishments that are located within a 1.5-mile radius
of Dallas City Hall may receive more than one garbage and recycling collection
per week by sanitation services. Commercial establishments that are located
outside of a 1.5-mile radius of Dallas City Hall may receive more than one
garbage and recycling collection per week by the sanitation services of the
city only if the director of sanitation agrees in writing.
      (7)   A commercial property shall comply with the following requirements
when using a recycling rollcart:
         (A)   The rollcart must not be overloaded to the point where spillage
occurs from overflow, wind, or handling.
         (B)   The rollcart must be closed or secured at the top to prevent
spillage.
         (C)   Only recyclable materials may be placed in a recycling rollcart.
A recycling rollcart that is used for non-recyclable materials or that contains
a significant amount of non-recyclable materials may be removed from the
premises at the direction of the director of sanitation.
         (D)   A recycling rollcart must be placed on the curb in accordance
with Section
18-3(a) and Section
18-4(c). A recycling rollcart that is not kept clean or that causes a nuisance
may be removed from the premises at the direction of the director of
sanitation.
      (8)   The director may provide for alternative solid waste collection
service to a customer, if the director determines that the customer cannot be
adequately serviced with the standard collection service.
   (c)   Schedule of service charges.
      (1)   The collection service charge for a residence or duplex is as
follows:
         (A)   Alley or curb collection service for municipal solid waste -
$40.09 per dwelling unit per month for one roll-cart, plus $15.51 per month for
each additional garbage roll- cart requested by the owner or occupant of the
premises.
         (B)   Packout or drive-in collection service for municipal solid waste
- $138.38 per dwelling unit per month for one roll-cart, plus $15.36 for each
additional garbage roll-cart requested by the owner or occupant of the
premises.
         (C)   Effective October 1, 2022, the owner or occupant of a dwelling
unit with one rollcart for recyclable materials may request one additional
rollcart for recyclable materials from the director of sanitation for no
additional fee. Dwelling units with two or more rollcarts for recyclable
materials may request additional rollcarts for recyclable materials for a one-
time processing and handling fee for $50.00 per rollcart, which will be applied
to the dwelling unit's water account.
      (2)   The collection service charge for an apartment or a mobile home
park that receives manual collection service from the sanitation services of
the city is as follows:
         (A)   Alley, curb, or drive-in collection service for municipal solid
waste - $40.09 per apartment unit or mobile home space per month.
         (B)   Packout collection service for municipal solid waste - $138.38
per apartment unit or mobile home space per month.
      (3)   A monthly collection service charge will be made for all commercial
establishments for collection service provided by the sanitation services of
the city as follows:
   TABLE OF MONTHLY CHARGES
   (Garbage & Recycling, per Section
18-9(b)(6), more than once a week)
   A multiplier will be used for multiple carts.
 
                    NUMBER OF COLLECTIONS PER WEEK*
                    1      2      3       4       5       6       7
96-gallon RollCarts $42.28 $84.57 $126.85 $169.14 $211.42 $253.71 $295.99
 
      (4)   A monthly recycling-only collection service charge will be made for
all commercial properties for weekly collection service provided by the
sanitation services of the city as follows:
TABLE OF MONTHLY CHARGES
(Recycling-Only Service, Outside of the Central Business District)
A multiplier will be used for multiple carts.
 
NUMBER OF COLLECTIONS PER WEEK
                    1      2      3      4       5       6       7
96-gallon RollCarts $27.49 $54.97 $82.46 $109.94 $137.43 $164.92 $192.40
 
      (5)   Extraordinary collection and removal service is as follows:
         (A)   A cost plus rate of $60 per five cubic yards, billed in five
cubic yard increments for materials set out for collection in advance or after
the period designed by the director of sanitation, as described in Section
18-4(e), as amended, and for materials not included in the regular collection
service as described in Section
18-8, as amended.
         (B)   The director of sanitation may provide an out-of-cycle
collection of garbage and recyclable materials from rollcarts owned and
provided by the city, upon a customer's request through the city's 311 system,
for a fee of $25 for garbage and $25 for recyclable materials. In the event a
customer submits a service request through the city's 311 system claiming
regular collection services were missed, and the director of sanitation later
determines through vehicle on-board camera systems that the rollcart(s) in
question were not set out at the prescribed time of collection, or did not
comply with the requirements of Sections
18-3 or
18-4 of this article, the director of sanitation may assess a collection fee of
$25 for garbage and $25 for recyclable materials to the dwelling unit's water
account.
      (6)   Miscellaneous collection service charges will be as follows:
         (A)   Public housing may be charged as apartments.
         (B)   Churches, clinics, hospitals, public buildings, and schools will
be charged as commercial locations.
      (7)   Packout or drive-in service for certain handicapped persons meeting
uniform requirements specified by the director of sanitation will be provided
at the rate for alley or curb collection service. Any applicant for a reduced
rate under this subparagraph who intentionally makes any misrepresentation in
any written statement required by such uniform requirements is guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
      (8)   The fee for replacement of a rollcart that is lost or damaged due
to a customer's negligence is $67.90 for a garbage rollcart or $70.81 for a
recycling rollcart.
      (9)   Large dead animals, including but not limited to horses, cattle,
and other animals of similar size, will be picked up by the city for a fee of
$125 per animal.
      (10)   Construction debris may be collected for a fee as part of a non-
compliant brush and bulky trash collection as outlined in Section
18-4(h)(2) or as a cost plus rate as outlined in Section
18-9(c)(5). Loose or small construction debris such as roofing materials,
shingles, brick, concrete, stone, drywall, insulation, glass, masonry
materials, and other materials designated in writing by the director of
sanitation will not be collected by the department of sanitation services.
   (d)   A person claiming entitlement to a refund of sanitation services paid
to the city must notify the director of sanitation of the claim within 180 days
from the date the disputed payment was received by the city. (Ord. Nos. 16367;
16435; 16697; 17133; 17545; 17987; 19300; 19409; 19963; 19991; 20736; 21058;
21431; 21632; 21819; 22206; 22306; 22565; 22906; 24743; 25048; 25384; 25754;
26134; 26478; 26960; 27353; 27695; 28019; 29149; 29477; 29879; 29879; 30215;
30653; 30993; 31231; 31332, 31657; 32003; 32310; 32556; 32863; 33224; 33232)
SEC. 18-9.1.   ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP FEE.
   A $3.00 per month environmental cleanup fee will be applied to each
residential and non-residential utility customer’s water account to address
litter and nuisance abatement from public right-of-way, homeless encampment
cleanup on public right-of-way, street cleaning, and related services. This fee
will include funding for solid waste related services such as public litter
basket collection, bulky waste and brush drop-off sites, household hazardous
waste, zero waste initiatives, and extra collections of brush due to severe
storms. (Ord. No. 32863)
SEC. 18-10.   REGULATING THE PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE MATERIALS.
   (a)   General regulations.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if he disposes of dry or wet solid
waste or other waste materials inside the city, other than at a location and in
a manner approved by the director of sanitation as complying with federal,
state, and local law regulating solid waste processing and disposal. The owner,
occupant, or person in control of premises to which illegally-deposited solid
waste is traced is presumed to have illegally disposed of or caused the illegal
disposal of the solid waste. If a vehicle is used to illegally dispose of solid
waste, the owner of the vehicle is presumed to have illegally disposed of or
authorized the illegal disposal of the solid waste. Proof of ownership of a
vehicle may be made by a computer- generated record of the registration of the
vehicle with the Texas Department of Public Safety showing the name of the
person to whom state license plates were issued. This proof is prima facie
evidence of the ownership of the vehicle by the person to whom the certificate
of registration was issued.
      (2)   The director of sanitation shall be responsible for determining
disposal procedures, authorized users, and methods of operation at municipal
transfer stations and landfill sites inside the city.
      (3)   The director of sanitation shall have authority to approve the
establishment and make inspections of non-municipal landfill sites inside the
city to ensure compliance with federal, state, and local law regulating the
establishment and operation of landfill sites.
      (4)   The director of sanitation shall have authority to regulate traffic
at the city’s transfer stations and landfill sites. Designated employees of the
department of sanitation services shall direct traffic by voice, hand, or
signal at the transfer stations and landfill sites. A person commits an offense
if he fails or refuses to comply with a traffic directive of a designated
employee of the department of sanitation services. A designated employee of the
department of sanitation services may cause the removal from a transfer station
or landfill site of any person or vehicle in violation of this paragraph.
   (b)   Processing and disposal of solid waste materials by private persons,
firms, or corporations will be permitted only after application has been made
to, and approved by, the director of sanitation as complying with all
applicable city, county, state, and federal regulations pertaining to solid
waste processing and disposal operations, and all fees required by this article
have been paid.
      (1)   The director of sanitation shall have authority to curtail,
temporarily suspend, or permanently halt any solid waste processing or disposal
operation being conducted by any private person, firm, or corporation that does
not conform to the requirements of city, county, state, or federal regulations
pertaining to solid waste processing and disposal operations or that in any
manner jeopardizes the public health, safety, and welfare. The director of
sanitation shall have authority to maintain curtailment or suspension
restrictions until, in the director’s judgment, adequate measures have been
taken to assure that removal of the restrictions will not jeopardize the public
health, safety, or welfare.
      (2)   The director of sanitation shall have authority to cause to be
rejected for processing or disposal any material that, in the director’s
judgment, would create a nuisance by reason of emission or disagreeable odors
or would operate to make the processing or disposal facilities unwholesome or
adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (c)   Processing and disposal of solid waste materials by the city.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if he takes, removes, or carries away
from any processing or disposal facility operated by the city any garbage,
trash, or other solid waste material, article, thing, or object situated on the
facility, whether or not the thing has monetary value, without prior written
permission and approval of the director of sanitation. In prosecutions for this
offense, it is not necessary to describe the thing taken, removed, or carried
away other than as generally described in this subsection or as “article,”
“thing,” or “item,” and it is not necessary to allege that the thing had
“value.”
      (2)   The director of sanitation shall have authority to designate those
processing or disposal sites operated by the city that will be open to public
access and those that will not be open to public access. (Ord. Nos. 16367;
20599; 24743)
SEC. 18-11.   SPECIFYING CHARGES FOR DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE MATERIALS.
   (a)   The following disposal service charges are established for disposing
of municipal solid waste at the Northwest (Bachman) Transfer Station:
      (1)   Earth, rocks, and inert material will not be accepted at the
station.
      (2)   Passenger cars, station wagons, pickups, and trailers less than 15
feet long that are used by Dallas city residents to haul their own waste from
their residences to the station - no charge. (A current, valid Texas driver's
license showing a Dallas address or a current Dallas water utilities bill is
required as proof of residency.)
      (3)   Trucks or trailers with a cargo bed length of 25 feet or greater or
truck-tractors with semi-trailers are prohibited from using the Northwest
(Bachman) transfer station, unless specifically permitted in writing by the
director of sanitation.
      (4)   Roll-off containers, whether open top or compactor, and compactor
trucks or other trucks carrying compacted or baled refuse are prohibited from
using the Northwest (Bachman) transfer station, unless specifically permitted
in writing by the director of sanitation.
      (5)   The charge for all materials accepted at the transfer station is
$71.28 per ton based on the transfer station weighing system, with a minimum
charge of $71.28 for any load that is less than one ton. Each ton shall be
assessed an additional $2.00 per ton customer processing fee for each
individual load paid and processed by a cashier upon entering the transfer
station.
      (6)   Whenever the transfer station weighing system is inoperable during
a delivery of solid waste the tonnage will be estimated by the city on the
basis of the full capacity of the vehicle delivering the solid waste.
      (7)   Effective January 1, 2023, an environmental fee will be applied to
all commercial disposal customers at $2.00 per ton with a minimum charge of
$2.00 for any load that is less than one ton.
   (b)   The following disposal service charges are established for disposing
of municipal solid waste at city landfill sites:
      (1)   Passenger cars, station wagons, pickups, and trailers less than 15
feet long that are used by Dallas city residents to haul their own waste from
their residences to a city landfill site - no charge. (A current, valid Texas
driver's license showing a Dallas address or a current Dallas water utilities
bill is required as proof of residency.)
      (2)   Except as provided in Subsection (b)(3), the charge for all
materials accepted at a city landfill site is $43.60 per ton based on the
landfill weighing system, with a minimum charge of $43.60 for any load that is
less than one ton. Each ton shall be assessed an additional $2.00 per ton
customer processing fee for each individual load paid and processed by a
cashier upon entering the landfill..
      (3)   Soils accepted at the city landfill that can be reused for landfill
cover or other beneficial reuse projects will be charged $3.00 per ton based on
the landfill weighing system, with a minimum charge of $3.00 for any load that
is less than one ton. Each ton of soil shall be assessed an additional $2.00
per ton customer processing fee for each individual load paid and processed by
a cashier upon entering the landfill. Prior to arrival at the landfill, soil
must be pre-approved through the special waste application process.
      (4)   Whenever the landfill weighing system is inoperable during a
delivery of solid waste or soil the tonnage will be estimated by the city on
the basis of the full capacity of the vehicle delivering the solid waste or
soil.
      (5)   A fee of $54.00 per load will be charged for the use of city
equipment, when available, to off-load bundled waste by pulling it with cables,
chains, or other devices. City equipment will be used at the customer's own
risk, with the city assuming no liability for any resulting damage. Non-city
vehicles are prohibited from pulling loads off of other vehicles at a city
landfill site.
      (6)   The fee for use of the city's mechanical tipper to off-load tractor
trailer loads is $100.00 per use.
      (7)   Collection vehicles not constructed with an enclosed transport body
must use nets, tarpaulins, or other devices to prevent accidental spillage. A
cover fee of $40 will be charged for any collection vehicle (other than a
pickup truck) that enters the landfill without being so equipped.
      (8)   Tires exceeding 25 inches in diameter will not be accepted at a
city landfill site.
      (9)   Effective January 1, 2023, an environmental fee will be applied to
all commercial disposal customers at $2.00 per ton with a minimum charge of
$2.00 for any load that is less than one ton.
      (10)   Customers entering the landfill without a high-visibility safety
vest will be required to purchase one onsite for $3.00.
   (c)   The director of sanitation may enter into a disposal service contract
with a solid waste collection service (as defined in Section 18-29 of this
chapter) to provide for volume delivery of solid waste to the landfill on an
annual basis for a discounted disposal service charge, subject to the following
rules and conditions:
      (1)   The disposal service contract must be in writing, on a form
approved by the director of sanitation and the city attorney's office. The term
of the contract may not be longer than five years. The contract must be
authorized by administrative action and must be signed by the city manager and
approved as to form by the city attorney.
      (2)   The disposal service contract must provide for a guaranteed annual
tonnage of solid waste of not less than 5,000 tons to be disposed of at the
landfill. If the landfill weighing system is inoperable during a delivery of
solid waste under the contract, the tonnage will be estimated by the city on
the basis of the full capacity of the vehicle delivering the solid waste in
accordance with Subsection (b)(4).
      (3)   The director of sanitation is not required to enter into a disposal
service contract under this subsection if the director determines that:
         (A)   the useful life of the landfill would be adversely affected; or
         (B)   it is not practical to enter into a proposed disposal service
contract for engineering, operational, or financial reasons.
      (4)   Payment of the disposal service charge under a disposal service
contract will be calculated in accordance with the terms of the contract and
this subsection. The initial disposal service charge for each solid waste
disposal contract entered into pursuant to this subsection will be the disposal
service charge in effect under Subsection (b)(2) on the date the contract is
executed. On October 1 of each calendar year, the disposal service charge may
be increased by the percent change, if any, between the June consumer price
index for the current calendar year and the June consumer price index for the
prior calendar year, except that the annual increase in the disposal service
charge may not exceed six percent during any calendar year. The percent change
will be determined by the director using The Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers (CPI-U) for the South Region for All Items, 1982- 84=100, published
by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. This
Consumer Price Index adjustment to the disposal service charge will only be
applied if there is an equal or greater percentage increase in the disposal
service charge in effect under Subsection (b)(2) for the next fiscal year. The
contractor must pay the disposal service charge on a monthly basis. At the end
of each contract year, the director of sanitation shall perform a
reconciliation to determine the actual tonnage of solid waste disposed of at
the landfill under the contract in that contract year and to make any
adjustments to the amounts finally owed by the contractor.
      (5)   In consideration of the agreement of a solid waste collection
service to guarantee the disposal of an annual tonnage of solid waste at the
landfill pursuant to a disposal service contract, consistent with market rates,
the director of sanitation may provide a discount from the disposal service
charge required under Subsection (c)(4) of this section.
      (6)   If the contractor fails to dispose of the annual tonnage of solid
waste at the landfill as guaranteed under the contract, the contractor must
still pay the discounted disposal service charge for the entire annual tonnage
guaranteed.
      (7)   If the director of sanitation determines that the contractor has
disposed of an amount of solid waste at the landfill that exceeds the annual
tonnage guaranteed under the contract, the director shall charge a disposal
service charge for that excess tonnage of solid waste using the same percentage
of discount applied to the guaranteed annual tonnage under the contract.
      (8)   Whenever the contractor delivers a load of solid waste to the
landfill that is less than one ton, the contractor will be charged the
discounted disposal service charge for one ton of solid waste.
   (d)   Disposal service charges are payable by any of the following methods:
      (1)   cash at the disposal site;
      (2)   credit or debit cards, under conditions established by the city; or
      (3)   monthly billing for commercial haulers upon approval of the
director of sanitation and under such conditions as may be established by the
director of sanitation and approved by the city attorney.
   (e)   A person engaged in a special residential cleanup effort may apply to
the director of sanitation for a waiver of the disposal service charge. The
director of sanitation may approve the application and waive the disposal
service charge if the director finds that the cleanup effort is being conducted
within a residential area of the city and not for profit.
   (f)   A person who refuses to pay a disposal service charge required by this
section or who breaches a term or condition of a disposal service contract
entered into under Subsection (c) may not deposit any waste at a city transfer
station or landfill site. (Ord. Nos. 16367; 16697; 17133; 18876; 19300; 20448;
20838; 21058; 21431; 21819; 22206; 22565; 24743; 25754; 26960; 27092; 27203;
27353; 27934; 28019; 29039; 29477; 30215; 30993; 31332; 31396, 31657; 32003;
32310; 32556; 32863; 33232)
SEC. 18-12.   REGULATING THE COLLECTION AND REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY DUMPED SOLID
WASTE MATERIALS ON PRIVATE PREMISES.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this section or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (2)   PREMISES means the lot, plot, or parcel of land, plus the front or
side parkway between the property line or sidewalk and the curb or traveled
way, and the rear or side parkway between the property line and the center line
of an adjacent alley.
   (b)   An owner, occupant, or person in control of private premises commits
an offense if he places, deposits, or throws; permits to accumulate; or permits
or causes to be placed, deposited, or thrown, solid waste material on those
premises in a manner or location that is in violation of this article.
   (c)   City authorized to collect and remove solid waste materials. Upon the
failure of the owner, occupant, or person in control of private premises to
comply with Subsection (b) of this section, or upon the written request and
authorization of the owner after notification under Subsection (d) of this
section, or upon a determination by the city health officer that the conditions
constitute an immediate health hazard, the director shall have the solid waste
materials collected and removed from the premises.
   (d)   Notice to remove.
      (1)   Before removing illegally-deposited solid waste material from
private premises, the director must notify the owner of the premises to remove
the solid waste material within seven days. This notice must be in writing and
may be served by handing it to the owner in person or by sending it United
States regular mail, addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as recorded
in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the
premises are located.
      (2)   If personal service to the owner cannot be obtained, then the owner
may be notified by:
         (A)   publication at least once in the official newspaper adopted by
the city council;
         (B)   posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on
the premises to which the violation relates; or
         (C)   posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into
the ground on the premises to which the violation relates.
      (3)   If the director mails a notice to a property owner in accordance
with Subsection (d)(1) and the United States Postal Service returns the notice
as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and
the notice is considered as delivered.
      (4)   In a notice provided under this section, the director may, by
regular mail and by a posting on the property, inform the owner of the property
on which the violation exists that, if the owner commits another violation of
the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on
or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may,
without further notice, correct the violation at the owner’s expense and then
assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice
under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not
been informed in writing by the owner of a change in ownership of the property,
then the city may, without notice, take any action permitted by Subsection (c)
of this section and assess its expenses as provided in Subsection (e) of this
section.
      (3)   Notice under this subsection is not necessary when the solid waste
material is determined by the director to be an immediate health hazard.
   (e)   Charge to be levied and collected by the city for solid waste material
collection and removal. If the city collects and removes solid waste materials
from private premises at the request of the owner or upon failure of the owner
to comply with the notice required under Subsection (d) of this section,
charges in the amount of the total actual costs incurred by the city in
performing the work will be collected from the owner or levied, assessed, and
collected against the premises on which the work is performed. The charges will
be collected by the city controller. The city controller shall file a statement
by the director with the county clerk of the county in which the property is
located setting out the total actual costs incurred by the city, the name of
the property owner if known, and a legal description of the property, as
required by state law. At the time the statement is filed, the city shall have
a privileged lien on the premises involved, second only to tax liens and liens
for street improvements, in the amount of the actual costs incurred, plus 10
percent interest on that amount from the date the costs were incurred. The city
may file a suit in an appropriate court of law to foreclose upon its lien and
recover its actual costs incurred plus interest. The suit must be filed in the
name of the city. The statement filed under this subsection, or a certified
copy of the statement, is prima facie proof of the amount of actual costs
incurred by the city.
   (f)   The director may issue citations and prosecute persons for violating
Subsection (b) regardless of whether a notice is issued under this section.
(Ord. Nos. 16367; 17226; 19963; 20599; 21025; 22026; 22334; 22494; 25371;
27697)
SEC. 18-12.1.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to
perform a duty required of him by this article, commits an offense. A person is
guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the
violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
   (b)   Except as provided in Subsection (c), an offense under this article is
punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 or less than:
      (1)   $50 for a first conviction of any violation of this article except
Section
18-4(e)(1),
18-5(c),
18-8(b)(1),
18-12(b), or
18-10;
      (2)   $150 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
18-4(e)(1);
      (3)   $100 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
18-5(c),
18-8(b)(1), or
18-12(b); and
      (4)   $200 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
18-10.
   (c)   An offense under section
18-4(c)(1) is punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or less than $50. An
offense under Section
18-4(e)(2) is punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or less than $150. An
offense under Section
18-5.1(a)(1) is punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or less than $150.
Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense and will be subject to
the fines established in this section.
   (d)   The minimum fines established in Subsections (b) and (c) shall be
doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month
period and trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense
within any 24-month period. At no time shall the minimum fine exceed the
maximum fine established in Subsection (b) or (c), whichever applies.
   (e)   Except where otherwise specified in this code, a culpable mental state
is not required for the commission of an offense under this article.
   (f)   As an alternative to imposing the criminal penalty prescribed in
Subsection (b) or (c), the city may impose administrative penalties, fees, and
court costs in accordance with
Article IV-b of
Chapter 27 of this code, as authorized by Section 54.044 of the Texas Local
Government Code, for an offense under this article. The alternative
administrative penalty range for an offense is the same as is prescribed for a
criminal offense in Subsection (b) or (c), whichever applies. (Ord. Nos. 20599;
22334; 25927; 26274; 30879, eff. 1-1-19)
ARTICLE II.
WEEDS, GRASS, AND VEGETATION.
SEC. 18-13.   GROWTH TO CERTAIN HEIGHT PROHIBITED; OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he is an owner, occupant, or person in
control of occupied or unoccupied premises in the city and:
      (1)   permits weeds or grass located on the premises to grow to a height
greater than 12 inches; or
      (2)   fails to remove weeds or grass from the premises after they have
been cut.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under:
      (1)   Subsection (a)(1) that the weeds and grass are maintained at or
below a height of 12 inches at all points on the premises within 100 feet of
its perimeters; and
      (2)   Subsection (a)(2) that the weeds and grass have been mulched,
raked, or composted in a manner approved by the director.
   (c)   For purposes of this article, PREMISES means the lot, plot, or parcel
of land, plus the front or side parkway between the property line or sidewalk
and the curb or traveled way, and the rear or side parkway between the property
line and the center line of an adjacent alley. (Ord. Nos. 13796; 17597; 17985;
20599; 21632; 26585)
SEC. 18-14.   DUTY TO PREVENT WEEDS, GRASS, OR VEGETATION FROM BECOMING A
NUISANCE OR FIRE HAZARD.
   Every owner, occupant, or person in control of any occupied or unoccupied
premises in the city shall use every precaution to prevent weeds, grass, or
other vegetation from growing on the premises so as to become a nuisance or
fire hazard. (Ord. Nos. 13796; 17597; 20599; 22413; 26585)
SEC. 18-14.1.   VEGETATION IN ALLEY, STREET, OR SIDEWALK.
   (a)   An owner, occupant, or person in control of any private premises
abutting an alley, street, or sidewalk within the city commits an offense if he
allows any vegetation, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, bushes,
and vines, to grow on the premises so as to project across the property line
over or into the right-of-way of the alley, street, or sidewalk.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   the vegetation consisted solely of weeds or grass not more than 12
inches high;
      (2)   no part of the vegetation projected over or into the alley or
street at a height of less than 15 feet above the ground; or
      (3)   no part of the vegetation projected over or into the sidewalk at a
height of less than eight feet above the ground, except that this defense does
not apply if the vegetation obstructed the visibility of a traffic control
sign, signal, or device or interfered with garbage or trash collection adjacent
to the sidewalk.
   (c)   Vegetation growing in violation of this section is a nuisance and may
be abated by the city in accordance with Section
18-17 of this article. (Ord. Nos. 20599; 22413; 25979; 26585)
SEC. 18-15.   ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   For the purposes of this article, DIRECTOR means the director of the
department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this
article or the director’s authorized representative.
   (b)   The director shall enforce the provisions of this article; provided,
that where a fire hazard exists, the provisions of Sections
18-13,
18-14, and
18-14.1 must be enforced by the fire marshal. (Ord. Nos. 13796; 17226; 20599;
26585)
SEC. 18-16.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to
perform a duty required of him under this article, commits an offense. A person
is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which a
violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
   (b)   An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,000 and, upon a first conviction, not less than $50.
   (c)   The minimum fine established in Subsection (b) will be doubled for the
second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and trebled
for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any 24-
month period. At no time may the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine
established in Subsection (b).
   (d)   As an alternative to imposing the criminal penalty prescribed in
Subsection (b), the city may impose administrative penalties, fees, and court
costs in accordance with
Article IV-b of
Chapter 27 of this code, as authorized by Section 54.044 of the Texas Local
Government Code, for an offense under this article. The alternative
administrative penalty range for an offense is the same as is prescribed for a
criminal offense in Subsection (b).
   (e)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this article is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 20599; 25927; 26585)
SEC. 18-17.   CITY REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND VEGETATION UPON FAILURE OF OWNER,
OCCUPANT, OR PERSON IN CONTROL TO DO SO; NOTICE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Upon the failure of the owner, occupant, or person in control of
private premises to comply with Section
18-13 of this article, the director shall have the weeds or grass cut, mulched
or raked, and removed from the premises.
   (b)   Upon the failure of the owner, occupant, or person in control of
private premises abutting an alley, street, or sidewalk within the city to
comply with Section
18-14.1 of this article, the director shall have the noncomplying vegetation
cut or trimmed, and removed from the alley, street, or sidewalk, whichever
applies.
   (c)   Before performing work, or causing work to be performed, under
Subsection (a) or (b), the director must notify the owner of the premises to
bring the premises into compliance within seven days. The notice must be in
writing and may be served by handing it to the owner in person or by sending it
United States regular mail, addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as
recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which
the premises are located.
   (d)   If personal service to the owner cannot be obtained, then the owner
may be notified by:
      (1)   publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city;
      (2)   posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on
the premises to which the violation relates; or
      (3)   posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the
ground on the premises to which the violation relates.
   (e)   If the director mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with
Subsection (c) and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as
“refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the
notice is considered as delivered.
   (f)   In a notice provided under this section, the director may, by regular
mail and by a posting on the property, inform the owner of the property on
which the violation exists that, if the owner commits another violation of the
same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or
before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may, without
further notice, correct the violation at the owner’s expense and then, in the
case of a violation of Section
18-13, assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a
notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city
has not been informed in writing by the owner of a change in ownership of the
property, then the city may, without notice, take any action permitted by
Subsection (a) or (b) and assess its expenses as provided in Section
18-18.
   (g)   The director may issue citations and prosecute persons for violating
Section
18-13 or
18-14.1 regardless of whether a notice is issued under this section. (Ord. Nos.
13796; 17226; 17597; 20599; 21025; 22494; 25371; 26585)
SEC. 18-18.   CHARGES TO BE COLLECTED FROM THE PROPERTY OWNER; LIEN ON PREMISES
FOR FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES.
   (a)   If the city cuts, mulches, rakes, or removes weeds or grass on or from
private premises under Section
18-17(a) or cuts, trims, or removes vegetation projecting over or into an
alley, street, or sidewalk right-of-way under Section
18-17(b) (either at the request of the owner or upon the failure of the owner
to comply with the notice required under Section
18-17), charges in the amount of the total actual costs incurred by the city in
performing the work will be collected from the owner by the city controller. If
the work was performed under Section
18-17(a), the charges may be levied, assessed, and collected against the
premises on which the work is performed, and the city controller shall file a
statement by the director with the county clerk of the county in which the
property is located setting out the total actual costs incurred by the city,
the name of the property owner if known, and a legal description of the
property, as required by state law.
   (b)   At the time a statement is filed under Subsection (a) for work
performed under Section
18-17(a), as required by state law, the city shall have a privileged lien
against the premises, second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements, in the amount of the actual costs incurred, plus 10 percent
interest on that amount from the date the costs were incurred.
   (c)   The city may file a suit in an appropriate court of law to foreclose
upon its lien and recover its actual costs incurred plus interest. The suit
must be filed in the name of the city. The statement filed under Subsection
(a), or a certified copy of the statement, is prima facie proof of the amount
of actual costs incurred by the city. (Ord. Nos. 13796; 15900; 16367; 17226;
17597; 20599; 22026; 22494; 25371; 26585)
ARTICLE III.
JUNKED VEHICLES.
SEC. 18-19.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   ANTIQUE VEHICLE means any passenger car or truck that:
         (A)   was manufactured in 1925 or before; or
         (B)   is at least 35 years old.
      (2)   COLLECTOR means the owner of one or more antique or special
interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of
special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order
to restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for
historic interest.
      (3)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (4)   INOPERATIVE or INOPERABLE means incapable of being propelled on its
own power due to dismantling, disrepair, or some other cause.
      (5)   JUNKED VEHICLE means any motor vehicle, as defined in Section 5.01
of Article 4477-9a, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, as amended, that:
         (A)   is inoperative; and
         (B)   does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license
plate or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate; is wrecked,
dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded; or remains inoperable for a
continuous period of more than 45 days.
      (6)   SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE means a motor vehicle of any age that has
not been altered or modified from original manufacturer’s specifications and,
because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. (Ord. Nos.
13900; 14494; 15720; 17226; 20599)
SEC. 18-20.   DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE; DECLARED UNLAWFUL.
   (a)   The presence of any junked vehicle on any private lot, tract, or
parcel of land, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, or on any
public right-of-way or other public property, within the city, is a public
nuisance.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he causes or maintains such a public
nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable,
abandoning, or discarding a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or other
public property or on the real property of another or permits a junked vehicle
to be parked, left, or maintained on personal real property.
   (c)   If the director reasonably believes that a vehicle is inoperable, the
director may request the owner or person claiming control of the vehicle to
demonstrate that it is operable. (Ord. Nos. 13900; 14494; 15720; 20599)
SEC. 18-21.   EXCEPTIONS.
   This article does not apply to:
      (1)   a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property;
      (2)   a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of the business enterprise;
      (3)   a vehicle or vehicle part in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained at a location officially designated and in a manner
approved by the city;
      (4)   an unlicensed, operable, or inoperable antique or special interest
vehicle stored by a collector on the collector’s property, if the vehicle and
the outdoor storage area are maintained in such a manner that they do not
constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means
of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means;
      (5)   a motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or
constructed for racing or operation on privately-owned drag strips or raceways;
or
      (6)   a motor vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed
forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment. (Ord. Nos. 13900;
14494; 15720; 20599; 22413)
SEC. 18-22.   NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE.
   (a)   Whenever a public nuisance exists on public property, on occupied
premises, or on the public right-of-way adjacent to occupied premises within
the city in violation of Section
18-20, the director shall order the owner, if the owner is in possession of the
premises, or the occupant of the premises, to abate or remove the nuisance.
   (b)   Whenever a public nuisance exists on unoccupied premises or on the
public right-of-way adjacent to unoccupied premises within the city in
violation of Section
18-20, and the owner of the premises can be found, the director shall order the
owner of the premises to abate or remove the nuisance.
   (c)   An order issued under Subsection (a) or (b) shall be served upon the
last known registered owner of the junked vehicle and any lienholder of record
and to the owner or, if the premises are occupied, the occupant of the premises
on which the public nuisance exists or the premises adjacent to the public
right-of- way on which the public nuisance exists by sending the order by
certified mail, five-day return receipt requested, to their addresses as shown
on the current city tax rolls or as last recorded with the United States Post
Office. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the
junked vehicle is unknown, the order to that person may be placed on the junked
vehicle, or, if that person is physically located, the order may be hand
delivered. The order shall:
      (1)   be in writing;
      (2)   specify the public nuisance and its location;
      (3)   specify the corrective measures required;
      (4)   provide for compliance within 10 days after service of notice; and
      (5)   state that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration
of the 10-day period for compliance.
   (d)   If the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, any
lienholder of record, and the owner or, if the premises are occupied, the
occupant of the premises all fail or refuse to comply with the order of the
director within the 10-day period after service of notice, the director may
take possession of the junked vehicle and remove it from the premises. After
removing a junked vehicle, the director shall dispose of the vehicle in such
manner as the city council may provide that is consistent with state law, and
the vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable.
   (e)   The owner or occupant of the premises may, within the 10-day period
after service of notice to abate the nuisance, request the clerk of the
municipal court of the city, either in person or in writing and without the
requirement of bond, to set a date and time to appear before the judge of the
municipal court for a trial to determine whether the person is in violation of
this article. The trial shall be set as provided in Section
18-24. If a hearing is requested within 10 days after service of notice to
abate the nuisance, then the director shall not order the removal of the junked
vehicle until ordered to do so by the judge of the municipal court.
   (f)   If the owner or, if the premises are occupied, the occupant of the
premises fails to either remove and abate the nuisance or to request a hearing
within 10 days after service of notice to abate the nuisance, then the director
may cause both the removal of the junked vehicle and the filing in municipal
court of a complaint for the violation of maintaining a public nuisance. (Ord.
Nos. 13900; 14494; 15720; 16367; 20599; 21025)
SEC. 18-23.   MOTOR VEHICLE DESCRIPTION.
   Any order requiring the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part must include a
description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license
number of the vehicle, if available at the site. (Ord. Nos. 15720; 20599)
SEC. 18-24.   TRIAL IN MUNICIPAL COURT - PRELIMINARIES.
   Upon receiving a request for trial made pursuant to Section
18-22, the clerk of the municipal court shall set a date and a time for trial
on the court docket. The clerk of the municipal court shall notify the city
attorney of the date and time of the hearing. The city attorney shall cause to
be prepared, filed, and served on the defendant a written complaint charging
that the owner or occupant of the premises, as the case may be, has violated
this article. After service, the complaint shall be on file with the clerk of
the municipal court not less than 10 days prior to the date of trial. (Ord.
Nos. 13900; 20599)
SEC. 18-25.   FINDINGS OF JUDGE; PENALTY.
   (a)   The judge of the municipal court shall hear any case brought before
the court pursuant to this article and shall determine whether the defendant
is, in fact, in violation of this article. At the trial it is presumed, unless
demonstrated otherwise by the defendant, that the vehicle that is the subject
of the complaint is inoperable.
   (b)   Upon a finding that the defendant is in violation of this article, the
defendant is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $200.
The judge of the court shall further order the defendant to remove and abate
the nuisance within 10 days.
   (c)   If the defendant fails or refuses, within 10 days, to abate or remove
the nuisance, the judge of the municipal court may issue an order to the
director to have the nuisance removed, and the director shall take possession
of the junked vehicle and remove it from the premises. The director shall then
dispose of the vehicle in such manner as the city council may provide that is
consistent with state law, and the vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made
operable. (Ord. Nos. 13900; 19963; 20599; 21025)
SEC. 18-26.   REMOVAL WITH PERMISSION OF OWNER.
   If, within 10 days after receipt of notice from the director to abate the
nuisance, the owner or occupant of the premises gives written permission to the
director for removal of the junked vehicle, the giving of the permission shall
be considered compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. Nos. 13900;
20599)
SEC. 18-27.   REMOVAL FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY OR OCCUPIED OR UNOCCUPIED PREMISES
BY COURT ORDER.
   (a)   If there is a junked vehicle on public property, on private premises
that are occupied or unoccupied, or on the public right-of-way adjacent to
occupied or unoccupied premises and the owner or occupant of the premises, or
the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, or any lienholder of
record cannot be found and notified to remove the vehicle, then, upon a showing
of the facts to the judge of the municipal court, the court may issue an order
to the director to have the vehicle removed, and the director shall take
possession of the junked vehicle and remove it.
   (b)   If the notice required in Section
18-22 is returned undelivered by the United States post office, then after 10
days from the date of the return, the court may issue an order to the director
to have the junked vehicle removed, and the director shall take possession of
the vehicle and remove it.
   (c)   The director shall, after removing the vehicle in compliance with a
court order issued pursuant to Subsection (a) or (b), dispose of the junked
vehicle in the manner provided by the city council that is consistent with
state law, and the vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord.
Nos. 13900; 14494; 20599)
SEC. 18-28.   NOTICE TO TEXAS DEPARTMENT OF HIGHWAYS AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION.
   Notice shall be given to the Texas Department of Highways and Public
Transportation within five days after the date of removal of any junked vehicle
as provided in this article, identifying the vehicle or vehicle part. (Ord.
Nos. 13900; 20599)
SEC. 18-28.1.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to
perform a duty required of him under this article, commits an offense. A person
is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which a
violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
   (b)   An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than
$200.
   (c)   As an alternative to imposing the criminal penalty prescribed in
Subsection (b), the city may impose administrative penalties, fees, and court
costs in accordance with Article IV-b of Chapter 27 of this code, as authorized
by Section 683.0765 of the Texas Transportation Code, for an offense under this
article. The alternative administrative penalty range for an offense is the
same as is prescribed for a criminal offense in Subsection (b). (Ord. 25927)
ARTICLE IV.
PRIVATE SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE.
Division 1. In General.
SEC. 18-29.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   COLLECTION BIN means one or more container, roll-off box, debris
box, dumpster, or other free standing waste container for the deposit and
collection of municipal solid waste or recyclable material.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (3)   FRANCHISEE means a person who has been granted a franchise under
this article and
Chapter XIV of the city charter to operate a solid waste collection service in
the city.
      (4)   GROSS RECEIPTS means any revenue directly or indirectly received or
generated from or in connection with any solid waste collection service
provided within the city, excluding the following amounts:
         (A)   disposal fees paid to the city by a franchisee;
         (B)   annual bad debt write-off amounts on uncollectible accounts for
solid waste collection service, provided that the write-off allowed is verified
by adequate supporting documentation and does not reduce the annual gross
receipts by more than three percent;
         (C)   revenues received or generated for any solid waste collection
service provided on behalf of the city by the franchisee pursuant to a written
contract with the city; and
         (D)   revenues directly received or generated from the collection or
processing of recyclable materials.
      (5)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, firm, government or
governmental subdivision, partnership, joint venture, limited liability
company, or other business entity.
      (6)   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE means the business of:
         (A)   removing municipal solid waste from any premises; or
         (B)   transporting, processing, or disposing of municipal solid waste.
(Ord. Nos. 17226; 21058; 26480; 26608; 33031)
SEC. 18-30.   AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The director shall implement and enforce this article and may by
written order promulgate such rules or regulations, not inconsistent with this
article or state or federal law, as the director determines are necessary to
discharge any duty under or to effect the policy of this article.
   (b)   The director shall have authority to impound any vehicle or collection
bin:
      (1)   when it or its contents have become foul, offensive, or otherwise
hazardous to the public health or safety; or
      (2)   that is being used for the collection of solid waste material in
violation of this article.
   (c)   A vehicle, dumpster, or roll-off container impounded under Subsection
(b) may not be moved without the consent of the director and may not be
returned to service until the contents are disposed of and the vehicle,
dumpster, or roll-off container is cleaned and brought into compliance with
this article.
   (d)   An impoundment fee of $509.00 will be assessed for the removal and
transportation of a collection bin to a storage facility.
   (e)   A fee of $20.00 per day will be assessed for storage of an impounded
collection bin.
(Ord. Nos. 14219; 17226; 21058; 26480; 26608; 33031)
SEC. 18-31.   DEFENSES.
   It is a defense to prosecution under this article, except for Sections
18-30(b) and (c),
18-45,
18-47,
18-49,
18-50, and
18-51, that the solid waste collection service:
      (1)   was operated by, or on behalf of, a governmental entity;
      (2)   did not operate a vehicle, or cause or permit the operation of a
vehicle, more than twice during any calendar year to:
         (A)   remove municipal solid waste from any premises within the city;
or
         (B)   transport, process, or dispose of municipal solid waste within
the city; or
      (3)   was operating without an established route and without collection
bins or containers to remove, transport, process, or dispose of waste generated
solely and incidental to its own operations, using vehicles owned, rented, or
borrowed for self-hauling. Examples may include, but are not limited to,
residential junk removal services, lawn and tree maintenance services, roofing
and other minor construction and demolition services. (Ord. Nos. 21058; 21163;
26480; 26608; 33031)
Division 2. Solid Waste Collection Franchises.
SEC. 18-32.   FRANCHISE AND DECAL REQUIRED.
   A person commits an offense if, without a valid solid waste collection
franchise granted under this article and
Chapter XIV of the city charter, he:
      (1)   operates, or causes or permits the operation of, a solid waste
collection service; or
      (2)   operates, or causes or permits the operation of, a vehicle for the
purpose of providing solid waste collection service in the city. (Ord. Nos.
14219; 16367; 17226; 21058; 21163; 24743; 26480; 26608; 33031; 33224)
SEC. 18-33.   FRANCHISE APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a solid waste collection franchise, a person must submit an
application on a form provided for that purpose to the director. The applicant
must be the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed solid waste
collection service. The application must contain the following information:
      (1)   the applicant’s name, address, and signature;
      (2)   the form of business of the applicant, and, if the business is a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, or
unincorporated association, a copy of the documents establishing the business;
      (3)   a description of any past business experience of the applicant,
particularly in providing solid waste collection service, and an identification
and description of any revocation or suspension by the city, or by any other
governmental entity, of a solid waste collection license, franchise, or similar
authorization held by the applicant or business before the date of filing the
application;
      (4)   the number and description of vehicles the applicant proposes to
use in the operation of the solid waste collection service, including year,
make, model, motor identification number, and state license registration number
for each vehicle;
      (5)   a description of the proposed solid waste collection service;
      (6)   documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating a
willingness to provide liability insurance as required by the city in the
franchise ordinance;
      (7)   documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes owed on the
real and personal property to be used in connection with the operation of the
proposed solid waste collection service if the business establishment is
located in the city; and
      (8)   such additional information as the applicant desires to include to
aid in the determination of whether the requested franchise should be granted.
   (b)   The director is authorized to require any other information deemed
relevant and necessary, and make any additional investigation as is necessary
to verify the truth of the information contained in the application and to
determine if the applicant meets the requirements of this article and the
standard franchise ordinance required by the city. (Ord. Nos. 21058; 21163;
24743; 26480; 26608; 33031)
SEC. 18-34.   FRANCHISE GRANT.
   (a)   If the director determines from the application that the applicant
meets the requirements of this article and other applicable law to hold a
franchise for solid waste collection service, the director shall present the
application to the city council and make a recommendation regarding the
application. The city council may grant or deny the franchise. The city council
shall grant a franchise by ordinance. The grant of a franchise under this
article is nonexclusive.
   (b)   The terms and conditions of a franchise will be set forth in the
ordinance granting the franchise to the applicant. By accepting the franchise,
the applicant agrees to comply with all of those terms and conditions.
   (c)   The director may issue a temporary solid waste collection license to
allow a solid waste collection service to operate for up to 180 days, while the
solid waste collection service’s franchise application is pending review and
the city council’s consideration. A temporary solid waste collection license
expires at the earlier of 180 days or denial of a franchise by the city
council. The terms and conditions of a temporary solid waste collection license
must be substantially similar in form and content as a franchise ordinance. The
director may revoke a temporary solid waste collection license for any
violation of city ordinance or state or federal law, rule, or regulation,
applicable to the collection or disposal of solid waste material. (Ord. Nos.
26480; 26608; 33031)
SEC. 18-35.   FRANCHISE FEES.
   (a)   A franchisee shall pay a franchise fee set by the city council in the
franchise ordinance. The franchise fee may not be less than six percent of the
gross receipts resulting from the operation of the solid waste collection
service within the city.
   (b)   The franchise fee must be paid on a quarterly basis, within 45 days of
the close of the calendar quarter for which the quarterly payment is
calculated. The initial quarterly payment covers the period beginning as of the
effective date of the franchise. A payment received later than 10 days after
the due date accrues interest at the rate prescribed in Section
2-1.1 of this code.
   (c)   A franchise fee payment is nonrefundable. (Ord. Nos. 14219; 14566;
17226; 20076; 21058; 21819; 24743; 26134; 26480; 26608; 32863; 33031)
SEC. 18-36.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33031)
SEC. 18-37.   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE; ASSESSMENT OF CIVIL
PENALTIES.
   (a)   The director may suspend the operation of a solid waste collection
service doing business under a franchise granted under this article if:
      (1)   the franchisee fails or refuses to comply with any provision of the
franchise ordinance, this article, or any other city ordinance or state or
federal law applicable to the collection or disposal of solid waste material;
      (2)   the franchisee fails or refuses to make a franchise fee payment
required by this article or the franchise ordinance at the time it was due; or
      (3)   the solid waste collection operation creates a public nuisance or a
serious public health or safety hazard.
   (b)   The director shall provide at least 24 hours written notice to the
franchisee of any suspension and include in the notice the reason for the
suspension, the date the suspension takes effect, the duration of the
suspension, and a statement informing the franchisee of the right to appeal the
suspension. The suspension must be for a definite period of time not to exceed
60 days.
   (c)   A suspension by the director is final unless, within 20 days after the
receipt of written notice of the director’s action, the franchisee files a
written appeal with the city manager. The city manager shall, within 15 days
after the appeal is filed, consider all the evidence in support of and against
the action appealed and render a decision either sustaining, reversing, or
modifying the action. The decision of the city manager is final. The filing of
an appeal under this subsection stays an action of the director until a final
decision is made by the city manager, unless the director determines that
continued operation of the solid waste collection service constitutes an
imminent and serious threat to the public health and safety.
   (d)   In addition to terminating a solid waste collection franchise on the
grounds set forth in the franchise ordinance, the city council, on the
recommendation of the director, may revoke a franchise, assess a civil penalty,
or both, if the franchisee:
      (1)   fails or refuses to comply with any provision of the franchise
ordinance, this article, or any other city ordinance or state or federal law
applicable to the collection, transportation, processing, or disposal of solid
waste material;
      (2)   knowingly or intentionally made a false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material matter in the franchise application or in
the negotiations for the franchise; or
      (3)   fails or refuses to make a franchise fee payment required by this
article or the franchise ordinance at the time it was due.
   (e)   Before presenting a franchise revocation or civil penalty assessment
to the city council under Subsection (d), the director shall notify the
franchisee in writing of the proposed action. The notice must include:
      (1)   the reason for the proposed revocation or civil penalty assessment;
      (2)   action the franchisee must take to prevent the revocation or civil
penalty assessment;
      (3)   a statement that the franchisee has 10 days to take the action to
correct any violation or noncompliance; and
      (4)   a statement that the franchisee has a right to appear before the
city council and contest the proposed revocation or civil penalty assessment.
   (f)   If, within 10 days after receipt of the notice required in Subsection
(e), the franchisee has not taken the action necessary to correct the violation
or noncompliance, the director shall present the franchise revocation, civil
penalty assessment, or both to the city council and make a recommendation
regarding the proposed action. The director shall notify the franchisee in
writing of the date the city council will consider the proposed action. The
city council may formally revoke the franchise, assess the recommended civil
penalty, impose any other penalty or action that the city council in its
discretion considers appropriate, or remand the matter to the director for
further review and recommendation. The action of the city council is final. The
director shall notify the franchisee in writing of the city council’s decision.
   (g)   Revocation of a solid waste collection franchise constitutes
termination of the franchise ordinance and all accompanying rights, privileges,
and permissions. Suspension or revocation of a solid waste collection franchise
does not waive the city’s right to collect civil penalties imposed under the
terms of the franchise ordinance prior to the suspension or revocation. (Ord.
Nos. 14219; 17226; 21058; 21163; 26480; 26608)
SEC. 18-38.   AMENDMENTS TO AND TRANSFER OF A FRANCHISE.
   (a)   A solid waste collection franchise may not be assigned, transferred,
mortgaged, or pledged without the approval of the city council upon
recommendation of the director. Minor amendments to a franchise, or approval of
additional vehicles or equipment for use in the solid waste collection service,
may be made by the director upon written request by a franchisee. The director
may make minor amendments to a franchise without written request of a
franchisee for matters of conformity with this chapter that do not adversely
affect the franchisee. An assignment, transfer, mortgage, or pledge of the
franchise, or an amendment that substantially changes the scope, terms, or
obligations of the franchise, must be applied for in the same manner as the
original franchise.
   (b)   Before any vehicle not listed in the application for a solid waste
collection franchise may be placed in service, the franchisee must notify the
director of the proposed use of a new or additional vehicle. (Ord. Nos. 21058;
21163; 24743; 26480; 26608; 33031)
SEC. 18-39.   EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE; VOIDANCE OF AUTHORITY TO
OPERATE VEHICLES.
   The city council shall designate the term of a solid waste collection
franchise in the franchise ordinance, which term may never exceed 40 years. The
franchisee may renew the franchise by making application in accordance with
Section
18-33. A franchisee shall apply for renewal at least 90 days before the
expiration of the franchise term. (Ord. Nos. 21058; 21163; 24743; 26480; 26608;
33031)
SEC. 18-40.   FRANCHISEE’S RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   Each franchisee shall maintain, at a single location in the Dallas-Fort
Worth metropolitan area, adequate financial records documenting all of its
solid waste collection service transactions within the city. The records must
be maintained in accordance with generally-accepted accounting and government-
auditing standards. The franchisee may be audited by the city as often as the
director deems necessary to ensure that accurate franchise fee payments are
received. A franchisee shall make its records available for inspection by the
director at reasonable times upon request. (Ord. Nos. 21058; 21163; 26480;
26608)
SEC. 18-41.   QUARTERLY REPORT.
   A franchisee shall file a quarterly report with the director containing the
following information for the preceding calendar quarter concerning solid
wastes and recyclable materials collected by the franchisee within the city:
      (1)   Total volume in tons of municipal solid waste collected by the
franchisee, with separate figures for total residential waste and total
commercial waste.
      (2)   Total volume in tons of recyclable materials collected and recycled
by the franchisee, with separate figures for total recycled residential waste
and total recycled commercial waste.
      (3)   A description and the total volume in tons of each type of material
recycled by the franchisee. (Ord. Nos. 21058; 21163; 26480; 26608; 33031)
SEC. 18-42.   FAILURE TO PAY AD VALOREM TAXES.
   A franchisee or an applicant for a solid waste collection franchise shall
not allow the payment of ad valorem taxes upon any vehicle, equipment, or other
real or personal property used directly or indirectly in connection with the
solid waste collection service to become delinquent. (Ord. Nos. 21058; 26480;
26608)
SEC. 18-43.   NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE OF ADDRESS OR OWNERSHIP.
   A franchisee shall notify the director within 10 days of a change in:
      (1)   the address or telephone number of the solid waste collection
service; or
      (2)   the form of the business or the executive officers of the solid
waste collection service. (Ord. Nos. 21058; 21163; 26480; 26608)
SEC. 18-44.   VEHICLE INSPECTION.
   A franchisee or an applicant for a solid waste collection franchise shall
allow for inspection of vehicles and equipment to evaluate compliance with this
chapter at such times as may be ordered by the director. (Ord. Nos. 21058;
26480; 26608; 33031)
Division 3. Miscellaneous Requirements relating to Solid Waste Collection,
Disposal, and Vehicles.
SEC. 18-45.   REQUIREMENTS FOR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLES AND COLLECTION
BINS.
   (a)   Any vehicle used for transporting municipal solid waste materials
other than wet solid waste within the city must:
      (1)   be fitted with a substantial, tight-fitting enclosure that is free
of any cracks or breaks and that has side boards and head boards of not less
than 24 inches in height and a tail board of not less than 18 inches in height,
to prevent waste material from being scattered or thrown onto the streets;
      (2)   be equipped with a closely fitting cover that must be used to
prevent the escape of loose material or effluvia; and
      (3)   comply with all applicable federal and state motor vehicle safety
standards.
   (b)   Any vehicle used for transporting wet solid waste material within the
city must:
      (1)   be fitted with a substantial, tight-fitting enclosure, with the
deck, sides, and ends of the bed constructed of sheet steel so that the vehicle
may be easily cleaned and with the sides not less than 24 inches high and the
tail board not less than 18 inches high;
      (2)   have a tight-fitting cover to prevent spillage;
      (3)   when carrying cans to transport wet solid waste material, use only
cans equipped with tight-fitting lids and holding chains so that the cans will
not turn over and spill;
      (4)   not have any drain holes in the sides of the vehicle and must have
any drain holes in the deck of the vehicle capped to prevent spillage or
leakage; and
      (5)   comply with all applicable federal and state motor vehicle safety
standards.
   (c)   Any vehicle used for transporting municipal solid waste and all
collection bins must be clearly marked in letters not less than four inches in
height with the name of the person who owns, controls, or operates the vehicle
or collection bin. (Ord. Nos. 14219; 21058; 26480; 26608; 33031)
SEC. 18-46.   RESPONSIBILITY OF PRODUCER OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.
   It is the responsibility of the producer of any municipal solid waste to
ensure that such waste material is disposed of in an approved manner at an
approved disposal site. It is the producer’s responsibility to inform the solid
waste collection service, in writing, of any waste that includes any material
that is hazardous by reason of its pathological, radiological, explosive,
toxic, or corrosive character. (Ord. Nos. 14219; 21058; 24743; 26480; 26608;
33031)
SEC. 18-47.   HAZARDOUS WASTE MATERIAL.
   A person providing solid waste collection service within the city shall
comply with all city ordinances and state and federal laws regulating the
handling, disposal, and transportation of hazardous waste materials. (Ord. Nos.
14219; 21058; 26480; 26608)
SEC. 18-48.   RESTRICTIONS ON REMOVAL OF SOLID WASTE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he removes from any collection bin or
container any municipal solid waste, or in any way obstructs or interferes with
any collection bin or container in the city.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section
that the person was:
      (1)   an employee of the city in the performance of official duties;
      (2)   a franchisee under this article performing solid waste collection
service in compliance with the terms of this article and the solid waste
collection franchise ordinance; or
      (3)   any owner or occupant of the premises on which the container or
receptacle is located. (Ord. Nos. 14219; 21058; 26480; 26608; 33031)
SEC. 18-49.   RESTRICTIONS ON DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
   A person engaged in the removal, handling, or transfer of municipal solid
waste or in any manner dealing with municipal solid waste commits an offense
if, either in person or by an agent, employee, or servant, he separates,
unloads, offers for sale or trade, or exchanges any part of the solid waste
materials within the city, except at a place designated by and in compliance
with this chapter and other applicable city ordinances. (Ord. Nos. 14219;
21058; 26480; 26608; 33031)
SEC. 18-50.   ACCUMULATIONS AND DEPOSIT OF WASTE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he deposits, causes to be deposited, or
permits to accumulate any municipal solid waste upon any public or private
premises within the city in such a manner as to emit noxious or offensive odors
or to become unsanitary or injurious to public health or safety.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he causes or permits any solid waste
collection vehicle, dumpster, or roll-off container or the contents of such
vehicle, dumpster, or roll-off container to be maintained in a condition that
is foul, offensive, or otherwise hazardous to the public health or safety.
(Ord. Nos. 14219; 21058; 26480; 26608; 33031)
Division 4. Violations and Penalties.
SEC. 18-51.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to
perform a duty required of him under this article, commits an offense. A person
is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which a
violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
   (b)   An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,000 and, upon a first conviction, not less than $100.
   (c)   The minimum fine established in Subsection (b) shall be doubled for
the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and
trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any
24-month period. At no time shall the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine
established in Subsection (b).
   (d)   In addition to being subject to criminal enforcement and penalties as
provided in Subsections (a) through (c) of this section, a franchisee that
violates or causes or permits the violation of any of the terms or conditions
of the franchise ordinance is liable for a civil penalty in the amount
prescribed by the city council in the franchise ordinance. A civil penalty
under the franchise ordinance may not exceed $2,000 for each violation. A
franchisee is liable for a separate violation for each day or part of a day
during which a violation is committed, continued, or permitted. (Ord. Nos.
20599; 21058; 26480; 26608)
ARTICLE IV-a.
MULTIFAMILY SITE RECYCLING COLLECTION AND REMOVAL SERVICES.
SEC. 18-52.   DIRECTOR OF SANITATION'S AUTHORITY.
   (a)   The director of sanitation shall implement and enforce this article
and may, by written order, promulgate rules or regulations consistent with this
article and other applicable laws, as the director of sanitation determines are
necessary to discharge any duty under this article or to achieve a purpose
outlined in the scope of this chapter.
   (b)   The city manager's designee, or that designee's authorized
representative may impound any vehicle or container used for the collection and
removal of recyclable materials if its contents become foul, offensive, or
otherwise hazardous to the public health or safety or if it is being used in
violation of this chapter. A vehicle or container impounded under this
subsection may not be moved without the consent of the city manager's designee,
or that designee's authorized representative and may not be returned to service
until the contents are properly disposed of and the vehicle or container is
cleaned and brought into compliance with this chapter. (Ord. No. 30879)
SEC. 18-53.   MULTIFAMILY SITE RECYCLING COLLECTION SERVICE.
   (a)   Multifamily site recycling collection service permit.
      (1)   Recycling collection service permit required. A person who is in
the business of collecting or removing recyclable materials from a multifamily
site shall obtain a multifamily site recycling collection service permit from
the city. A permit is not required for a business such as a building
contracting, home repair, landscaping, roofing, or other similar business that
incidentally collects or removes recyclable materials in performance of their
service.
      (2)   Permit application requirements. To obtain a multifamily site
recycling collection service permit, a person shall submit an application, on a
form or in a manner approved by the director of sanitation, and shall include
the following information:
         (A)   the person's name, address, and notarized signature;
         (B)   the person's form of business, and, if applicable, the documents
establishing the form of business, including a list of directors and officers
and their contact information;
         (C)   a description of any past business experience in providing
recycling collection and removal services as well as information related to
revocation or suspension by the city, or by any other governmental entity, of a
recycling permit, solid waste collection license, franchise, or similar
authorization held by the applicant;
         (D)   the number and description of vehicles to be used for recycling
collection and removal services, including year, make, model, vehicle
identification number, and state license registration number for each vehicle;
         (E)   documentary evidence from an insurance company that the person
or company has liability insurance and a commercial fleet policy;
         (F)   documentation that applicant is registered and authorized to do
business in the state of Texas;
         (G)   documentary evidence, if requested, of payment of ad valorem
taxes owed on the real and personal property to be used in connection with the
operation of the proposed recycling collection service if the business
establishment is located in the City of Dallas; and
         (H)   any other information that the director of sanitation deems
necessary and is reasonable in determining if the person is qualified to
provide recycling collection and removal services at a multifamily site in
compliance with this code.
      (3)   Fees and annual renewal. The fee for an initial multifamily site
recycling collection service permit is $275 and is non-refundable. The
recycling permit must be renewed every twelve months for a fee of $100 and is
non-refundable.
   (b)   Recycling containers. A multifamily site recycling collection service
business shall provide color coded recycling containers to its customers. The
recycling containers must display the following affixed signage:
      (1)   photo or images of recyclable materials accepted, minimum size of
18" x 12", must be on the front of the container, along with information or a
graphic indicating that cardboard boxes should be broken down and "No Plastic
Bags";
      (2)   the word "RECYCLING ONLY", with minimum letter size of 12 inches,
and chasing arrows symbol in prominent lettering and clearly labeled on the
front recycling container; and
      (3)   contact information to report overflowing recycling containers and
contamination.
   (c)   Recycling facilities. A multifamily site recycling collection service
business shall transport collected recyclable materials to a recycling facility
authorized to operate in the State of Texas.
   (d)   Reporting. A multifamily site recycling collection service business
shall submit an annual report to the director of sanitation by February 1 of
each year, beginning on February 1, 2021, on a form provided by the director of
sanitation, and shall include the following information:
         (A)   multifamily site recycling collection service business's contact
information;
         (B)   tonnage of recyclable materials collected from multifamily sites
in the city of Dallas in the prior calendar year. If collection routes require
commingling of material collected outside the city, tonnage should be reported
on a total basis and an appropriately prorated percentage to estimate Dallas
tons;
         (C)   for the prior fiscal year, on average, the total number of units
served and total weekly recycling capacity for multifamily sites in Dallas;
         (D)   name and location of materials recovery facilities or other
recycling processing facility utilized in the prior calendar year;
         (E)   load reject rate used in the prior calendar year, as reported by
materials recovery or recycling processing facilities;
         (F)   residue percentage rate used in the prior calendar year, as
reported by materials recovery facilities or recycling processing facilities;
         (G)   documentary evidence, if requested, of payment of ad valorem
taxes owed on the real and personal property to be used in connection with the
operation of the proposed multifamily site recycling collection service if the
business establishment is located within the city; and
         (H)   any other information that may be reasonably requested by the
director of sanitation regarding the recycling collection services.
   (e)   Customer education. A multifamily site recycling collection service
business shall educate and inform each customer upon contracting and annually
thereafter of the following:
      (1)   that the multifamily site recycling collection service business
provides recycling collection services in accordance with
Chapter 18 of the Dallas City Code;
      (2)   types and capacity of recycling containers that may be utilized;
      (3)   types of recyclable materials accepted to transport to a materials
recovery facility;
      (4)   disclosure of additional fees assessed to multifamily sites that
exceed the multifamily site recycling collection service business's allowable
contamination rate;
      (5)   instruction on reducing contamination of recyclable materials; and
      (6)   the multifamily site recycling collection service business's
information to request an audit of recyclables collected from a multifamily
site. (Ord. 30879, eff. 1-1-19)
SEC. 18-54.   INSPECTIONS, SUSPENSIONS, REVOCATIONS, AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   Inspections, suspensions, and revocations. A multifamily site
recycling collection service business's vehicles are subject to inspections in
a manner approved by the director of sanitation. If a multifamily site
recycling collection service business has three violations of this chapter,
then the director of sanitation may suspend or revoke the recycling permit
until such time that the director of sanitation determines the business is in
compliance with this chapter.
   (b)   Penalties. A person who violates a provision of this article, or who
fails to perform a duty required of him under this article, commits an offense.
A person is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during
which a violation is committed, continued, or permitted. An offense under this
article is punishable by a fine not more than $500 or less than $150. (Ord.
30879, eff. 1-1-19)
ARTICLE V.
TIRES.
SEC. 18-55.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article, and includes the
director's authorized representatives.
      (3)   MANIFEST means a tracking mechanism to monitor the transfer of
tires from the point of generation to their end-use or final destination, such
as a tire storage site, scrap tire facility, permitted landfill, or land
reclamation project using tires. The manifest is a five-part form whose format
and content is prescribed by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
      (4)   MOBILE TIRE REPAIR BUSINESS means a business that repairs tires at
any temporary location, including but not limited to a roadway, alley, parking
lot, or residence. The term does not include a business that only changes out
or replaces tires, but does not make any repairs to a tire.
      (5)   MOBILE TIRE REPAIR UNIT means any vehicle used in a mobile tire
repair business.
      (6)   SCRAP TIRE means a whole tire or any portion of a tire that:
         (A)   can no longer be used for its original intended purpose; or
         (B)   is being held, transported, or processed for disposal or
recycling.
      (7)   SCRAP TIRE GENERATOR means a fleet operator, an automotive
dismantler, or a retailer, wholesaler, manufacturer, recapper, or retreader of
new or used tires.
      (8)   SCRAP TIRE TRANSPORTER means any business or person who transports
more than six scrap tires at any one time or is loading or unloading scrap
tires to or from any location within the city.
      (9)   TIRE BUSINESS means any business or establishment where used tires
are collected, repaired, processed, recycled, scrapped, sold, bought, or
stored, including but not limited to a mobile tire repair business and a
salvage yard.
      (10)   TIRE RECYCLING FACILITY means a state-registered facility that
processes, recycles, or conducts energy recovery with scrap tires.
      (11)   VEHICLE means any motorized vehicle and any non-motorized trailer
that is or may be attached to a motorized vehicle. If a trailer is attached to
a motorized vehicle, both the trailer and the motorized vehicle will be
considered as one vehicle. (Ord. Nos. 25635; 32334)
SEC. 18-56.   TIRE BUSINESS LICENSE AND MOBILE TIRE REPAIR UNIT PERMIT
REQUIRED; APPLICATION; TRANSFERABILITY.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, within the city, he:
      (1)   owns or operates a tire business without a valid tire business
license issued under this article; or
      (2)   owns, operates, or permits the operation of a mobile tire repair
unit without displaying a valid mobile tire repair unit permit in a visible and
conspicuous location on the unit.
   (b)   To obtain a tire business license, a person must submit an application
on a form provided for that purpose to the director. The applicant must be the
person who will own, control, or operate the tire business. The application
must be signed and verified by the applicant and contain all of the following
information:
      (1)   The name, residential mailing address, county of residence, email
address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of each owner and operator of the
tire business.
      (2)   The physical address, email address, and telephone number of the
tire business.
      (3)   The approximate number of tires that will be stored on site at the
tire business.
      (4)   If the tire business is located in the city of Dallas, the zoning
district or districts where the business is located.
      (5)   The tax identification number or taxpayer identification number of
each owner and operator listed in the license application.
      (6)   A statement that the tire business is in compliance with the
requirements of Section 19-34.1 of this code.
      (7)   The number and description of vehicles the applicant proposes to
use as mobile tire repair units, including the year, make, model, color,
vehicle identification number, and state license registration number for each
vehicle, and proof that each vehicle is in compliance with state requirements
for vehicle registration, vehicle inspection, and vehicle financial
responsibility.
      (8)   The registration or license number of any Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality registration or license, if applicable.
   (c)   A separate tire business license is required for each separate
establishment operated as a tire business. A separate mobile tire repair unit
permit is required for each separate vehicle operated as a mobile tire repair
unit. Licenses and permits are not transferable between persons, businesses, or
vehicles. (Ord. Nos. 25635; 32334)
SEC. 18-57.   LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES.
   (a)   The annual fee for a tire business license is $163.
   (b)   The annual fee for each mobile tire repair unit permit is $163.
   (c)   The fee for issuing a duplicate tire business license or mobile tire
repair unit permit for one that is lost, stolen, or mutilated is $39.
   (d)   The applicant shall pay all fees required by this section to the
director before a license or permit will be issued. No refund of a fee will be
made. (Ord. Nos. 25635; 26598; 29879; 31332; 32556)
SEC. 18-58.   ISSUANCE, DENIAL, AND DISPLAY OF A LICENSE OR PERMIT; TIRE
DISPOSAL RECORDS.
   (a)   The director shall issue a tire business license to the applicant,
unless the director determines that the applicant:
      (1)   failed to completely fill out an application;
      (2)   provided false information on an application;
      (3)   failed to pay a license or permit fee required under this article;
      (4)   has had a tire business license revoked within the preceding 12
months; or
      (5)   has failed to complete the training required by Section
18-61.1.
   (b)   Upon issuance of a license to an applicant, the director shall issue a
permit to each vehicle to be operated by the applicant as a mobile tire repair
unit.
   (c)   If the director determines that an applicant should be denied a tire
business license, the director shall notify the applicant in writing that the
application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and a
statement informing the applicant of the right of appeal. The director shall
provide the notice within 10 business days of making the determination.
   (d)   A license or permit issued under this section must be displayed in a
manner and location approved by the director. A license and permit must be
presented upon request to the director or to a peace officer for examination.
   (e)   A tire business shall keep a state approved manifest of all tires
received and transported out of its facility. A notarized audit of all tire
transactions must be made available upon the request of the director, chief of
police, city marshal, or city attorney. A tire business shall maintain manifest
records for three years at the physical address designated on its license.
   (f)   A tire business, mobile tire repair unit, or scrap tire transporter
commits an offense if it allows any tire to be transported upon any public
street other than by an approved and registered permit holder. Each tire
business, mobile tire repair unit, and scrap tire transporter shall maintain
daily records of the numbers of tires generated at each premise under its
control. (Ord. Nos. 25635; 32334)
SEC. 18-59.   REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.
   (a)   The director shall revoke a tire business license if the licensee:
      (1)   refuses to allow any agent of the city entry into and inspection of
the tire business or a mobile tire repair unit;
      (2)   is convicted twice within a 24-month period of any city ordinance
or state or federal law regulating solid waste, litter, dumping, pollution,
standing water, insect or rodent infestation, junk or salvage yards, junk motor
vehicles, tires, or similar health, sanitation, or environmental concerns;
      (3)   violates any provision of this article or Section
19-34.1 of this code; or
      (4)   does not complete the training required by Section
18-61.1.
   (b)   Any person whose license or permit has been revoked shall return the
license or permit to the director, along with any identification stickers or
decals issued to the licensee within 10 business days of revocation. (Ord. Nos.
25635; 32334)
SEC. 18-60.   APPEALS.
   If the director denies issuance of a license or a license renewal or revokes
a license issued pursuant to this article, this action is final unless the
applicant or licensee shall, within 30 days after the receipt of written notice
of the director’s action, file with the city manager a written appeal. The city
manager shall, within 10 days after the appeal is filed, consider all the
evidence in support of and against the action appealed and render a decision
either sustaining or reversing the action. The decision of the city manager is
final. (Ord. 25635)
SEC. 18-61.   EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE; VOIDANCE OF AUTHORITY TO
OPERATE A MOBILE TIRE REPAIR UNIT.
   (a)   A tire business license expires one year from the date of issuance and
may be renewed by making application in accordance with Section
18-56. A licensee shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the license.
   (b)   Any permit to operate a mobile tire repair unit that is granted under
this article expires upon expiration, revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal of
the accompanying tire business license. (Ord. 25635)
SEC. 18-61.1.   REQUIRED TRAINING.
   (a)   The licensee and each of the licensee's authorized agents at each tire
business location and mobile tire repair unit shall complete a two-hour
training course delivered by the director prior to initial registration and
annually thereafter prior to renewal.
   (b)   The licensee shall notify the director within 15 days of the
separation of any authorized agent or the termination of the agency
relationship.
   (c)   All new authorized agents shall complete the required training within
30 days of the establishment of the agency relationship. If the training is not
completed within 30 days, the tire business license is subject to revocation
pursuant to Section
18-59.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, an authorized agent is manager,
supervisor, or person in control of a tire business or mobile tire repair unit.
(Ord. 32334)
SEC. 18-61.2.   SCRAP TIRE STORAGE METHODS.
   (a)   Tires stored by a tire business must be stored under a roofed
structure.
   (b)   All used tires and scrap tires must be stored in a manner which
prevents exposure to natural elements.
   (c)   Tires must be stored to prevent the collection of water, debris, dirt,
rubbish, and other materials.
   (d)   Used tires and scrap tires pieces stored outside must be screened from
public view.
   (e)   Tires must be secured to prevent unauthorized removal from the
structure.
   (f)   Tires must be stored in compliance with the Dallas Fire Code.
   (g)   Tires must be stored in a regular manner that tends to eliminate
mosquito breeding and rodent habitation.
   (h)   Tires stored in violation of this section will be deemed a public
nuisance subject to abatement at the expense of the premise owner.
   (i)   Tires must be stored at each facility in accordance with all local,
state, and federal laws and regulations.
   (j)   Scrap tire generators storing more than 500 scrap tires on the ground
or more than 2,000 scrap tires in enclosed and lockable containers at a
facility must obtain a scrap tire storage registration pursuant to 30 Texas
Administrative Code Section 328.56, as amended. (Ord. 32334)
SEC. 16-61.3.   TIRE IDENTIFICATION.
   Within one business day of receipt, the tire business who first receives the
scrap tire must mark it with the assigned business's license number. The
license number must be placed on each tire using a permanent marking system
and:
      (1)   be at least one inch in height;
      (2)   be of contrasting color; and
      (3)   be located on at least one side of the tire. (Ord. 32334)
SEC. 18-62.   TRANSPORTING SCRAP TIRES.
   (a)    A person commits an offense if he transports scrap tires in a vehicle
within the city without:
      (1)   displaying a valid scrap tire transporter decal in a visible and
conspicuous location on the rear of the vehicle;
      (2)   being listed as a transporter or authorized driver for the vehicle
in the application for the vehicle's scrap tire transporter decal that is on
file with the director;
      (3)   maintaining for inspection at any time a current manifest as
required by Section 361.112 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended;
      (4)   the appropriate identification markings as described by Section
18-61.3; or
      (5)   displaying the decal owner's name, phone number, and decal number
on both sides of each vehicle owned and operated by the owner and used in the
transporting of scrap tires. The lettering must be permanently affixed to the
vehicle, be of a contrasting color, and be at least two inches in height. The
decal number must be preceded by the letters "CODL." For purposes of this
paragraph, magnetic lettering is not considered permanently affixed.
   (b)   A person wishing to transport scrap tires in the city must apply for a
scrap tire transporter decal on a form provided by the director for that
purpose. A separate application must be made for each vehicle to be used to
transport scrap tires. The application must be signed and verified by the
applicant, be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $58, and contain all of the
following information:
      (1)   The name, mailing address, county of residence, and telephone and
facsimile numbers of the transporter and all authorized drivers of the vehicle.
      (2)   The year, make, model, vehicle identification number, and state
registration number for the vehicle on which the tires will be transported, and
proof that the vehicle is in compliance with state requirements for vehicle
registration, vehicle inspection, and vehicle financial responsibility.
   (c)   A scrap tire transporter decal is not transferable from one vehicle to
another.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of
this section that:
      (1)   not more than six scrap tires were being transported at the same
time in the same vehicle; or
      (2)   the scrap tires were being transported from a point outside of the
Dallas city limits to another point outside of the Dallas city limits, and the
vehicle did not stop within the Dallas city limits for the purpose of loading
or unloading any scrap tires. (Ord. Nos. 25635 ; 31332; 32334)
SEC. 18-63.   IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   A peace officer is authorized to remove or cause the removal of a
vehicle when the officer arrests a person for a violation of Section
18-62 and the officer is by law required to take the person arrested
immediately before a magistrate.
   (b)   A vehicle removed and towed under this section must be kept at a place
designated by the chief of police as a city pound location until application
for redemption is made by the vehicle owner or the owner’s authorized agent.
   (c)   A vehicle impounded under this section will be released to the vehicle
owner or the owner’s authorized agent in accordance with the provisions of
Sections
28-4 and
28-5 of this code, after:
      (1)   the city has removed all illegal scrap tires from the impounded
vehicle and stored or disposed of them in a manner prescribed by the director;
and
      (2)   the vehicle owner or the owner’s authorized agent has paid the
following fees to the city:
         (A)   the towing fees required by Section
15D-57 of this code for the tow of a disabled vehicle by an emergency wrecker
service;
         (B)   the notification, impoundment, and storage fees required by
Section
28-4 of this code for an impounded vehicle; and
         (C)   a disposal fee of $2.50 for each scrap tire removed from the
impounded vehicle for disposal by the city. (Ord. 25635)
SEC. 18-64.   UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL OF TIRES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he disposes of a scrap tire at any
location within the city.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the scrap
tire was disposed of:
      (1)   at a city landfill in compliance with city regulations governing
the landfill; or
      (2)   at a tire recycling facility or a tire disposal facility that is
registered or permitted by the state as required under Section 361.112 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, provided that the tires were
delivered to the facility by a tire transporter registered by the state and the
manifest for the tires was signed by the transporter and the facility accepting
the tires. (Ord. 25635)
SEC. 18-65.   EXEMPTIONS.
   This article does not apply to any department, branch, or agency of the
government of the United States or the State of Texas. (Ord. 25635)
SEC. 18-65.1.   REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   The director is authorized, at a reasonable time, to inspect each tire
business operating in the city for the purposes of ascertaining whether a
violation of this article or any other city ordinance or state or federal law
applicable to a tire business has occurred.
   (b)   The director shall inspect each tire business operating in the city at
least once per year.
   (c)   When a tire business is inspected by the director and a violation of
this article or any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to
the tire business is found, the tire business will, after the expiration of any
time limit for compliance given in a notice or order issued because of the
violation, be reinspected by the director to determine that the violation has
been eliminated. (Ord. 32334)
SEC. 18-66.   PENALTY.
   (a)   An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not less than
$500 or more than $2,000.
      (1)   Each day that any violation continues constitutes a separate
offense.
      (2)   Each tire transported in violation of this article constitutes a
separate offense.
   (b)   A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an
offense under this article.
   (c)   If a vehicle that has previously been impounded and redeemed under
this article is again impounded as the result of a subsequent violation of this
article, the director is authorized to retain the vehicle as evidence in the
criminal proceeding for that violation until the termination of the criminal
case in municipal court. If, upon termination of the criminal case, the
defendant is found not guilty of the violation, the defendant may redeem the
vehicle without paying any storage fees. If the defendant is assessed a fine
for the violation, the municipal court judge may, in lieu of requiring payment
of the fine assessed and any costs, declare the vehicle is a criminal
instrument, declare the vehicle is forfeited to the city, and order the sale of
the impounded vehicle, with the proceeds of the sale to be used to satisfy any
outstanding municipal court judgment. Any amount obtained in the sale of the
vehicle that is in excess of the amount of the fine assessed and any costs will
be returned to the defendant. (Ord. Nos. 25635; 32334)
CHAPTER 19
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
19-1.   City health officer, city environmental health officer, and director.
Sec.
19-1.1.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-2.   Power of city council to control unsanitary conditions by resolution -
Generally.
Sec.
19-3.   Same - Notice required - Generally.
Sec.
19-4.   Same - Same - Council may require personal service.
Sec.
19-5.   Same - Owner to comply with notice within 10 days.
Sec.
19-6.   Same - Penalty for failure to comply with notice.
Sec.
19-7.   Same - City to perform work upon default of owner - Generally.
Sec.
19-8.   Same - Same - Assessment of cost against property or owner.
Sec.
19-9.   Same - Same - Notice of assessment; objections; hearing.
Sec.
19-10.   Same - Same - Assessment to be made by ordinance; recording lien;
assessment to equal benefit to property or owner.
Sec.
19-11.   Same - Same - Ordinance to fix lien and time of payment; interest
rate.
Sec.
19-12.   Same - Same - Priority of assessment lien; enforcement.
Sec.
19-13.   Same - Same - Contest of assessment; bar.
Sec.
19-14.   Trash, etc., not to be thrown from houses.
Sec.
19-15.   Throwing trash upon public places prohibited.
Sec.
19-16.   Departing tenants required to leave building and premises clean and
sanitary.
Sec.
19-17.   Unwholesome premises - Generally.
Sec.
19-18.   Same - Inspection of premises; report of offenses.
Sec.
19-19.   Slaughter of animals in the city.
Sec.
19-20.   Depositing filth on premises prohibited; owner to remove animal
carcasses.
Sec.
19-21.   Green or decayed hides.
Sec.
19-22.   Causing offensive substance to be discharged on adjacent premises.
Sec.
19-23.   Drinking cups for common use.
Sec.
19-24.   Towels for common use.
Sec.
19-25.   Bringing infected person or property into city.
Sec.
19-26.   Businesses or substances injurious to health.
Sec.
19-27.   Vital statistics - Records to be kept.
Sec.
19-28.   Fees for vital statistics records.
Sec.
19-29.   Same - Record of certified copies issued to be kept; disposition of
fees.
Sec.
19-30.   Mosquito-breeding waters - Generally.
Sec.
19-31.   Same - Defined.
Sec.
19-32.   Same - Method of treatment.
Sec.
19-33.   Same - Penalty.
Sec.
19-34.   Cisterns, etc., to be screened.
Sec.
19-34.1.   Accumulation of tires.
Sec.
19-35.   Polluting wells.
Sec.
19-36.   Gill well - Generally.
Sec.
19-37.   Same - Trespassing upon.
Sec.
19-37.1.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-38.   Diaper changing accommodations in restrooms.
ARTICLE II.
CITY HEALTH OFFICER.
Sec.
19-39.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-40.   Authority to issue warrants.
Sec.
19-41.   Supervision and control over matters pertaining to health.
Sec.
19-42.   Police powers.
Sec.
19-43.   Authority to inspect.
Sec.
19-44.   Refusal to allow inspection.
Sec.
19-45.   Reserved.
Sec.
19-46.   Authority to pass rules and regulations.
Sec.
19-46.1.   Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED.
Secs. 19-47 thru 19-59.   Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
INFECTIOUS AND COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
Sec.
19-60.   Definitions.
Sec.
19-61.   Communicable diseases enumerated.
Sec.
19-62.   Reports of communicable diseases.
Sec.
19-63.   Laboratory examinations and reports; authority of health officer to
inspect laboratories and blood banks and blood transfusion services.
Sec.
19-64.   Measures for control in schools.
Sec.
19-65.   Interference with director of public health.
Sec.
19-66.   Medical certificates required of domestic servants.
Sec.
19-67.   Isolation of infected persons.
Sec.
19-68.   Physicians to report certain diseases.
Sec.
19-69.   When school children to be examined; prohibiting school attendance.
Sec.
19-70.   Hotel keepers, etc., to report infectious diseases.
Sec.
19-71.   Methods of isolation in various diseases.
Sec.
19-72.   Placarding.
Sec.
19-73.   Minimum periods of isolation.
Sec.
19-74.   Control of contacts.
Sec.
19-75.   Incubation periods.
Sec.
19-76.   Procedure when dwelling infected.
Sec.
19-77.   Removal of certain cases to hospital.
Sec.
19-78.   Precautions by attendants.
Sec.
19-79.   Disinfection.
Sec.
19-80.   Specific provisions for controlling certain diseases.
Sec.
19-81.   Special rules for tuberculosis.
Sec.
19-82.   Serum to be furnished indigent persons.
Sec.
19-82.1.   Immunization, registration, and record fee schedule.
Sec.
19-83.   Regulation of funerals for persons dying from certain diseases.
ARTICLE IVA.
REPORTABLE HEALTH CONDITIONS.
Sec.
19-83.1.   Definitions.
Sec.
19-83.2.   Environmentally related health condition level of lead.
Sec.
19-83.3.   Reporting requirements.
Sec.
19-83.4.   Use of reports.
Sec.
19-83.5.   Penalty.
ARTICLE V.
DRY CLOSETS.
Sec.
19-84.   Construction and maintenance.
Sec.
19-85.   Cleaning; prevention of odor.
ARTICLE VI.
SEPTIC TANKS.
Sec.
19-86.   Definitions.
Sec.
19-87.   Permit - Required.
Sec.
19-88.   Application for permit; fee; percolation test.
Sec.
19-89.   Approval of plans by the director before issuance of permit.
Sec.
19-90.   Construction standards.
Sec.
19-91.   Inspection.
Sec.
19-92.   Tanks not to be offensive.
Sec.
19-93.   Cesspools.
ARTICLE VII.
FUMIGATION.
Sec.
19-94.   Definitions.
Sec.
19-95.   General safeguards.
Sec.
19-96.   Notice required generally.
Sec.
19-97.   Notice of occupants.
Sec.
19-98.   Doors to be locked, etc.
Sec.
19-99.   Warning signs to be posted.
Sec.
19-100.   Guards required.
ARTICLE VIII.
DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
Sec.
19-101.   “Drainage district” defined.
Sec.
19-102.   Construction of article.
Sec.
19-103.   Purchase of property.
Sec.
19-104.   Creation of drainage district; preparation of plat; estimate of cost.
Sec.
19-105.   Condemnation proceedings.
Sec.
19-106.   Special assessments - Generally.
Sec.
19-107.   Same - Hearing; notice required, payment, etc.
Sec.
19-108.   Same - Issuance of certificates, etc.
Sec.
19-109.   Same - Errors; corrections; reassessments.
Sec.
19-110.   Same - Suit to set aside or correct.
Sec.
19-111.   Same - Method; judgment of commissioners to be conclusive.
Sec.
19-112.   State law to control article.
Sec.
19-113.   Specifications; bids; contract; bond.
Sec.
19-114.   Use of day work by city.
Sec.
19-115.   Report of amount to be paid by city.
Sec.
19-116.   Charter to govern bidding.
Sec.
19-117.   Additional methods of financing.
ARTICLE IX.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
Sec.
19-118.   Definitions.
Sec.
19-118.1.   Enforcement.
Sec.
19-118.2.   Prohibited discharges.
Sec.
19-118.3.   Regulation of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers.
Sec.
19-118.4.   Used oil regulation; household hazardous waste.
Sec.
19-118.5.   Discharge prevention, reporting, and cleanup.
Sec.
19-118.6.   Stormwater discharges from construction activities.
Sec.
19-118.7.   Stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity.
Sec.
19-118.8.   Compliance monitoring.
ARTICLE X.
LIQUID WASTE.
Division 1. Generally.
Sec.
19-119.   Definitions.
Division 2. Liquid Waste Transportation.
Sec.
19-120.   Permit required.
Sec.
19-121.   Fee and display of permit.
Sec.
19-122.   Liquid waste vehicles; impoundment.
Sec.
19-123.   Responsibilities of a liquid waste transporter.
Sec.
19-124.   Rules and regulations.
Sec.
19-125.   Suspension or revocation of permit.
Sec.
19-126.   Appeal.
Division 3. Liquid Waste Production.
Sec.
19-126.1.   Producer of waste and manifest system.
Sec.
19-126.2.   Traps/interceptors required.
Sec.
19-126.3.   Permit required for traps/interceptors.
Sec.
19-126.4.   Suspension or revocation of permits.
Sec.
19-126.5.   Responsibilities of liquid waste producer.
Division 4. Liquid Waste Accumulation and Disposal.
Sec.
19-127.   Accumulation of liquid waste.
Sec.
19-128.   Septage and chemical toilet waste.
Sec.
19-129.   Disposal of liquid waste.
Sec.
19-130.   Responsibilities of liquid waste disposers.
Division 5. Enforcement.
Sec.
19-131.   Criminal responsibility of corporations or associations.
Sec.
19-131.1.   Right of entry of city employees.
Sec.
19-131.2.   Enforcement.
ARTICLE XI.
DISPOSAL OF FETAL MATERIAL.
Sec.
19-132.   Definitions.
Sec.
19-133.   Permit required - transporter.
Sec.
19-134.   Permit required - disposer.
Sec.
19-135.   Exemptions.
Sec.
19-136.   Method of disposal.
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 19-1.   CITY HEALTH OFFICER, CITY ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICER, AND
DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The city manager shall appoint a qualified person as the city health
officer. The city health officer shall possess an M.D. degree, be licensed to
practice medicine in the state of Texas, and meet all other requirements of
state law for a city health officer.
   (b)   The city manager may appoint a qualified person as environmental
health officer. The city environmental health officer must be a registered
professional engineer and meet all other qualifications of state law. If an
environmental health officer is appointed, he shall perform such duties as may
be required by the city manager, by ordinance of the city council, or by state
law.
   (c)   In this article, DIRECTOR means the director of the department
designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article or the
director’s designated representative. (Ord. Nos. 14163; 14217; 17226; 17293;
27697)
SEC. 19-1.1.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 22026)
SEC. 19-2.   POWER OF CITY COUNCIL TO CONTROL UNSANITARY CONDITIONS BY
RESOLUTION - GENERALLY.
   The city council shall have the power in their discretion, by a resolution
passed by a majority vote to require:
   (a)   The filling up, drainage and regulating of any lots, grounds or yards,
or any other places in the city, which, in their opinion, shall be unwholesome
or have stagnant water therein or thereon, or shall from any other cause be in
such condition as to be liable to produce disease.
   (b)   All premises to be inspected, and to impose fines on the owners of
houses under which stagnant water may be found or upon whose premises such
stagnant water may be found.
   (c)   The cleaning of any house, building, establishment, lot, yard or
grounds from filth, carrion or impure or unwholesome matter of any kind.
   (d)   The owner of any lots within the city to keep same free from rubbish,
brush and any objectionable, unsightly and unsanitary matter of whatever
nature. (Code 1941, Art. 86-44)
SEC. 19-3.   SAME - NOTICE REQUIRED - GENERALLY.
   Upon the passage of the resolution provided for in Section
19-2, the city secretary shall cause to be published in a daily newspaper of
general circulation in the city a notice to the owner of the property described
in Section
19-2, or of property which shall be in an unwholesome condition or have
stagnant water thereon or which shall be in any condition whatever that is
likely to produce disease, requiring the filling up, draining or regulating of
such property or requiring the cleaning of any house, building, establishment,
lot, yard or grounds from filth, carrion or impure or unwholesome matter of any
kind, or requiring the removal of any objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary
matter of whatever nature. Such notice shall state that the owner is required
to remove and remedy within a period of 10 days from the publication of the
notice any such unsanitary and unwholesome condition, describing the same in
the notice, or the notice may be given in writing to the owner of the property,
or to the agent of the owner if they be nonresidents of the city. If the name
of the owner or his agent be unknown, then such notice shall state that such
owner is unknown. If the name of the owner of the property, or his agent, be
unknown, the resolution provided for in Section
19-2 shall describe in general terms the property involved and affected by
same, and such description of the property as is contained in the resolution
shall also be set forth in the notice. (Code 1941, Art. 86-45)
SEC. 19-4.   SAME - SAME - COUNCIL MAY REQUIRE PERSONAL SERVICE.
   The city council may, at their discretion, require written notice to be
served upon the owner of the property described in Section
19-2, or upon his agent, if such owner be a nonresident, or if the name of the
owner be unknown. But either notice by publication or personal notice as
required by this section shall be deemed sufficient without any other character
of notice. (Code 1941, Art. 86-46)
SEC. 19-5.   SAME - OWNER TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE WITHIN 10 DAYS.
   The owner of the property described in Section
19-2, or his agent, if such owner be a nonresident, shall, within 10 days from
the publication of such notice, or from the service of such personal notice in
writing, as the case may be, fully comply with the terms and conditions of the
resolution and notice, and do and perform any and all things required therein
or cause the same to be done within the time required by this section. (Code
1941, Art. 86-47)
SEC. 19-6.   SAME - PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
   Any owner or any agent of an owner, if the owner is a nonresident, who fails
to fill up, drain, or regulate any lots, grounds, or yards owned by him which
are unwholesome or have stagnant water on them, or which from any cause are in
such condition as to be liable to produce disease, or who fails to cleanse and
disinfect any house, building, establishment, lot, yard, or ground owned by him
from filth, weeds, rubbish, brush, and all other objectionable, unsightly, or
unsanitary matter of whatever nature on the property owned by him, within 10
days after the publication of notice as provided in Section
19-3 or after service of personal notice in writing as provided in Section
19-4, as the case may be, shall be guilty of an offense. (Code 1941, Art. 86-
48; Ord. 19963)
SEC. 19-7.   SAME - CITY TO PERFORM WORK UPON DEFAULT OF OWNER - GENERALLY.
   If the owner of any property described in Section
19-2, or his agent, if any such owner be a nonresident, shall not within 10
days from the publication of notice, as provided in Section
19-3, or from service of personal notice in writing, as provided in Section
19-4, as the case may be, do and perform any and all the things whatsoever
mentioned and required by the resolution and the notice, then the city council
shall have the power, and it shall be their duty, to do and cause to be done
any or all of the things enumerated in Section
19-2. (Code 1941, Art. 86-49)
SEC. 19-8.   SAME - SAME - ASSESSMENT OF COST AGAINST PROPERTY OR OWNER.
   Whenever the city council shall have caused any of the things enumerated in
Section
19-2 to be done after due resolution and notice to the owner, and upon failure
of the owner to do and perform the things aforesaid, then the council shall
have power to assess the whole cost of such work, including the cost of the
publication of the notice, against the property upon which such work was done
and against the owner of the property; provided, that no assessment shall be
made against any property, or its own, or personal liability declared unless
such property shall be specially benefited by the work so done upon the same to
the extent of such assessment; provided further, that the city council may by
one resolution require the several things to be done as enumerated in Section
19-2, or any one of such things, on any number of pieces of property. In such
case the specific thing to be done on each and every separate piece of property
shall be clearly stated in the resolution, and notice shall be given to each
owner in the manner provided for in Section
19-3. (Code 1941, Art. 86-50)
SEC. 19-9.   SAME - SAME - NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT; OBJECTIONS; HEARING.
   No assessment for any of the things to be done as enumerated in Section
19-2 shall be made against any property or its owner, until the city council
shall have first so declared by resolution directing that notice thereof be
given to the owner thereof, and such notice shall have been given by
advertising the same in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city
for 10 consecutive days. The notice aforesaid shall state the time and place of
the hearing, the cost of the work as proposed to be assessed against the owner
of such property, and the purpose for which the assessment is proposed to be
levied. Such hearing shall be not less than 10 days from the date of the first
publication of such notice, or the date stated in the notice aforesaid, or at
any time thereafter. Before any assessment is actually levied, any person
interested in any property which may be claimed to be subject to assessment,
for the purpose of paying the cost of doing the work in performance of any or
all of the things enumerated in Section
19-2, may make and file objection thereto. Such person shall be entitled to a
full and fair hearing before the city council as to the matters affecting the
property under such assessment or the benefits thereto, or as to the work
proposed to be done thereon, or as to any liability therefor, or as to any
irregularity or invalidity of the proceeding, or any other objection thereto.
Such objection shall be filed in writing stating the nature thereof, and a full
opportunity shall be given to the person filing the same to produce evidence,
to subpoena witnesses and to appear in person or by attorney. A full and fair
hearing shall be given by the city council, which hearing may be adjourned from
time to time or day to day without further notice. The city council shall have
the power to inquire into and determine all facts necessary to the adjudication
of such objections and the ascertainment of special benefits to the owner of
the property, and to the property, by the performance of the work necessary to
do the identical things mentioned and set forth in the resolution and notice
and shall render such judgment or order in each case as may be just and proper.
Any objection to the regularity of the proceedings or the validity of any
assessment or the determination of personal liability against such property, or
its owner, shall be deemed waived unless presented at the time and in the
manner prescribed by this section. (Code 1941, Art. 86-51)
SEC. 19-10.   SAME - SAME - ASSESSMENT TO BE MADE BY ORDINANCE; RECORDING LIEN;
ASSESSMENT TO EQUAL BENEFIT TO PROPERTY OR OWNER.
   When the hearing provided for in Section
19-9 has been concluded, the city council shall, by ordinance, assess against
the owner of the property and against his property the cost of the work
performed in doing the things provided for and set forth in the resolution and
notice, including the cost of the publication of the notice, and shall adjudge
and declare a personal liability against such owner of such property and
against the property, and shall also adjudge and declare a privilege lien
thereon. The city manager or director shall forthwith thereafter file with the
county clerk a statement of such assessment and expenses, provided it shall
have been determined by the council upon such hearing that the owner and his
property has been benefited and enhanced in value in an amount at least equal
to the assessment and expenses. If in any case it shall be determined on such
hearing that the property of any owner is not benefited and enhanced in value
by the performance of the work thereon, then no such assessment shall be made
against the property or against the owner thereof; provided, however, that if
after such hearing it shall be determined by the council that the property has
been benefited and enhanced in value in an amount less than the cost of such
work so done thereon, together with the cost of publication of the notice, then
the council shall assess against the owner and the property only such an amount
as shall equal the benefit received by such owner and his property. (Code 1941,
Art. 86-52; Ord. 27697)
SEC. 19-11.   SAME - SAME - ORDINANCE TO FIX LIEN AND TIME OF PAYMENT; INTEREST
RATE.
   The ordinance making the assessment against the property, as provided for in
Section
19-10, shall fix a lien against the property of each of such owners, declaring
the owner thereof to be personally liable for the respective amounts which may
be assessed against them and set the time in which the assessment shall be paid
which time shall not be longer than 30 days from the date of the making of the
assessment. Such assessment shall bear interest at the rate of 10 percent per
annum from the date of making the same. Any number of assessments against
different pieces of property may be levied in one and the same ordinance. (Code
1941, Art. 86-53)
SEC. 19-12.   SAME - SAME - PRIORITY OF ASSESSMENT LIEN; ENFORCEMENT.
   The amount assessed under the terms of this article against any property or
owner thereof shall be secured by a privilege lien upon the property to secure
the expenditure so made. Such liens shall be second only to tax liens and liens
for street improvements, and such assessment shall constitute a personal
liability against the owner of the property in favor of the city. Such liens
and liability may be enforced by suit in any court having jurisdiction and the
assessment aforesaid or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie evidence
of the amount expended in any such work or improvement. (Code 1941, Art. 86-54)
SEC. 19-13.   SAME - SAME - CONTEST OF ASSESSMENT; BAR.
   Any person having any interest in any property against which any assessment
shall have been made or levied under the provisions of this article shall have
the right to contest the assessment or the validity thereof, or the regularity
of any proceeding with reference to the assessment, or the special benefits
received by the owner of such property, by filing suit in any court having
competent jurisdiction thereof, in which suit the city shall be defended;
provided, that such suit shall be brought within 10 days from the date of the
passage of the ordinance levying such assessment against such property and if
not so brought, then the owner or other person having an interest in the
property shall thereafter be barred and estopped to question the validity of
such proceedings, assessment, liability and lien thereby fixed. This bar and
estoppel shall apply to the heirs, assigns, successors and legal
representatives of such person. (Code 1941, Art. 86-55)
SEC. 19-14.   TRASH, ETC., NOT TO BE THROWN FROM HOUSES.
   No person shall throw any article, trash, filth, slop or anything else,
whatever, from the roof or upper story, or window of a house, upon the house or
premises of another or upon any street or sidewalk. (Code 1941, Art. 87-4)
SEC. 19-15.   THROWING TRASH UPON PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall throw, or permit anyone in his employ to throw upon any
public place, any animal or vegetable substance whatever, or any tin, rock,
brick or broken concrete, glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, pieces
of iron or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle
upon any public place. (Code 1941, Art. 86-61)
SEC. 19-16.   DEPARTING TENANTS REQUIRED TO LEAVE BUILDING AND PREMISES CLEAN
AND SANITARY.
   Whenever any person now occupying or using or hereafter occupying or using
any building or premises in the city, improved or unimproved, whether such
person be the owner, lessee or tenant, or any other manner occupying the same,
shall remove from and vacate such building or premises, then it shall be the
duty of such person so vacating or removing from such building or premises to
immediately remove therefrom all loose paper, garbage, filth, rubbish and waste
matter of every kind and character and to place the building so vacated and the
premises adjacent thereto or used in connection therewith in a clean and
sanitary condition. (Code 1941, Art. 87-8)
SEC. 19-17.   UNWHOLESOME PREMISES - GENERALLY.
   No person shall suffer or permit any cellar, vault, drain, pool, privy,
sewer, yard, grounds or premises belonging to or controlled or occupied by him
to become, from any cause, nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious to the public
health, or unpleasant and disagreeable to adjacent residents or persons. (Code
1941, Art 86-17)
SEC. 19-18.   SAME - INSPECTION OF PREMISES; REPORT OF OFFENSES.
   The police, the director, the city health officer, or the city environmental
health officer, and such other officers, employees, or agents as may be
designated by the director, the city health officer, or the city environmental
health officer for that purpose are authorized to enter and examine all
tenements, cellars, and other places within the city. If they find any nuisance
or filth, they shall report the same immediately to the director, the city
health officer, or the city environmental health officer and make a complaint
before the municipal court, unless the owner or occupant immediately causes the
same to be removed. (Code 1941, Art. 86-66; Ord. 27697)
SEC. 19-19.   SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS IN THE CITY.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates or maintains any hidehouse,
slaughterhouse, or slaughter pen, yard, ground, or premises, used for any
purpose whatever, in the city or within 3,000 feet of the corporate line, in
such manner as to exude noxious odors or stenches, be offensive or disagreeable
to any of the inhabitants of the city, or be injurious to the health or comfort
of any of the inhabitants of the city.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he kills or slaughters, or causes the
killing or slaughter of, any animal within the city for the purpose of selling,
bartering, donating, or using the animal’s flesh for any form of human
consumption. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the
animal was killed or slaughtered:
      (1)   in a slaughterhouse or in a food products establishment, as defined
in Chapter 17 of this code, that is operating in compliance with all applicable
city ordinances and state and federal laws; or
      (2)   as part of a religious ritual or ceremony. (Code 1941, Art. 86-26;
Ord. 21962)
SEC. 19-20.   DEPOSITING FILTH ON PREMISES PROHIBITED; OWNER TO REMOVE ANIMAL
CARCASSES.
   No person shall deposit or place in or on any premises, public or private,
enclosed or common, within the city, any vegetable or animal matter or slop, or
any filth of a character likely to affect the public health or to produce
offensive smells, nor shall any person suffer the carcass of any dead animal,
which at its death belonged to him, to be or remain in or upon any such place
more than six hours after its death. (Code 1941, Art. 86-22)
SEC. 19-21.   GREEN OR DECAYED HIDES.
   The depositing, storing, trimming, scouring or treating of any green,
tainted, decaying or malodorous hide in the city is hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and no person shall hereafter deposit, store, trim, scour, cure or
treat any green, tainted, decaying or malodorous hide at any place within the
corporate limits of the city; provided, that the receiving, trimming, weighing
of green hides not tainted, decaying or malodorous within the limits of the
city where the person so receiving, trimming or weighing the same shall not
permit the hides or any trimmings therefrom to remain within the city limits
more than four hours shall not be deemed a violation of this section; provided
further, that the resalting of untainted green salt-hides within the city is
not hereby prohibited. (Code 1941, Art. 86-23)
SEC. 19-22.   CAUSING OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCE TO BE DISCHARGED ON ADJACENT
PREMISES.
   Whoever shall cause or permit any nauseous, foul or putrid liquid or
substance, or any liquid or substance likely to become nauseous, foul,
offensive or putrid, to be discharged, placed or thrown on, or to flow out of
any premises into or upon any adjacent premises, or any street or alley, is
guilty of an offense. (Code 1941, Art. 86-20; Ord. 19963)
SEC. 19-23.   DRINKING CUPS FOR COMMON USE.
   The common use of a drinking cup or receptacle for drinking water in any
theater, factory, store, office building, school, public hall, park or in any
public place or street in the city, or the furnishing of such place, is hereby
prohibited and declared to be unlawful. The term “common use” as used in this
section shall be construed to mean for use by more than one person without
being sanitized after each use. Any person violating this section is guilty of
an offense. (Ord. Nos. 7802; 19963)
SEC. 19-24.   TOWELS FOR COMMON USE.
   No person owning or in charge or control of any lavatory or washroom in any
hotel, restaurant, factory, store, office building, school, public hall or
public place or building shall maintain, in or about such lavatory or washroom,
any towel for common use, or expose for use or allow to be exposed for use, any
towel to be used by more than one person. The term “common use” as used in this
section shall be construed to mean for use by more than one person without
being washed after such use. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section is guilty of an offense. (Ord. Nos. 7802; 19963)
SEC. 19-25.   BRINGING INFECTED PERSON OR PROPERTY INTO CITY.
   Any person who shall bring, or cause to be brought, into the city any person
or property of any kind tainted or infected with malignant fever, smallpox or
other contagious or infectious disease is guilty of an offense. (Ord. Nos.
7802; 19963)
SEC. 19-26.   BUSINESSES OR SUBSTANCES INJURIOUS TO HEALTH.
   If anyone within the city shall carry on any trade, business or occupation
injurious to the health of those who reside in the vicinity, or shall suffer
any substance which shall have that effect to remain on his premises, in his
possession or under his control, he is guilty of an offense. (Code 1941, Art.
86-25; Ord. 19963)
SEC. 19-27.   VITAL STATISTICS - RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   It shall be the duty of the registrar or acting registrar of vital
statistics to keep a microfilm record of each birth, death and stillbirth
certificate filed through the local office of vital statistics, and that a
duplicate or master film be maintained in a safe place of storage for making
extra film copies when old record films wear out. (Ord. 7807)
SEC. 19-28.   FEES FOR VITAL STATISTICS RECORDS.
   (a)   The local registrar of vital statistics for the city of Dallas is
authorized, and has the duty, to issue to any applicant a certified copy of any
birth or death certificate that is of record in the local registrar’s office.
The local registrar shall charge the same fees for vital statistics records as
are charged by the Texas Bureau of Vital Statistics, as set forth in Section
181.22 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended.
   (b)   In addition to the fees charged under Subsection (a), the local
registrar shall charge the following fees:
      (1)   A $1 vital statistics record preservation fee will be collected
upon the issuance of each record of vital statistics, as authorized by Section
191.0045(h) of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (2)   An applicant requesting that a vital statistics record be mailed
will be charged:
         (A)   $1 if the record is sent by standard mail; and
         (B)   $17.50 if the record is sent by express overnight service.
   (c)   Notwithstanding Subsections (a) and (b) of this section, no fees will
be charged when an exemption set forth in Section 191.0046 of the Texas Health
and Safety Code, as amended, applies. (Ord. Nos. 7807, 8896, 13485; 15971;
17237; 19861; 20448; 21162; 21251; 22072; 22569; 25048; 25384)
SEC. 19-29.   SAME - RECORD OF CERTIFIED COPIES ISSUED TO BE KEPT; DISPOSITION
OF FEES.
   It shall be the duty of the registrar of vital statistics to keep a record
in a well-bound book of each certified copy of a certificate issued under the
preceding section, and to give a receipt to the applicant for the amount of fee
collected by the officer. All fees so collected shall be deposited in the
general fund of the city. (Ord. 7807)
SEC. 19-30.   MOSQUITO-BREEDING WATERS - GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any premises in the city,
or within 3,000 feet of the corporate limits thereof, or the agent of the
owner, if the owner be a nonresident or absent from the city, to cause, suffer
or permit any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed
or are likely to breed on such premises, unless such collection of water is
treated in the manner prescribed by the health officer of the city or his duly
authorized representative, so as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, and any
such collection of water so unlawfully maintained is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. (Code 1941, Art. 86-37)
SEC. 19-31.   SAME - DEFINED.
   The collection of water to be considered as coming within the terms of
Sections
19-30 to
19-33 are those which are contained or may hereafter be contained in ditches,
ponds, pools, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults,
fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse
troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective
house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets or other similar water containers.
(Code 1941, Art. 86-38)
SEC. 19-32.   SAME - METHOD OF TREATMENT.
   The methods of treatment of any collection of water for the purpose of
preventing the breeding of mosquitoes must be approved by the director, the
city health officer, or the city environmental health officer or their duly
authorized representatives, and may be one or more of the following:
      (1)   Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch one
way or any other material that will effectually prevent the ingress or egress
of mosquitoes.
      (2)   Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers
together with their thorough drying or cleaning.
      (3)   Using an approved larvicide.
      (4)   Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene,
petroleum, or paraffin oil once every seven days.
      (5)   Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and
other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish; absence of
half-grown mosquito larvae is evidence of compliance with the measure.
      (6)   Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the director, the city
health officer, or the city environmental health officer, or their duly
authorized representatives.
      (7)   Proper disposal of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles,
and similar articles likely to hold water. (Code 1941, Art. 86-39; Ord. 27697)
SEC. 19-33.   SAME - PENALTY.
   If any person responsible for the existence of any condition that gives rise
or is likely to give rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fails or refuses to
immediately take all necessary measures directed by the director, the city
health officer, or the city environmental health officer or their duly
authorized representatives to prevent the same in accordance with the terms of
this article, after notice to do so, that person commits an offense. (Code
1941, Art. 86-40; Ord. Nos. 19963; 27697)
SEC. 19-34.   CISTERNS, ETC., TO BE SCREENED.
   It shall hereafter be unlawful to own, use, keep or maintain within the
corporate limits of the city any cistern or cisterns, tub or tubs, barrels or
other receptacles for the storing of water therein without having the top of
such cisterns, tubs, barrels or other receptacles covered with a wooden or
metallic cover or wire screen or material, or by two or more characters of
coverings, so constructed and adjusted as to prevent any mosquitoes from
entering into any such cisterns, tubs, barrels or other receptacles, or from
coming in contact with the water therein. (Code 1941, Art. 86-42)
SEC. 19-34.1.   ACCUMULATION OF TIRES.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, TIRE means any motorcycle, automobile,
truck, trailer, tractor, or other vehicle tire.
   (b)   Roofed structure required. Every person owning, managing, operating,
leasing, or renting any premises where one or more new, used, or old tires are
stored or allowed to accumulate shall keep the tires under a roofed structure
on the premises that is:
      (1)   of sufficient capacity to contain the tires and keep them from
being exposed to rain, irrigation, or any other source of water;
      (2)   kept clean and free from the accumulation of any material or
substance that might attract flies, rodents, or other insects or pests; and
      (3)   kept locked or otherwise secured to prevent the tires from being
removed from the structure without the express authorization of the person
owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting the premises.
   (c)   Inspections, investigations, and enforcement. The director, the city
health officer, the city environmental health officer, and their authorized
agents or representatives, and police officers, code enforcement officers, and
any other persons designated by the city council or the city manager, have the
authority and responsibility to conduct inspections, investigations, and
enforcement activities on all premises within the city to ensure compliance
with this section.
   (d)   Penalty.
      (1)   A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine of not less than $500 or more than $2,000.
      (2)   A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an
offense under this section.
      (3)   Prosecution for an offense under Paragraph (1) of this subsection
does not prevent the use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable
to the person charged with, or the conduct involved in, the offense. (Ord. Nos.
25635; 27697)
SEC. 19-35.   POLLUTING WELLS.
   Whoever shall throw, cast or deposit any filth, substance or thing in any
public or private well or cistern is guilty of an offense. (Code 1941, Art. 86-
30; Ord. 19963)
SEC. 19-36.   GILL WELL - GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to traffic in or sell any of the mineral
water known as Gill Well water save and except such person as may exercise such
right under a contract with the city.
   The term “traffic in” Gill Well water shall mean any person deriving a
compensation from the business of delivering or soliciting orders for or
selling Gill Well water, or who may make a livelihood out of delivery or
soliciting orders, or the sale of same. (Code 1941, Arts. 156-1, 156-2)
SEC. 19-37.   SAME - TRESPASSING UPON.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interfere with, trespass
upon, deface or abuse any of the property, pipes, faucets or connections
connected with Gill Well or the water flowing from such pipes, without first
obtaining the permission of the city council. (Code 1941, Art. 156-3)
SEC. 19-37.1.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 18961)
SEC. 19-38.   DIAPER CHANGING ACCOMMODATIONS IN RESTROOMS.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in Subsection (d), it shall be unlawful
to operate a use listed in Subsection (c) or a city-owned building that is not
equipped with a minimum of one safe, sanitary, and convenient diaper changing
accommodation in each publicly available and accessible restroom.
   (b)   Definitions. In this section,
      (1)   DIAPER CHANGING ACCOMMODATION means a table or other device
suitable for changing the diaper of a child age three or under.
      (2)   MAJOR RENOVATION means reconstruction, alteration, or renovation of
a main structure that involves reconfiguration of a publicly available and
accessible restroom.
      (3)   NEW CONSTRUCTION means construction of a main structure that did
not exist as of May 8, 2019 and requires public restrooms.
   (c)   Applicability. This section only applies to new construction and major
renovations of:
      (1)   city-owned buildings;
      (2)   structures containing the following land uses as defined in Chapter
51, "Dallas Development Code":
         (A)   clothing store;
         (B)   drive-in restaurant;
         (C)   drug store;
         (D)   hardware or sporting goods store;
         (E)   home improvement center;
         (F)   restaurant without drive-in service;
         (G)   retail food store;
         (H)   theatre; and
      (3)   structures containing the following land uses as defined in Chapter
51A, "Dallas Development Code":
         (A)   general merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less;
         (B)   general merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet;
         (C)   general merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more;
         (D)   restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service;
         (F)   restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service; and
         (G)   theater.
   (d)   Exception. The requirement in Subsection (a) does not apply to a
restroom that contains clear and conspicuous signage indicating where an
alternative restroom with a diaper changing accommodation is located. The
alternative restroom must be one that is assigned to individuals of the gender
of the original restroom or one that is available to all individuals. (Ord.
31193)
ARTICLE II.
CITY HEALTH OFFICER.
SEC. 19-39.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 17226)
SEC. 19-40.   AUTHORITY TO ISSUE WARRANTS.
   The city health officer shall have the authority to issue warrants for the
arrest of persons violating the provisions of the sanitary code of the city and
for the confinement of persons suffering from venereal and communicable
diseases. (Code 1941, Art. 24-3; Ord. 17226)
SEC. 19-41.   SUPERVISION AND CONTROL OVER MATTERS PERTAINING TO HEALTH.
   The city health officer shall have direct supervision and control over all
matters pertaining to the health of the citizens of the city and over the
enforcement of all laws and ordinances, rules and regulations dealing with
public health, sanitary and hygienic conditions within the city, and the
supervision and prevention of infectious and contagious diseases. (Code 1941,
Art. 24-4; Ord. 17226)
SEC. 19-42.   POLICE POWERS.
   The city health officer shall be clothed with all necessary police powers to
properly perform the duties of his office, and the term city health officer
shall mean the city health officer or his duly authorized representatives.
(Code 1941, Art. 24-5; Ord. 17226)
SEC. 19-43.   AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   The city health officer and those working directly under his supervision
shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and for this purpose may at all
reasonable times with the permission of the owner or occupant or upon issuance
of an appropriate warrant enter in and upon any premises within the city or
within 3,000 feet of the corporate limits thereof. (Code 1941, Art. 86-41; Ord.
17226)
SEC. 19-44.   REFUSAL TO ALLOW INSPECTION.
   Any person refusing to allow the city health officer or any authorized agent
or representative of the city health officer to make an inspection as
authorized by Section
19-43 of this chapter is guilty of an offense. (Ord. Nos. 3643; 17226; 19963;
22026; 27697)
SEC. 19-45.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 17226)
SEC. 19-46.   AUTHORITY TO PASS RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city health officer is hereby authorized and empowered to promulgate
such additional rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the laws of this
state and this code, as he may deem conducive to the preservation of the health
of the city. (Ord. Nos. 4404; 17226)
SEC. 19-46.1.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 17393)
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED.
SECS. 19-47 THRU 19-59.
(Repealed by Ord. 27697)
ARTICLE IV.
INFECTIOUS AND COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
SEC. 19-60.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
      (1)   ABSOLUTE ISOLATION includes: First, the confinement of the patient
and attendants to one room or suite of rooms, to which none but authorized
officers or attendants shall have admission; second, screening of room and
entire house if necessary with not less than 16-mesh wire gauze; third, the
prohibition of passing out of the sick room of any object or material until the
same has been thoroughly disinfected; fourth, if, in the opinion of the
director of public health the patient cannot be treated with reasonable safety
to the public at home, the removal of the patient and contacts to a contagious
disease hospital.
      (2)   ABSOLUTE QUARANTINE includes: First, absolute prohibitions of
entrance to or exit from the building or conveyance except by officers or
attendants authorized by the director of public health, and the placing of
guards, if necessary, to enforce this prohibition; second, the posting of a
warning placard bearing the name of the disease quarantined in letters not less
than one inch high in a conspicuous place or places on the outside of the
building or conveyance; third, the prohibition of the passing out of any object
or material from the quarantined house or conveyance; fourth, provision for
conveying the necessities of life, under proper restrictions, to those in
quarantine.
      (3)   A CARRIER means a person who, without symptoms of a communicable
disease, harbors and disseminates, or is likely to disseminate, the infectious
agent of that disease.
      (4)   CLEANSING means the removal by scrubbing and washing of organic
matter on which and in which micro-organisms may find favorable conditions for
prolonging their life and virulence and the removal by the same means of micro-
organisms adherent to the surface.
      (5)   COMMUNICABLE DISEASES means such diseases as are communicable
through the conveyance of the infectious agent of the disease.
      (6)   COMPLETE DISINFECTION means disinfection during illness, under the
direction of the director of public health, of a patient’s body, of all
excretions or discharges of a patient, and of all articles of clothing and
utensils used by a patient and, after recovery, death, or removal, the
disinfection of walls, woodwork, furniture, bedding, and other items.
      (7)   CONTACT means a person who has been sufficiently near to an
infected person or anything contaminated by an infectious agent to make
possible the transmission of the infectious agent to the person.
      (8)   CULTURES means growths of micro- organisms in or upon artificial
media. The material for culture is obtained from body fluids, secretions, or
excreta and is used for the purpose of determining the presence of the
infectious agent.
      (9)   DISINFECTION means the process of destroying the vitality of the
disease-producing organisms by physical or chemical means.
      (10)   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH or DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH means the
city health officer.
      (11)   IMMUNES means persons having had the disease. Persons having a
negative Schick test will be considered immune to diphtheria. Persons having
had immune globulin for measles, toxoid for whooping cough, or vaccines for
typhus and typhoid are not considered as being immune.
      (12)   INCUBATION PERIOD of a communicable disease means the interval
that usually elapses between the time of the implanting of the specific
pathogenic agent into the body of a susceptible person and the manifestation of
the first symptoms of the disease.
      (13)   INFECTIOUS AGENT means a living micro-organism capable, under
favorable conditions, of inciting a communicable disease. The words “germ,”
“micro-organism,” “infectious agent” and “virus” are used interchangeably.
      (14)   ISOLATION means the separation of persons suffering from a
communicable disease, or carriers of the infectious organism, from other
persons in such places and under such conditions as will prevent the direct
conveyance of the infectious agent to susceptible persons.
      (15)   MODIFIED ISOLATION includes: First, the confinement of the patient
and attendants to one room or suite of rooms to which none but authorized
officers or attendants shall have admission, but allowing the attendants to
pass out of the room after disinfection of person and complete change of
clothing; second, screening as provided in the definition of absolute
isolation; third, the prohibition of passing any object or material out of the
such room until it has been disinfected.
      (16)   MODIFIED QUARANTINE includes: First, prohibition of entrance and
exit, an absolute quarantine except against certain members of the family
authorized by the director of public health to pass in and out under certain
definite restrictions; second, the placing of a placard as provided in the
definition of absolute quarantine; third, isolation of the patient and
attendant; fourth, prohibition of the carrying out of any object or material
unless the same has been thoroughly disinfected.
      (17)   PARTIAL DISINFECTION means disinfection of discharges or
excretions of patients and their clothing and the room or rooms occupied by the
patients during illness.
      (18)   PERIOD OF COMMUNICABILITY means the time during which a person
affected with a communicable disease is capable of transmitting the infectious
agent to others.
      (19)   QUARANTINE means the confining of persons, animals, or materials
within a designated area and excluding other persons, animals, or materials
from such area.
      (20)   RENOVATION means, in addition to cleansing, such treatment of the
walls, floors, and ceilings of rooms or houses as may be necessary to place the
premises in a satisfactory sanitary condition. (Ord. Nos. 4404; 27697)
SEC. 19-61.   COMMUNICABLE DISEASES ENUMERATED.
   The following diseases are declared to be communicable through the
conveyance of an infectious agent and must be reported: Anthrax; Asiatic
cholera; botulism; bubonic plague; chancroid; chickenpox; conjunctivitis; acute
infectious; dengue; diphtheria; dysentery, amebic; dysentery, bacillary,
dysentery, unspecified; encephalitis; lethargica; food infections; German
measles; glanders; gonorrhea; granuloma inguinale; hookworm; impetigo,
contagiosa; influenza; leprosy; lymphogranuloma venereum; malaria; measles;
meningitis, epidemic cerebrospina; mumps; ophthalmia, neonatorium; paratyphoid
fever; pneumonia, bronchial; pneumonia, lobar; poliomyelitis, acute;
psittacosis; rabies, human; rabies, animal; rat-bite fever; relapsing fever;
rheumatic fever; Rocky Mountain spotted fever; salmonella infection; scabies;
scarlet fever; septic sore throat; smallpox; syphilis; tetanus; trachoma;
trichinosis; tuberculosis; tularemia; typhoid fever; typhoid carriers; typhus
fever; undulant fever; Vincent’s angina; Weil’s disease; whooping cough;
streptococcal sore throat; streptococcal tonsillitis; streptococcal
nasopharnyitis; yellow fever, and other diseases which in the opinion of the
director of public health may be communicable. (Ord. Nos. 4404; 5869)
SEC. 19-62.   REPORTS OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
   Every physician shall report in writing and, when practicable, by an
acknowledged telephone communication to the department of public health, within
12 hours after having seen, professionally, each person having or whom he
suspects of having any communicable disease, as defined in Section
19-60 and enumerated in Section
19-61.
   The attending physician is authorized and it is made his duty to place the
patient under the restrictions of quarantine described in this section in the
case of each respective disease. The following data are required: Date of
onset; disease or suspected disease; patient’s name, age, sex and color;
patient’s address; school attended or place of employment; occupation; number
in household, adults and children; probable source of infection or origin of
disease; if disease is smallpox, type, number of times successfully vaccinated
(in typhoid fever also), and approximate dates; and, if typhoid fever,
salmonellosis, tuberculosis, dysenytery, undulant fever, scarlet fever,
diphtheria, acute anterior polio-myelitis, cerebro-spinal meningitis, or septic
sore throat, was patient, or is any member of the household, engaged in the
production or handling of milk or any other food directly; name and address of
person making report, and date of same. Such report shall be made within 12
hours after the case comes under observation.
   Every hotel proprietor or manager, keeper of a boardinghouse or head of a
family, having knowledge of any person infected with or who is suspected of
being infected with any of the diseases enumerated in Section
19-61 of this article, and every teacher or principal of any public, private or
parochial school, having knowledge of a pupil, teacher or employee infected
with or who is suspected of being infected with any of the diseases enumerated
in such section, shall report same to the department of public health within 12
hours of the time of his first knowledge of the nature of such disease;
provided, that should the case have been reported by the attending physician,
no further report will be required.
   Persons with the premonitory symptoms of whooping cough, whether positively
diagnosed as such or not, must be reported to the department of public health
by the attending physician, by acknowledged telephone communication or in
writing, within 24 hours of the time the patient is first seen. Conclusive
proof that the case is suspected of being whooping cough by the attending
physician will consist of his having advised the patient, its parent or
guardian, as to the treatment of whooping cough; or of his having stated to the
patient, its parent or guardian that he suspects whooping cough; or of his
having administered pertussis vaccine, or any other treatment for whooping
cough.
   Whenever a person suspected of having any contagious disease as defined in
Revised Civil Statutes, Section 4477, or in Section
19-60 and enumerated in Section
19-61, is reported to the department of public health, the director of public
health shall investigate same and if unable to make a diagnosis, shall placard
the house with a placard bearing the words “Suspected Contagious Disease
Within,” and shall institute the type of quarantine applicable to the disease
suspected until such time as diagnosis is made, or until the case is declared
no longer contagious.
   Whenever a physician is called to attend a patient who is suffering with
diphtheria (membranous croup), he shall report the same to the department of
public health by acknowledged telephone communication within one hour of the
time the patient is first seen. If the attending physician suspects diphtheria,
to the extent that he administers or advises the administration of a diphtheria
anti-toxin, he shall report same to the department of public health by
acknowledged telephone communication within one hour of the time the anti-toxin
is administered or advised to be administered. (Ord. 4404)
SEC. 19-63.   LABORATORY EXAMINATIONS AND REPORTS; AUTHORITY OF HEALTH OFFICER
TO INSPECT LABORATORIES AND BLOOD BANKS AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICES.
   (a)   The director of public health shall secure material for cultures, or
specimens for bateriological or other laboratory examinations to assist in
determining the diagnosis whenever in his judgment such procedure is necessary,
and any person, when so requested by him or his authorized representative,
shall permit such specimen to be taken.
   The director of public health, or his representative, is hereby given
authority to inspect all bacteriological or clinical laboratories in the city
in which material from persons affected with communicable diseases is examined.
   Whenever an examination for diagnosis by a laboratory or any person other
than the physician in charge of the person from whom a laboratory specimen is
taken discloses the existence of a case of communicable disease, the person in
charge of the laboratory making the examination shall report all the facts,
including the name and address of the patient, to the department of public
health within 24 hours of the time diagnosis is made.
   Persons in charge of laboratories shall make such reports to the department
of public health as the director of public health may require.
   (b)   The director of public health, or his representatives, are hereby
given authority to inspect all blood banks and blood transfusion services in
the city (and blood banks and blood transfusion services in adjoining county
towns whenever blood and blood derivatives are imported for use within the city
limits) to determine compliance with current standards of blood banking and
blood transfusion services established by the Division of Biologics Standards
of the National Institutes of Health, the American Association of Blood Banks
and the Dallas County Medical Society, and compliance with rules and
regulations which might be adopted by the state department of health. The
director of public health may require one or more experts in the field of blood
banking to assist him, in an advisory capacity, in the inspection of any blood
bank.
   The director of public health shall be informed of existing and proposed
blood banking and blood transfusion services within the community and shall
offer rules and regulations for the location and construction of the blood
bank, including plumbing, heating, refrigeration, lighting, ventilation,
electrical services and all sanitary conditions and general hygiene which shall
insure the conduct and operation of the blood bank in a manner which will
protect the public health.
   The organization of new blood banking and blood transfusion services and the
modification of existing ones shall have, in the interest of public health and
safety, the approval of the department of public health and of the Dallas
County Medical Society (or the Dallas County Osteopathic Society if it pertains
to an osteopathic institution). In order to secure such approval, blood banking
and blood transfusion services shall have as responsible medical director a
physician licensed by the state board of medical examiners. If any change
occurs in the location, the licensed physician supervision or directorship of
the blood bank, or upon the discovery of a reportable communicable disease or
other condition injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the public, the
director of such blood bank shall inform or report such occurrence to the
director of public health within 48 hours. (Ord. Nos. 4404; 11452)
SEC. 19-64.   MEASURES FOR CONTROL IN SCHOOLS.
   The teacher, principal or president of any school, college, university of
Sunday school having under his care any pupil who appears to be affected by any
communicable disease shall promptly send such pupil home or separate him from
other pupils until examined by a physician. The teacher, principal or president
shall report the case in accordance with Section
19-62.
   In the event of the presence of any disease as specified in Section
19-61, the director of public health may cause to be examined any pupils,
teachers or other persons employed in the schools, and may take any measures
necessary to prevent the spread of disease. All school authorities and
employees shall conform to all rules and regulations of the department of
public health for the accomplishment of this end.
   Children having scarlet fever, diphtheria, acute poliomyelitis or smallpox,
and their contacts, may return to school only after presentation to the
principal of a certificate of freedom from disease signed by the director of
public health or his authorized representative. Children having had other
diseases may return only after presenting to the principal a certificate of
freedom from disease signed by the attending physician or the director of
public health, or after it is determined that the minimum period of isolation
prescribed in Section
19-71 for the disease the child had is completed. In cases where the director
of public health has had to exercise his discretion in quarantining, the
authorization to return to school must be given by the director of public
health, or his authorized representative. When in doubt concerning any case,
the school principal may require that release certificates be signed personally
by the director of public health or assistant director of public health.
   No superintendent, principal or teacher of any school, and no parent or
guardian of any child or minor, shall permit any such child or minor having
head lice or body lice to attend any public, private, parochial or Sunday
school until such child or minor shall have obtained a certificate from the
department of public health or from a private physician attesting to his
freedom from lice. (Ord. Nos. 4404; 5869)
SEC. 19-65.   INTERFERENCE WITH DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH.
   If any principal, school teacher, superintendent, or other person in charge
of any school or otherwise connected with any school willfully attempts to
obstruct or interfere with the director of public health or any authorized
person assisting in carrying out the provisions of this article, he shall be
guilty of an offense. (Ord. Nos. 7802; 19963)
SEC. 19-66.   MEDICAL CERTIFICATES REQUIRED OF DOMESTIC SERVANTS.
   Domestic servants and employees must secure the medical certificate provided
for in Chapter 17 before entering upon their duties or before continuing their
duties as such domestic servants or employees, and they shall pay the same fees
as provided for in Chapter 17, “Domestic servant”. “Domestic servant” as used
herein means any servant or employee in any home or private residence engaged
in the usual and customary household duties, such as cooking, cleaning and
caring for or tending children. (Ord. 7804)
SEC. 19-67.   ISOLATION OF INFECTED PERSONS.
   The director of public health shall, when he is informed of the existence of
any malignant fever, smallpox or other pestilential, infectious or contagious
disease in the city, cause the person affected to be taken to such place as he
may designate for treatment. The place selected by the director of public
health shall be and become a pest house.
   The director of public health shall make, and he is hereby clothed with the
power to make, and enforce all proper regulations to keep the diseased person
so isolated from healthy persons and to prevent the intrusion of parties not
under his direction and control. (Ord. 7802)
SEC. 19-68.   PHYSICIANS TO REPORT CERTAIN DISEASES.
   Every practicing physician in the city is hereby required to report
immediately to the director of public health every case of diphtheria,
smallpox, influenza, scarlet fever or other contagious and infectious diseases
that he may be called upon to attend. Such report shall be in writing and
signed by such physician, and it shall be made within six hours after the
discovery of such disease and shall state the name, sex, place of residence and
color of the person afflicted with such disease and the character of such
disease. (Ord. 7802)
SEC. 19-69.   WHEN SCHOOL CHILDREN TO BE EXAMINED; PROHIBITING SCHOOL
ATTENDANCE.
   Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the director of public health
that any infectious or contagious diseases exist or are likely to exist among
the school children or pupils attending the public schools of the city or
private schools, it shall be the duty of such officer to immediately examine
and investigate the condition of any such school, or of any child or pupil
attending same for the purpose of ascertaining if there exists any contagious
or infectious disease, or is likely to exist any contagious infectious disease.
If any pupil or child attending any school is found with any contagious
disease, he shall, upon the order of the officer, discontinue his attendance at
the school, and shall not return or attempt to return to same until the
infectious or contagious disease is entirely cured. It shall be the duty of the
teacher, principal or superintendent in charge of such pupil, child or school
to disallow and prohibit the child or pupil from attending the school until
such child or pupil is entirely cured and freed from any contagious or
infectious disease. (Ord. 7802)
SEC. 19-70.   HOTEL KEEPERS, ETC., TO REPORT INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
   When it shall come to the knowledge of the keeper or proprietor of any
hotel, tavern, boardinghouse or inn that any inmate thereof shall be sick with
smallpox, varioloid, yellow fever or any other infectious or contagious disease
he shall forthwith report the same to the director of public health. (Ord.
7802)
SEC. 19-71.   METHODS OF ISOLATION IN VARIOUS DISEASES.
   Every person suffering from any of the diseases mentioned in Section
19-61 shall isolate himself and every person in charge of such a person shall
isolate the person of whom he is in charge in the following manner: When the
disease is smallpox, the person affected shall be placed in absolute
quarantine; when the disease is diphtheria, acute poliomyelitis or scarlet
fever, the person affected shall be placed in modified quarantine; when the
disease is epidemic meningitis, the person affected shall be placed in modified
isolation; when the disease is malaria, yellow fever, dengue or encephalitis,
the person affected shall be kept in a screened room free from mosquitoes until
the infection organism is no longer found in the blood; when the disease is any
of the others mentioned in Section
19-61, the person affected shall be so restricted in movement that the disease
will not spread from him to others. No person other than the physician or
person in charge of or in attendance upon the patient shall enter any premises,
room or apartment quarantined for a communicable disease in violation of the
terms of the quarantine. No person shall wilfully or negligently expose any
other person to a communicable disease. (Ord. Nos. 4404; 5869)
SEC. 19-72.   PLACARDING.
   When there is a case of diphtheria, acute poliomyelitis, scarlet fever or
smallpox, the director of public health, or his duly authorized representative,
shall post a suitable placard or placards in a conspicuous place or places on
the premises, apartment or room where the disease exists; provided, that if the
case is under satisfactory hospital care, the placard may be omitted, except in
cases where the placard is needed for control of contacts. The director of
public health shall placard any premises wherein there is any person having a
communicable disease, if that person does not isolate himself in a manner that
will assure the prevention or spread of disease from himself to others. No
person shall remove such placard except the director of public health or his
authorized representative. (Ord. Nos. 4404; 5869)
SEC. 19-73.   MINIMUM PERIODS OF ISOLATION.
   The minimum periods of isolation in various diseases shall be as follows:
Scarlet fever, until 14 days from onset of the disease; diphtheria, until two
negative nose and throat cultures taken not less than 24 hours apart are
obtained; acute poliomyelitis, until 14 days from onset of the disease;
epidemic meningitis, until seven days from onset of the disease, if the patient
is free of acute symptoms; smallpox, until all primary crusts have been shed;
measles and German measles, until seven days from onset of the rash;
chickenpox, until seven days from onset of the disease, or until all primary
crusts have disappeared; whooping cough, until four weeks from onset of
catarrhal symptoms, or three weeks from onset of paroxysmal cough; mumps, until
the swelling has disappeared; typhoid fever, until 10 days after temperature
reaches and remains normal, and thereafter until two stools, taken not less
than 48 hours apart, are negative for bacillus typhosus; all other diseases
mentioned in Section
19-61, until, in the opinion of the director of public health, the patient can
no longer transmit the infection. (Ord. Nos. 4404; 5514; 5869)
SEC. 19-74.   CONTROL OF CONTACTS.
   The director of public health shall have the power to isolate or restrict
the movement of any person who is known to have been exposed to any of the
communicable diseases named in Section
19-80 for a time equal to the maximum incubation period of the disease and in
the manner prescribed in Section
19-71. (Ord. 4404)
SEC. 19-75.   INCUBATION PERIODS.
   For the purpose of this article, maximum incubation periods shall be
considered to be as follows: Chickenpox, 18 days; measles, 18 days; German
measles, 21 days; typhoid and paratyphoid fevers, 28 days; acute poliomyelitis,
14 days; Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 12 days; scarlet fever, seven days;
whooping cough, 16 days; diphtheria, seven days; epidemic meningitis, 14 days;
mumps, 26 days; smallpox, 21 days. (Ord. 4404)
SEC. 19-76.   PROCEDURE WHEN DWELLING INFECTED.
   Whenever it shall be called to the attention of the director of public
health that a dwelling is infected with a contagious disease or that it is
dangerous due to inadequate ventilation and otherwise unsanitary and likely to
cause sickness among the occupants of such building, the director of public
health shall make an inspection of such building and if he finds that such
building is in truth and fact infected with a contagious disease or that it is
dangerous due to lack of ventilation, or is otherwise in an unsanitary
condition and likely to cause disease, then the director of public health shall
issue an order to the owner or agent, directing such owner or agent to
disinfect or decontaminate the building and to otherwise remedy any defects he
finds and upon the failure on the part of the owner or agent to conform with
this order within 10 days, the director of public health shall direct that the
building be vacated, if occupied, and that it remain vacant until the
conditions set forth in the order are corrected in conformity with this article
or any provisions of this code or other ordinances of the city, and if the
owner or agent shall not have remedied the conditions complained of, the
occupant or occupants shall be notified by the director of public health to
vacate the premises within three days, unless the director of public health
shall quarantine the entire premises and the occupants thereof, and it shall be
unlawful and an offense of any occupant to fail to comply with the notice or
order so issued. (Code 1941, Art. 49-11; Ord. Nos. 4404; 8049)
SEC. 19-77.   REMOVAL OF CERTAIN CASES TO HOSPITAL.
   When, in the opinion of the director of public health, proper isolation or
quarantine of a person affected with, or a contact, or a carrier of any of the
diseases mentioned in Section
19-61, is not or cannot be properly carried out on the premises occupied by
such person, the director of public health may cause such person to be removed
to a hospital or other proper place designated by the director of public
health. (Code 1941, Art. 49-12; Ord. 4404)
SEC. 19-78.   PRECAUTIONS BY ATTENDANTS.
   The physician or any other person permitted to visit a person affected with
a communicable disease shall practice such measures of personal cleansing,
disinfecting and all other precautions as are necessary to prevent the spread
of the disease to others. (Code 1941, Art. 49-13; Ord. 4404)
SEC. 19-79.   DISINFECTION.
   When any person is affected with a communicable disease, adequate
disinfection shall begin at its onset and continue until its termination. It
shall be the duty of the director of public health or his authorized
representative to give specific instructions to the person attending a case or
suspected case of communicable disease as to methods of disinfecting the
discharges and articles used by or on the patient, and it shall be the duty of
the person in charge to carry out such instructions. No article shall be
removed from quarantined premises without a permit from the director of public
health, or his authorized representative.
   When the case has terminated, the owner or occupant shall further disinfect,
clean or renovate the premises as the director of public health shall require.
Any articles which, in the opinion of the director of public health or his
representative cannot be properly cleansed or disinfected shall be destroyed.
The owner of any premises, apartment or rooms, which have been occupied by a
person affected with a communicable disease, shall not rent the same to others
or permit occupation by others until the premises have been cleansed to the
satisfaction of the director of public health or his representative. (Code
1941, Art. 49-14; Ord. 4404)
SEC. 19-80.   SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR CONTROLLING CERTAIN DISEASES.
   Directions shall be given by the director of public health, or his
authorized representative, to the nurse, attendant, head of the family or owner
of any premises, apartment or room, as the case may be, in the following
diseases, and in each case the party or parties concerned shall comply with the
instructions for control as outlined in this section: TYPHOID FEVER,
PARATYPHOID FEVER, ASIATIC CHOLERA, DYSENTERY (AMOEBIC, BACILLARY) AND
POLIOMYELITIS. Careful search for contacts by the director of public health and
nurse; instructions of family and attendant in nature of isolation; screening
of room free from flies, with wire screen doors adequate for exclusion of
flies; instruction of family in handling of food for household so that no fly
or article that has been in contact with patient may come in contact with food,
no milk bottle or other vessel for carrying milk shall be taken away from house
until case is terminated or upon written release from the director of public
health. In typhoid and paratyphoid, the director of public health shall
urgently recommend protective inoculation. Cases found in houses not screened
shall be protected within six hours by mosquito-bar netting and the room, house
or apartment in which patient is confined must be equipped with screen doors
within 48 hours.
   DIPHTHERIA. Careful search for contacts by director of public health and
nurse; instruction of family and attendant in nature of disease; all contacts
must be isolated and the director of public health will urge use of diphtheria
anti-toxin as a prophylactic. Exposed children, teachers, librarians, food
handlers and others whose work brings them in contact with the public must
change their address and give one negative culture from nose and throat before
returning to school or work. If they do not change their address, they shall be
excluded until one negative culture is taken after the case is terminated. The
householder shall not allow milk bottles or other containers to be taken from
house until termination of case and until same have been thoroughly disinfected
by boiling or by immersion for one hour in five per cent carbolic or lysol
solution, and upon written release by the director of public health.
   SCARLET FEVER, SEPTIC SORE THROAT, STREPTOCOCCAL SORE THROAT, STREPTOCOCCAL
NASOPHARYNGITIS. Children in the family shall be allowed to return to school
after period of incubation of diseases or upon the certificate of the attending
physician, or in the event there is no attending physician, on the certificate
of the director of public health or his authorized representative, certifying
that such children have received adequate and sufficient prophylaxis to render
them free from the presence of the infectious agent.
   DENGUE, MALARIAL FEVER AND YELLOW FEVER. Instructions by medical officer in
nature of infection, means of transmission and methods to be used for
preventing spread. Householder shall be instructed to rid house or premises of
all mosquitoes immediately, and to use means for the prevention of development
of mosquitoes on his premises, within 24 hours.
   SMALLPOX. The director of public health shall vaccinate all known contacts
and other persons in residence, house, apartment, building, establishment,
factory or other concern where patient was engaged at work. Contacts who have
been successfully vaccinated will not be detained, but contacts who have
refused vaccination shall be held in absolute isolation until 21 days following
removal or recovery of patient and complete disinfection of the room.
   INFLUENZA. The health officer will take such steps as he may deem necessary
in educating the public in habits of personal cleanliness, danger of
association with contacts showing catarrhal symptoms or cough, and, during
epidemics, upon the recommendation of the health officer, the city council may
issue such instructions as may be deemed necessary for the control of this
disease.
   WHOOPING COUGH. The head of the family shall keep the child away from other
children until the case is terminated.
   TYPHUS FEVER. The head of the family must destroy all vermin on body of
patients, transfer to vermin-free clothing, and place in a room free from
vermin, and all attendants must wear verminproof clothes. The head of the
family must take steps to eradicate rats and fleas from premises. All persons
exposed to typhus shall be held in quarantine in a vermin-free room until 12
days after last exposure.
   At termination of case, head of household shall destroy all lice, together
with their eggs, on patient’s body, if not already done, and destroy all vermin
and eggs in clothing returned to patient, and free isolation room of all
vermin.
   Upon appearance of an epidemic, the director of public health shall issue
general measures for delousing of persons’ clothing and premises as he may deem
necessary and for the eradication of rats and fleas.
   CHICKENPOX. Cases diagnosed as chickenpox in persons unvaccinated against
smallpox must be seen by the director of public health and/or the city health
officer.
   MUMPS. Parent, guardian or head of household must exclude children from
school or other public gatherings for 21 days after their last exposure to a
recognized case. (Code 1941, Art. 49-15; Ord. Nos. 4404; 5869)
SEC. 19-81.   SPECIAL RULES FOR TUBERCULOSIS.
   Whenever there is a case of tuberculosis, it shall be the duty of the
director of public health or his representative to take such proper precautions
as he may deem necessary, and to give proper instructions to the patient and
all other persons occupying the same premises to prevent the spread of the
disease. Every person affected with tuberculosis shall dispose of his sputum,
saliva or other discharges in a manner not dangerous to public health. Whenever
a person so affected is, or is likely to be, a menace to the health of others,
the director of public health shall have the power to cause the removal of such
person to an isolation hospital or other proper place until the danger has been
removed. Upon recovery of a person having tuberculosis, it shall be the duty of
his physician to notify the director of public health. (Code 1941, Art. 49-16;
Ord. 4404)
SEC. 19-82.   SERUM TO BE FURNISHED INDIGENT PERSONS.
   It shall be the duty of the department of public health to furnish free to
all indigent persons vaccine virus for smallpox protection and also the serum
or anti-toxin of any other disease. (Code 1941, Art. 49-17; Ord. 4404)
SEC. 19-82.1.   IMMUNIZATION, REGISTRATION, AND RECORD FEE SCHEDULE.
   The director of public health of the city is authorized to charge the
following fees for the following services performed by the health department:
      (1)   for each visit by an individual to a child health clinic, an amount
in accordance with the following schedule based on the Poverty Income
Guidelines established by the United States Department of Health:
 
Poverty Level                Fee Per Treatment
Less than 120 percent        $3
120 to less than 140 percent $6
140 to less than 160 percent $8
160 to less than 180 percent $10
180 to less than 200 percent $12
200 percent and over         $14
 
      (2)   $3 for each visit to an immunization clinic by an individual who
receives immunization;
      (3)   $3 for each individual who receives immunization during each visit
to a day care center;
      (4)   $1 for each duplicate copy of an immunization record; and
      (5)   $2 for each registration by an individual for each of the following
health education classes or screenings:
         (A)   $4 for a four-week class;
         (B)   $5 for a five-week or six-week class; and
         (C)   $2 for a health screening. (Ord. Nos. 11913; 17134; 19300;
20076)
SEC. 19-83.   REGULATION OF FUNERALS FOR PERSONS DYING FROM CERTAIN DISEASES.
   When a person has died of epidemic cerebro- spinal meningitis, polio-
myelitis, diphtheria or smallpox, no person except the undertaker and his
assistants, the clergyman and others permitted by the director of public health
shall enter the house until after the funeral and until after the warning
placard has been removed. If the funeral is held elsewhere than at the last
residence of the deceased, the funeral may be public; provided, that only those
members of the immediate family may attend, who, in the opinion of the director
of public health, are free from infection, and to whom he has given permission
to do so. (Ord. 5869)
ARTICLE IVA.
REPORTABLE HEALTH CONDITIONS.
SEC. 19-83.1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   (1)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the city
manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s authorized
representative.
   (2)   ENVIRONMENTALLY RELATED HEALTH CONDITION means a condition in which
body levels of certain substances are equal to or in excess of the levels set
out in Section
19-83.2. (Ord. 18193)
SEC. 19-83.2.   ENVIRONMENTALLY RELATED HEALTH CONDITION LEVEL OF LEAD.
   An environmentally related health condition level of lead is a blood level
of at least 10 micrograms per deciliter. (Ord. Nos. 18193; 21215)
SEC. 19-83.3.   REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Every licensed physician, hospital, or free standing medical
laboratory in the city shall report to the director any environmentally related
health condition as defined in Section
19-83.2, which is detected in the course of regular medical practice or
laboratory testing. The report shall be in a manner similar to state health
reporting of certain infectious diseases and shall:
      (1)   be in writing and signed by the reporting party;
      (2)   be made within 15 calendar days after the result of testing is
received by the physician or hospital, or in the case of a medical laboratory,
after the test is performed;
      (3)   state the name, age and address of the person having the condition;
and
      (4)   state the precise test results.
   (b)   Reporting of elevated free erythrocyte protoporphyrin is not required
if additional testing shows that the porphyria is the result of either an iron
deficiency or other proven cause. (Ord. 18193)
SEC. 19-83.4.   USE OF REPORTS.
   (a)   Every report made to the director under Section
19-83.3 is confidential and may be released only to:
      (1)   the person having the environmentally related health condition or,
in the case of a minor, a parent or guardian; and
      (2)   the Texas Department of State Health Services.
   (b)   The director shall, through the city manager, make a quarterly report
to the city council on the number and type of physicians’ reports. If it
becomes apparent to the director that a particular area, community,
neighborhood, or section of the city is the subject of numerous similar
environmentally related health conditions, the director may, at any time,
notify the city council through the city manager, that the environmentally
related health conditions have been reported. (Ord. Nos. 18193; 28127)
SEC. 19-83.5.   PENALTY.
   An offense committed under this section is punishable by a fine of not more
than $100. (Ord. 18193)
ARTICLE V.
DRY CLOSETS.
SEC. 19-84.   CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   From and after the 15th day of December, 1915, all dry closets within the
city and all dry closets located within 3,000 feet of the corporate line of the
city shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent access of flies and
insects to the closets and to the night soil and for such purpose shall be
constructed as follows:
   (a)   The closets and the compartment under the seat in which stands the
night soil container shall be tightly constructed of sound lumber, without
cracks or crevices. Any opening for ventilation shall be covered with wire fly
screening. There shall be at the back or side of the night soil container an
opening for the removal of the night soil container, which opening shall be
provided with a tightly fitting, let-down board cover, hinged to the house and
so constructed as to prevent access of insects to the night soil. This cover
shall be provided with a hook or button and shall always be kept closed. Where
practicable, the opening shall abut on a public alley, and in any event it
shall be located so as to be readily accessible to the city scavenger. The
night soil container shall rest on a floor at least six inches above the ground
and two inches below the floor of the closet. The seat openings in the closet
shall be provided with tightly fitting, hinged, self-closing covers of
sufficient size to completely cover the openings in the seat.
   (b)   The roof of each dry closet shall be watertight and so constructed as
not to shed water into the night soil container. The doors of all dry closets
shall be tight fitting and self closing and any windows or openings for
ventilation shall be covered with wire fly screens not coarser than 14 mesh to
the inch. All dry closets shall have at least two openings of not less than one
square foot each for ventilation.
   (c)   All existing dry closets which are not constructed in compliance with
this chapter shall be immediately reconstructed or repaired so as to be in
accordance with the provisions hereof, and it shall be the duty of the owner or
person in charge or control of the property upon which such closet is located,
or the agent of such owner, if the owner be a nonresident, to make such
alterations or improvements as will fully meet the requirements and intent of
this chapter, and so as to prevent the closet from being a menace to public
health.
   (d)   Whenever in the opinion of the city health officer, or his duly
authorized agent, the condition of any existing closet is such that it cannot
be altered to meet the requirements of this chapter and be maintained in a
sanitary condition, the owner or person in charge of the property upon which
such dry closet is located, or the agent of such owner, if such owner is a
nonresident, shall, within 15 days after notice from the city health officer,
or his duly authorized agent, provide a new closet constructed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   No dry closet shall be built or maintained on any piece of property,
any part of which extends to within 100 feet of a sanitary sewer. No dry closet
shall be located within 10 feet of the property line of any piece of property
except where such property abuts upon a public alley. If a water-operated
fixture is installed in any dry closet, it shall be included within the
provisions of this chapter and shall be in all respects constructed and
maintained in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 7806;
27697)
SEC. 19-85.   CLEANING; PREVENTION OF ODOR.
   All dry closets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition at all
times. The night soil containers shall be emptied and cleaned and disinfected
at least once a month and more frequently if in the opinion of the director of
public health or his duly authorized agent this is necessary. The door of the
closet shall not be allowed to remain open at any time, unless there is a self-
closing fly screen door in addition to that required under the preceding
section. No wash water, garbage, kitchen slop or other liquid wastes shall be
emptied into the dry closet. Every dry closet shall be provided with a box of
dry earth or powdered lime, enough of which shall be added each day to the
night soil container to absorb the excess moisture and prevent odor. No night
soil from any person suffering from typhoid fever or other serious bowel
trouble shall be deposited in any dry closet without being previously
disinfected in such manner as directed or approved by the director of public
health, or his duly authorized agent. (Ord. 7806)
ARTICLE VI.
SEPTIC TANKS.
SEC. 19-86.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   CESSPOOL means a covered excavation which receives the discharge of
raw domestic sewage or other organic wastes and is designed to retain the
organic matter and solids, but permit the liquids to seep through the bottom
and sides.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s
designated representative.
      (3)   PERSON means any natural person, corporation, organization, estate,
trust, partnership, association, or similar entity.
      (4)   PRIVATE SEWAGE FACILITY means any facility or method used for
disposal of sewage that serves only an individual household or establishment
and appurtenant structures, and the operation and maintenance of which is the
sole responsibility of the householder or owner of the establishment’s
facilities.
      (5)   SEPTIC TANK means a water-tight, covered receptacle designed and
constructed to (1) receive the discharge of sewage from a building sewer, (2)
separate solids from the liquid, (3) digest organic matter under anaerobic
conditions, (4) store digested solids through a period of detention, and (5)
allow the clarified liquids to discharge for final disposal.
      (6)   SEWAGE means any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter
in suspension or solution, including liquids containing chemicals in solution,
domestic wastewater, and laundry wastes. (Ord. Nos. 7821; 15655; 17226)
SEC. 19-87.   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he installs a septic tank or any other
form of private sewage facility in the city, or where water is furnished by the
city, without a permit.
   (b)   No permit for a private sewage facility will be issued if the location
is within 100 feet of an existing city sanitary sewer system, unless an
exception is granted by the director on the grounds that connection with the
sanitary sewer is impossible.
   (c)   If the city sanitary sewer system is extended to serve an area that is
served by private sewage facilities, a person commits an offense if he fails to
connect to the city system within one year of the date the city sewer system is
available. If a private facility malfunctions seriously and overflows prior to
the expiration of one year, connection to the city system must be made
immediately. (Ord. Nos. 7821; 15655)
SEC. 19-88.   APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE; PERCOLATION TEST.
   Application for a septic tank permit must be made to the building official.
The fee for a septic tank permit is $100, and the fee shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   plans and specifications of the proposed septic tank; and
      (2)   the results of a valid percolation test complying with rules and
regulations for the conducting of percolation tests which shall be promulgated
by the building official. (Ord. Nos. 7821; 15655; 18969)
SEC. 19-89.   APPROVAL OF PLANS BY THE DIRECTOR BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   A permit for the installation of a septic tank shall be issued only after
approval of the plans and specifications by the director, and assurance that
the plans meet the requirements of the construction standards as contained in
Sec. 19-90 of this article. (Ord. Nos. 7821; 15655)
SEC. 19-90.   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The specifications for the construction of a septic tank shall be those
published in the most recent edition of “Construction Standards for Private
Sewage Facilities,” issued by the Texas Department of Health Resources, as it
may be amended from time to time. Those standards, currently Rule Numbers
301.79.03. 001-003 of the Texas Department of Health Resources, are promulgated
under the authority of Texas Civil Statutes, Art. 4477-1 (1976). (Ord. Nos.
7821; 15655)
SEC. 19-91.   INSPECTION.
   Before the septic tank system is covered, the permit holder shall notify the
director and allow the director to inspect the system. The director shall
ascertain that the tanks, connections, and other materials are constructed in
accordance with the applicable construction standards. (Ord. Nos. 7821; 15655)
SEC. 19-92.   TANKS NOT TO BE OFFENSIVE.
   A person commits an offense if he allows a septic tank or other private
sewage facility within the city, or within 3000 feet of the corporate limits of
the city, to become foul, offensive, or nauseating, or in any way drain to the
surface of the ground, so as to become injurious to the public health. (Ord.
Nos. 7821; 15655)
SEC. 19-93.   CESSPOOLS.
   A person commits an offense if he deposits sewage into a cesspool anywhere
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. Nos. 7821; 15655)
ARTICLE VII.
FUMIGATION.
SEC. 19-94.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s
designated representative.
      (2)   FUMIGATION and EXTERMINATION BY FUMIGATION mean the use of
hydrocyanic acid gas, cyanogen, chloropicrin, methyl bromide, or any other
poisonous, noxious, or dangerous gases or fumes which are liable to affect
human beings by causing sickness or death, for the extermination of germs,
bacteria, insects, vermin, rats, or other pests in any place of domestic
habitation, hotel, apartment hotel, apartment building, tenement building,
store, office, hospital, asylum, home, rooming house, place of public assembly,
or any other building or place. (Ord. Nos. 3281; 27697)
SEC. 19-95.   GENERAL SAFEGUARDS.
   All persons fumigating or engaged in extermination by fumigation shall take
all necessary and reasonable precautions and safeguards in connection with such
fumigation as shall be necessary to protect all persons who might be affected
by such fumigation. (Ord. 3281)
SEC. 19-96.   NOTICE REQUIRED GENERALLY.
   Any person intending to generate or release hydrocyanic acid gas or other
dangerous gases or fumes for fumigation purposes shall, before starting such
generation or release of gases, file written notice with the director, the
police department, and the fire department of the city at least 24 hours before
beginning such fumigation; provided, that any person intending to fumigate a
mobile unit such as a boxcar or truck is required to give a written notice only
four hours before beginning such fumigation. Such notice, either the four hour
notice or the 24 hour notice, must state the following:
      (1)   The location of the building, mobile unit, or place to be
fumigated.
      (2)   The type of fumigation to be used, including the kind of gas,
fumes, and warning agent.
      (3)   The time such work is to be started and when the building or place
is to be reopened. (Ord. Nos. 3281; 11807; 22026; 27697)
SEC. 19-97.   NOTICE TO OCCUPANTS.
   When hydrocyanic acid gas, or other dangerous gases or fumes, are to be used
for fumigation, the person undertaking such fumigation shall personally inspect
the premises before beginning the fumigation and shall serve notice over his
signature upon all responsible occupants of each room or apartment within the
danger area, stating the danger of the process and the precautions to be
observed, designating the rooms or apartments that must be vacated and
indicating the time when the gas is to be generated or liberated. The form of
this notice must be approved by the director. (Ord. Nos. 3281; 27697)
SEC. 19-98.   DOORS TO BE LOCKED, ETC.
   Before fumigation, the person fumigating shall personally inspect all rooms
and apartments ordered vacated under Section
19-97, and shall see that such rooms are unoccupied by persons or domestic
animals, after which all doors to such rooms, excepting one exit door to the
rooms or apartments to be gassed, shall be securely locked and sealed. In
addition such windows or wall openings as might possibly be used to gain
entrance shall be sealed and shall be locked or barred in such a way as to
prevent entrance. Immediately upon generating or liberating the gas, the door
through which the fumigator leaves shall be securely locked and sealed, and all
keys obtainable to all the rooms or apartments ordered vacated shall be
retained by the fumigator until all danger is passed. (Ord. 3281)
SEC. 19-99.   WARNING SIGNS TO BE POSTED.
   (a)   Prior to beginning fumigation, suitable warning signs must be posted
on all entrances or doors to the premises to be fumigated, as follows:
   DANGER
   FUMIGATING WITH POISON GAS
   KEEP AWAY
   ============
   BY ORDER OF
   THE CITY OF DALLAS
   (NAME, ADDRESS AND
   TELEPHONE NUMBER OF
   FUMIGATOR)
   (b)   Such signs must be not less than 24 inches by 18 inches, and be
printed in red ink on white cardboard, or metal white background. The letters
in the word “danger” must be at least two inches high, and all others, except
the signature of the fumigator, at least three-fourths of an inch high. At
night, and in such places where the natural light between sunrise and sunset is
dim, such signs must be illuminated so as to make the reading matter on the
sign plainly legible. (Ord. Nos. 3281; 27697)
SEC. 19-100.   GUARDS REQUIRED.
   Whenever hydrocyanic acid gas and other dangerous gases and fumes are used
for fumigation, a sufficient number of guards shall be kept at the entrance or
entrances to the building or place to be fumigated, in order to prevent any
person from entering such building or place while the gas remains therein. Such
guards shall remain on duty until after the building or place is opened for
airing, and until the gas has been completely dispelled from such building or
place. The fumigator shall be responsible for reopening such building or place
after the fumigation, and shall be responsible for seeing that such building or
place is safe for human habitation before allowing persons to enter. (Ord.
3281)
ARTICLE VIII.
DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
SEC. 19-101.   “DRAINAGE DISTRICT” DEFINED.
   The term “drainage district”, as used in this article, shall comprehend and
mean the building of storm sewers as provided in this article, or the
reclamation of lands, as provided in this article, and in general shall
comprehend the doing of any necessary improvement to effectuate such purposes
and the assessment of the cost thereof, according to a just, fair and equitable
apportionment, against the property specially benefited and enhanced in value
by the making of such improvements. (Code 1941, Art. 128-3)
SEC. 19-102.   CONSTRUCTION OF ARTICLE.
   All the provisions of the charter and state laws relative to the assessment
of property shall, so far as practicable, be applicable to any of the
provisions of this article unless otherwise provided in this article. This
article shall be cumulative of all other methods and means provided by any
other law relating to the same subject. (Code 1941, Art. 128-19)
SEC. 19-103.   PURCHASE OF PROPERTY.
   The city may purchase, by agreement or by condemnation, all property that
may be necessary for carrying out any particular drainage plan, or the making
of any drainage improvement, and the same shall be paid for out of any
available funds and the cost of the purchase shall be added to the cost of the
improvement and charged against the property in the territory specially
benefited thereby. The city may sell and convey any part of any such property
unappropriated for such improvement at such terms and for such consideration as
it may see fit, and the proceeds thereof shall become a part of the special
fund out of which the cost of the improvement may be defrayed. Only the cost of
property actually appropriated for such improvement shall be included in any
assessment made under the provisions hereof. (Code 1941, Art. 128-2)
SEC. 19-104.   CREATION OF DRAINAGE DISTRICT; PREPARATION OF PLAT; ESTIMATE OF
COST.
   When the city council determines to proceed to create a drainage district,
it shall so declare by resolution, which resolution may state the nature and
extent of the drainage improvement to be made and the limits thereof, and may
describe the parcel or parcels of land proposed to be taken or condemned, in
case condemnation may be required, by any description substantially identifying
the same, by lot or block number, or number of front feet, or, if owned by an
estate, the name thereof. No error, mistake or omission of such resolution
shall invalidate it, and its passage shall be conclusive of the public use and
necessity of the proposed improvement. Upon passage of such resolution, the
city engineer or an engineer designated by the city council shall prepare and
submit to the city council a plat showing the nature and limits of the proposed
improvements, the boundaries thereof and the points between which it is
proposed to establish the same, and the property through which it is to be
extended, which is to be taken or condemned therefor, and shall in writing
report the estimated total cost of such improvement, and of each parcel of
property to be condemned or acquired. The city council shall examine such plat
and report and correct errors therein, if any, but no error or omission shall
invalidate the same or any proceeding had thereafter pursuant thereto. (Code
1941, Art. 128-4)
SEC. 19-105.   CONDEMNATION PROCEEDINGS.
   No property shall be taken for a drainage district without just compensation
first made in accordance with the provisions of law applicable thereto.
   In case of condemnation, commissioners shall be appointed in accordance with
the method provided by the statutes relating to the opening and widening of
streets and by such other laws as may be applicable thereto.
   The laws relating to the method of condemnation of property by railroads and
methods of appeal shall apply to any drainage district created hereunder, the
city to occupy the position of a railroad company, as nearly as practicable.
(Code 1941, Art. 128-5)
SEC. 19-106.   SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS - GENERALLY.
   Whenever the city council shall order the creation of any drainage district,
as provided in this article, it may then or at any time provide, by resolution,
that all or part of the cost thereof shall be assessed against the property
located in the territory affected by such drainage improvement. It may then, or
at any time, provide for the appointment of three special commissioners to
apportion the cost of the property so specially enhanced in value by reason of
the drainage improvement. Such special commissioners may be appointed at any
time to do and perform such work, and they shall receive such compensation as
may be provided by the city council; provided, that in case it is determined
that condemnation of any such drainage district may be required, then the
commissioners so appointed by the proper court or court authority may do such
assessing and make such apportionment of assessments as in the case of the
opening and widening of public streets. Such assessments shall constitute a
prior lien upon the property to all other except for ad valorem taxes, and the
same shall relate back and take effect as of the date of the resolution
ordering the improvement.
   No assessment shall be made against any property exempt under the law from
execution, but the owner thereof shall be personally liable and assessed
therefor. (Code 1941, Art. 128-6)
SEC. 19-107.   SAME - HEARING; NOTICE REQUIRED; PAYMENT, ETC.
   No assessment shall be made against owners of property benefited, or their
property, pursuant to this article, until after a reasonable opportunity to be
heard shall have been given them, lienholders and others interested, before the
special commissioners referred to in the preceding section, preceded by a
reasonable notice thereof, published three times prior to such hearing in some
newspaper of general circulation in the city, the first publication to be not
less than 10 days prior to such hearing. The names of owners, lienholders and
others interested need not be specifically set out in such notice, but the
parcel or parcels of land proposed to be assessed shall be briefly described in
such notice, either by lot and block number, front feet thereof, or by any
other description reasonably identifying the same, or by reference to any plat,
report or record filed in connection with the proceedings.
   The city council or special commissioners shall have power to give other and
additional notice, but the published notice, required by the preceding
paragraph, shall be sufficient.
   At such hearing the owners, lienholders and other interested parties shall
have the right to contest in writing the assessments, the special benefits,
irregularities or invalidities thereof, or any prerequisite thereto, and to
produce testimony in support of such contests, and the special commissioners
shall determine the amounts, if any, to be assessed. The city council shall
make such assessments by ordinance. Such assessments may be enforced by suit
brought by the city for the benefit of any holder and owner of such assessment,
or of the certificate issued thereon, or brought by such holder and owner, or
by the sale of the property assessed in the same manner as near as possible as
is provided for the sale of real estate for municipal taxes. Assessments may be
made payable in not exceeding 15 installments, the last maturing in not over 15
years, and may bear interest at not over eight percent per annum.
   Each property owner shall have the privilege of discharging the whole amount
assessed against him, or any installment thereof, at anytime before maturity,
upon payment thereof, with accrued interest. Upon the payment by any property
owner of his assessment in full, the city shall cause to be executed by the
city manager or any officer designated by the city council for such purpose,
and duly acknowledged for record, a release of the lien of such assessment. The
fact that more than one parcel or lot of land, the property of one owner or
jointly owned by two or more persons, have been assessed together in one
assessment, shall not invalidate the same or the lien thereon, or any claim of
personal liability thereunder. The cost of any such improvement assessed
against any property or owner thereof, together with all costs and reasonable
expense in collecting the same, including reasonable attorney’s fees when
incurred, shall constitute a personal claim against such property owner, and
shall be secured by a lien on such property superior to all other liens, claims
or titles, except city, county and state taxes, and such personal liability and
lien may be enforced either by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction, or
by sale in the same manner, as far as applicable, as sales are authorized to be
made by the city for the nonpayment of taxes; provided, that it shall not be
necessary to sell at the same time as for delinquent ad valorem taxes, and the
city council may make such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as
may be deemed necessary to provide for the collection of such assessment.
   The city council shall at all times have the authority to provide, by
appropriation out of any of the general or special revenues available, money to
pay for the cost of doing any special improvement, and any such appropriation
shall be charged against such district and such sum so appropriated shall be
paid back from property specially benefited, on the sale of certificates or as
such money may be realized. Special funds may be created from time to time to
carry out the work of such contemplated improvements. (Code 1941, Art. 128-7)
SEC. 19-108.   SAME - ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES, ETC.
   The city may issue assignable certificates, payable to the city, or to the
purchaser thereof, declaring the liability of owners and their property for the
payment of assessments, and may fix the terms, time of payment and conditions
of default and maturity thereof. If such certificate shall recite that the
proceedings with reference to the improvements therein referred to have been
regularly had in compliance with law, and that all prerequisites to fixing the
assessment lien against the property therein referred to, and the personal
liability of its owner, have been performed, such recitals shall be prima facie
evidence of the facts so recited.
   The allegations of such recitals of such certificates in any suit brought
for the enforcement thereof shall be a sufficient allegation of all proceedings
had by the city council with reference to the making of such improvements and
the assessment of the cost thereof, and of all prerequisites to such
assessment, and shall be deemed sufficient to permit proof of such proceedings
and prerequisites without the necessity of alleging and setting forth the same
in the pleadings, by caption, substantially or in full. Such certificates may
cover a period of 15 years and bear interest not to exceed eight percent per
annum.
   Such certificates shall represent the respective amounts due against the
respective owners of property whose property is specially benefited, as
provided in this article, and in case the work is let by contract, the
contractor shall look to the certificates for his compensation; provided, that
the portion of the cost of the improvement that is assessed against the city
may be paid in cash by the city, or according to such arrangement as may be had
between the city and the contractor. The certificates may be impounded, and if
the finances are available, the city any purchase the same as provided by the
charter. (Code 1941, Art. 128-8, 128-15)
SEC. 19-109.   SAME - ERRORS; CORRECTIONS; REASSESSMENTS.
   No error in any proceeding under this article, or in the description of
property, or in the name of its owner, shall invalidate an assessment, which
shall, nevertheless, be in effect as against the real and true owner and his
property. Whenever the city council or special commissioners are advised of
such error, they shall correct the same, and shall at the request of any
interested party reassess any owner of property erroneously assessed, after
lawful notice and hearing and in accordance with benefits as provided in this
article as to original assessments, and may fix the time and terms of payment
of the sums so reassessed, and issue assignable certificates evidencing the
same as provided in this article as to original assessments. The right to make
such reassessments shall continue until the expiration of 15 years from the
date of the ordinance making the original assessment. But if the same shall
have been resisted or brought in question in any action of law, the time
consumed in such action shall be excluded in computing such term of 15 years.
In making such reassessments it shall not be necessary to do any act, or take
any step, or again perform any prerequisite already legally done or performed
with reference to the original assessment, but the city council may in its
discretion proceed without again taking steps already validly taken or
performed; provided, that no reassessment shall be made until after notice and
hearing and in accordance with benefits, as provided in this article. (Code
1941, Art. 128-9)
SEC. 19-110.   SAME - SUIT TO SET ASIDE OR CORRECT.
   Any property owner against whom or whose property an assessment or
reassessment has been made pursuant to this article may, within 10 days
thereafter, bring suit in any court have jurisdiction, to set aside or correct
the same, or any proceeding with reference thereto on account of any error or
invalidity therein, but thereafter such owner, his heirs, assigns or successors
shall be barred from such action or any defense of invalidity in such
proceedings or assessment or reassessment, in any action in which the same may
be brought into question. (Code 1941, Art. 128-10)
SEC. 19-111.   SAME - METHOD; JUDGMENT OF COMMISSIONERS TO BE CONCLUSIVE.
   The apportionment of the assessments made pursuant to this article may be
made on the front foot basis or made on an area basis or both, whichever in the
judgment of the special commissioners may be deemed the most equitable and
just, and the judgment of the special commissioners shall in either case be
deemed prima facie evidence conclusive as to its correctness. (Code 1941, Art.
128-11)
SEC. 19-112.   STATE LAW TO CONTROL ARTICLE.
   As far as applicable, the terms of this article shall be controlled, as to
the manner of making assessments, except as otherwise provided herein, by the
law controlling the opening and widening of streets, and more particularly by
Title 28, Chapter 17, of the Revised Civil Statutes of the state. (Code 1941,
Art. 128-12)
SEC. 19-113.   SPECIFICATIONS; BIDS; CONTRACT; BOND.
   (a)   At any time after the passage of the original resolution provided for
in Section 19-104 by the city council, and more particularly at any time after
a hearing is given as provided in Section
19-107 to the property owners and lienholders owning property in the drainage
district created, the director of water utilities may submit specifications for
the doing of work contemplated in such improvement, which specifications must
in general terms set forth the nature and extent of the improvement or
improvements to be made, the section or section to be improved, and the
material or materials with which the improvements are to be constructed. Such
specifications may provide, at the election of the city council, that such
improvements may be constructed from different materials and may specify
different or alternative methods of making such improvements. The director of
water utilities shall make approximate estimates of the cost of improvements
under the different methods desired to be employed.
   (b)   Upon the adoption of specifications, if the city council decides to do
the work by contract, the city secretary, or such other officer as may be
designated by the city council, shall advertise for sealed bids for the
construction of such improvements in accordance with the specifications. The
advertisement must be inserted in a daily paper of general circulation in the
city and state the time within which bids may be received as prescribed by the
city council, which time may not be less than 10 or more than 15 days from the
insertion of the advertisement. Bids must be filed with the city secretary, or
such other officer as the board may designate, and must be opened and read in a
public meeting of the city council. The city council shall have the right to
accept such bids as it deems most advantageous to the city and the owners of
the property abutting upon the public highway named to be improved, or may
reject any and all bids. Where an improvement is ordered upon different
specifications, or for the construction of work or any part of the work with
different materials or under different plans or methods of construction or
payment for such improvement, the city council may, after opening bids, select
such methods, plans, or materials for making such improvement, or any part of
the improvement, as it deems best, and to let the work to such bidder and upon
such bid as it may select. No bid may be amended, changed, or revised after
being filed.
   (c)   When bids for improvements have been accepted by the city council, the
city shall enter into contract with the contractor to whom the work has been
let for the performance of the improvements, which contracts must be executed
in the name of the city or by its city manager and must be attested by the city
secretary, or such other officer as may be designated by the city council, with
the corporate seal. The contractor to whom the work has been let shall execute
a bond as may be required by the city council and as provided by the charter.
The contract and bond, if satisfactory, must be approved by the city council.
(Code 1941, Art. 128-13; Ord. Nos. 22026; 28424; 30994)
SEC. 19-114.   USE OF DAY WORK BY CITY.
   In case the city council should desire to do the work contemplated by this
article, by day work, it may proceed to do so, where its funds may be available
for such purpose and where it deems the day work more advantageous to the
owners of property in the territory benefited by the improvement. (Code 1941,
Art. 128-14)
SEC. 19-115.   REPORT OF AMOUNT TO BE PAID BY CITY.
   The special commissioners created by this article to make assessments may
consider, in any improvement district created, that portion of the cost, if
any, that will be required to be paid by the city, and the same shall be
reported to the city council in their final report. (Code 1941, Art. 128-16)
SEC. 19-116.   CHARTER TO GOVERN BIDDING.
   The provisions of the charter, relative to street paving, shall as far as
applicable govern the method of bidding and advertising for bids on any
contract let for any improvement pursuant to this article. (Code 1941, Art.
128-17)
SEC. 19-117.   ADDITIONAL METHODS OF FINANCING.
   The city council may in addition to any of the regulations provided for in
this article pass such other regulations as it may deem advisable for the
financing of any project instituted hereunder, it being the purpose of the
regulations to secure in a lawful manner all of the money necessary to carry
out and pay for any improvement ordered pursuant to this article. (Code 1941,
Art. 128-18)
ARTICLE IX.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
SEC. 19-118.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   AGRICULTURAL STORMWATER RUNOFF means any stormwater runoff from
orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other non- point source
agricultural activities, but does not include discharges from:
         (A)   concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR
Section 122.23; or
         (B)   concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in
40 CFR Section 122.24.
      (2)   ANIMAL WASTE means:
         (A)   animal manure, litter, or bedding;
         (B)   water that has contacted animal manure, litter, or bedding;
         (C)   water from washing, flushing, or cleaning animal pens; and
         (D)   liquid or solid waste from pens used at kennels, animal
hospitals, poultry processing facilities, dairies, or rendering plants.
      (3)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES means schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, local ordinances, maintenance procedures, structural
controls, and other management practices that are implemented to prevent or
reduce the discharge of pollutants into the stormwater drainage system, waters
of the United States, or state water. Best management practices also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
material storage.
      (4)   CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations, as periodically amended.
      (5)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (6)   COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION means the initial disturbance of soils
associated with clearing, tree removal, demolition, grading, excavating, earth
filling, or other construction activities.
      (7)   COMMERCIAL means used in connection with any business, trade,
industry, or other business activity engaged in for profit.
      (8)   CONSTRUCTION GENERAL PERMIT means either the general NPDES permit
issued by the EPA under 40 CFR Section 122.28, as amended, or the general TPDES
permit issued by the TCEQ under Chapter 205, Title 30 of the Texas
Administrative Code, as amended, that authorizes stormwater associated with
construction activities to be discharged into waters of the United States or
state water, including any subsequent modifications or amendments to the
permit, any renewals of the permit, and the associated EPA or TCEQ regulations.
      (9)   CONSTRUCTION SITE means a tract or parcel of land upon which
commencement of construction has occurred, together with any adjacent areas
used to access the construction site or to stage construction materials or
equipment by easement, license agreement, lease agreement, or other written or
verbal agreement. A construction site may include or be solely comprised of one
or more platted lots, public rights-of-way, or easements.
      (10)   CONSTRUCTION SITE NOTICE means the notice required to be posted at
a construction site by EPA or TCEQ regulations or by a construction general
permit that states a description of the project, the name and contact
information of the operator of the construction site, and the location of the
stormwater pollution prevention plan for the construction site.
      (11)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article, or the director’s duly
authorized representative.
      (12)   DISCHARGE means any addition, introduction, release, or flow of
any pollutant, stormwater, or other substance, whether separate or mixed, into
the stormwater drainage system, waters of the United States, or state water.
The term includes any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
escaping, leaching, dumping, disposing, or other type of release or discharge
engaged in, caused, or permitted by a discharger.
      (13)   DISCHARGER means:
         (A)   any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise
responsible for a discharge, including but not limited to any operator of a
construction site or industrial facility; or
         (B)   any owner or operator of a facility that is the source of a
discharge.
      (14)   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER means the following types of wastewater when
free from industrial waste:
         (A)   Water containing human excrement.
         (B)   Gray water from home clothes washing, bathing, showers,
dishwashing, and food preparation, and other wastewater from household drains.
         (C)   Waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories, and institutions.
      (15)   DUST means particles of a substance with a particle diameter of 50
microns or less.
      (16)   EPA means:
         (A)   the United States Environmental Protection Agency;
         (B)   any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed
to the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency; and
         (C)   any duly authorized official of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or any successor agency.
      (17)   EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE means any substance listed in the
appendices to 40 CFR Part 355, Emergency Planning and Notification.
      (18)   FACILITY means any building, structure, installation, equipment,
vehicle, vessel, process, activity, construction site, or other property, real
or personal, from which there is or may be a discharge.
      (19)   FERTILIZER means a solid or non-solid substance or compound that
contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants,
which substance or compound is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient
element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the
quality of a crop. The term includes a mixture of two or more fertilizers. The
term does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a mixture of
animal and plant remains, for which no claim of essential plant nutrient
elements is made.
      (20)   FINAL STABILIZATION means the status of the ground when:
         (A)   all soil disturbing activities at a site have been completed;
and
         (B)   either a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70
percent of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures has been established or equivalent permanent stabilization measures
(such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
      (21)   FIRE DEPARTMENT means the fire- rescue department of the city.
      (22)   FIRE PROTECTION WATER means water, including any substance or
material contained in the water, that is used by a person other than the fire
department to control or extinguish a fire.
      (23)   GARBAGE means that term as defined in Section
18-2(20) of this code.
      (24)   GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY means a state agency, county, school district,
municipality, or other political subdivision of the state.
      (25)   HARMFUL QUANTITY means the amount of any substance that will cause
pollution in the stormwater drainage system, waters of the United States, or
state water.
      (26)   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of
40 CFR Part 302.
      (27)   HAZARDOUS WASTE means any substance identified or listed as a
hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261.
      (28)   HERBICIDE means a chemical pesticide designed to control or
destroy plants, weeds, or leaves of grass.
      (29)   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE means any material generated in a
household (including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunk
houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, camp grounds, picnic grounds, and day
use recreational areas) by a consumer that, except for the exclusion provided
in 40 CFR Section 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under
40 CFR Part 261.
      (30)   INDIVIDUAL PERMIT means either an individual NPDES permit issued
by the EPA under 40 CFR Section 122.26, as amended, or an individual TPDES
permit issued by the TCEQ under Chapter 205, Title 30 of the Texas
Administrative Code, as amended, that authorizes stormwater from a construction
site or industrial facility specifically identified in the permit to be
discharged into waters of the United States or state water, including any
subsequent modifications or amendments to the permit, any renewals of the
permit, and the associated EPA or TCEQ regulations.
      (31)   INDUSTRIAL FACILITY means a facility that is listed in 40 CFR
Section 122.26(b)(14) or that is identified in a multi-sector general permit as
being engaged in industrial activity.
      (32)   INDUSTRIAL WASTE means that term as defined in Section
49-1(49) of this code.
      (33)   LANDFILL means an area of land or an excavation owned and operated
by the city:
         (A)   in which municipal solid waste is placed for permanent disposal;
and
         (B)   that is not a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an
injection well, or a pile, as those terms are defined in regulations
promulgated by the TCEQ.
      (34)   MG/L means milligrams per liter.
      (35)   MOTOR VEHICLE FLUID means any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze,
transmission fluid, hydraulic fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant,
gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend, or other fluid used in a motor
vehicle.
      (36)   MULTI-SECTOR GENERAL PERMIT means either the general NPDES permit
issued by the EPA under 40 CFR Section 122.28, as amended, or the general TPDES
permit issued by the TCEQ under Chapter 205, Title 30 of the Texas
Administrative Code, as amended, that authorizes stormwater from an industrial
facility to be discharged into waters of the United States or state water,
including any subsequent modifications or amendments to the permit, any
renewals of the permit, and the associated EPA or TCEQ regulations.
      (37)   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE means that term as defined in Section
18-2(28) of this code.
      (38)   NON-POINT SOURCE means any source of discharge of a pollutant that
is not a point source.
      (39)   NOTICE OF CHANGE means a written notification to the TCEQ required
by EPA or TCEQ regulations or by the terms governing a multi-sector general
permit or construction general permit, informing the TCEQ of changes to
information that was provided in a notice of intent or prior notice of change.
      (40)   NOTICE OF INTENT means the notice of intent application form
required by EPA or TCEQ regulations or by the terms governing a multi-sector
general permit or construction general permit to obtain NPDES or TPDES permit
coverage.
      (41)   NOTICE OF TERMINATION means the notice of termination required by
EPA or TCEQ regulations or by the terms governing a multi-sector general permit
or construction general permit to terminate NPDES or TPDES permit coverage.
      (42)   NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM) PERMIT
means a permit issued by the EPA under 40 CFR Part 122, as amended, that
authorizes the discharge of stormwater into waters of the United States.
      (43)   OIL means any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited
to:
         (A)   petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil, or any fraction of those oils
that is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure;
         (B)   sludge;
         (C)   oil refuse;
         (D)   oil mixed with other waste;
         (E)   animal fat, oil, or grease, including that of fish or marine
mammals; and
         (F)   vegetable oil, including oil from seeds, nuts, fruits, or
kernels.
      (44)   OPERATOR means any person who, either individually or jointly with
another person, has:
         (A)   operational control over facility specifications or construction
plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications in the
plans or specifications;
         (B)   responsibility for the management of an industrial facility;
         (C)   day-to-day operational control over those activities at a
facility necessary to ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements
and any permit conditions, including compliance with a stormwater pollution
prevention plan;
         (D)   actual physical use or operation of, or supervision of the
actual physical use or operation of, a facility; or
         (E)   operational control that is limited to the employment of other
operators.
      (45)   OWNER means any person who owns or has title, in whole or in part,
to a facility that is the source of a discharge.
      (46)   PERSON means an individual; a private, public, or non-profit
corporation; a partnership; an association; a limited liability company; a
firm; an industry; a governmental entity; or any other legal entity.
      (47)   PESTICIDE means any substance or mixture of substances intended:
         (A)   to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest; or
         (B)   for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant, as those
terms are defined in Section 76.001 of the Texas Agriculture Code, as amended.
      (48)   PETROLEUM PRODUCT means a petroleum product that is obtained from
distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel
for the propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline,
gasohol and other alcohol-blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene,
distillate fuel oil, and Number 1 and Number 2 diesel. The term does not
include naphtha-type jet fuel, kerosene-type jet fuel, or a petroleum product
destined for use in chemical manufacturing or feedstock of that manufacturing.
      (49)   PETROLEUM STORAGE TANK means any one, or a combination of,
aboveground or underground storage tanks that contain petroleum products,
including any connecting underground pipes.
      (50)   pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen
ion concentration of a solution that provides a relative measure of the acidity
or alkalinity of the solution.
      (51)   POINT SOURCE means any discernable, confined, and discrete
conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel,
conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal
feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel, or other
floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. The term does
not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater
runoff.
      (52)   POLLUTANT means dredged spoil, dirt, mud, solid waste, incinerator
residue, wastewater, garbage, wastewater sludge, munitions, chemical waste,
chemical sludge, medical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials,
hazardous waste, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, yard waste,
animal waste, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water, and any other similar material or substance characterized by state or
federal law or EPA or TCEQ regulations as a pollutant. The term does not
include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from
cultivated or uncultivated range land, pasture land, or farm land.
      (53)   POLLUTION means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical,
or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any waters of the United
States or state water that:
         (A)   renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans,
animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or
welfare; or
         (B)   impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for
any lawful or reasonable purpose.
      (54)   REPORTABLE QUANTITY means:
         (A)   for a hazardous substance, the quantity established and listed
in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302; and
         (B)   for an extremely hazardous substance, the quantity established
in 40 CFR Part 355 and listed in the appendices thereto, or Section 311 of the
Clean Water Act as described in 40 CFR Section 117.3.
      (55)   REPRESENTATIVE STORM EVENT means a precipitation event that:
         (A)   results in one-tenth inch or more of precipitation, as measured
by a rain gauge located within five miles of a construction site or industrial
facility;
         (B)   occurs at least 72 hours after the preceding precipitation event
that resulted in one-tenth inch or more of precipitation, as measured by the
same rain gauge; and
         (C)   produces runoff sufficient to obtain a discharge sample.
      (56)   RUBBISH means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that
consists of:
         (A)   combustible waste material, including paper, rags, cartons,
wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastic, yard trimmings, leaves, and
similar material; and
         (B)   noncombustible waste material, including glass, crockery, tin
cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar material that does not burn
at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800 degrees Fahrenheit).
      (57)   SECONDARY CONTAINMENT means a container or diversionary structure
(such as a bulk storage container, tank, basin, or mobile or portable
container) that is designed, installed, and constructed to catch and contain
spillage or leaks from a container that stores oil, used oil, petroleum
products, or any pollutant.
      (58)   SEPTIC TANK WASTE means any domestic wastewater contained in or
coming from a holding tank such as a vessel, chemical toilet, camper, trailer,
or septic tank.
      (59)   SITE means the land or water area where any facility is physically
located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the
facility.
      (60)   SOLID WASTE means any waste resulting from industrial, municipal,
commercial, mining, and agricultural operations or from community and
institutional activities, including but not limited to garbage; rubbish;
refuse; sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or
air pollution control facility; or other discarded material including solid,
liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material.
      (61)   SPECIFIC CONDUCTIVITY means the estimated dissolved solid contents
in water, as reflected by the ability of the water to conduct electricity and
as measured using the testing procedure for specific conductance under 40 CFR
136.3, as amended, or an equivalent method approved by the director.
      (62)   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION means either:
         (A)   a standard industrial classification under the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of
Management and Budget; or
         (B)   a North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)
classification under the U.S. NAICS Manual issued by the United States Office
of Management and Budget.
      (63)   STATE means the State of Texas.
      (64)   STATE WATER means, to the extent the water is located wholly or
partially within the city:
         (A)   the water of the ordinary flow, underflow, and tides of every
river, natural spring, stream, creek, pond, reservoir, estuary, wetland, marsh,
inlet, canal, and lake and of every bay or arm of the Gulf of Mexico and the
stormwater, floodwater, and rainwater of every river, natural stream, canyon,
ravine, depression, and watershed within, upon, or forming the boundaries of
the state, and including the beds and banks of all courses and bodies of
surface water; and
         (B)   water that is imported from any source outside the boundaries of
the state for use in the state and that is transported through the beds and
banks of any navigable stream within the state or by utilizing any facilities
owned or operated by the state.
      (65)   STORMWATER means stormwater runoff, snow or ice melt runoff, and
surface and drainage runoff resulting from precipitation that reaches the
surface of the earth during a precipitation event.
      (66)   STORMWATER DISCHARGE ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY means the
discharge from any conveyance that is used for collecting and conveying
stormwater and that is directly related to manufacturing, processing, or raw
materials storage areas at an industrial facility, which facility is within one
of the categories of facilities listed in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14) or is
identified in a multi-sector general permit as being engaged in industrial
activity. The term does not include any discharge that is excluded from the
EPA’s definition of “stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity.”
      (67)   STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM means the system of conveyances and
facilities (including roads with drainage systems, city streets, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, detention basins, ditches, man-made channels, natural creeks
and channels, lakes, rivers, and storm drains) owned and operated by the city
that are designed or used exclusively to collect or convey stormwater and that
are not designed or used to collect or convey wastewater.
      (68)   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN means a plan required by
either a construction general permit, a multi-sector general permit, or an
individual permit, which plan describes and ensures the implementation of
practices to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with
construction or industrial activity at a site or facility.
      (69)   TCEQ means:
         (A)   the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality;
         (B)   any state department, agency, or commission that may succeed to
the authority of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality; and
         (C)   any duly authorized official of the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality or any successor agency.
      (70)   TPDES (TEXAS POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM) PERMIT means
a permit issued by the TCEQ under Chapter 205, Title 30 of the Texas
Administrative Code, as amended, that authorizes the discharge of stormwater
into waters of the United States or state water.
      (71)   UNCONTAMINATED means not containing a harmful quantity of a
pollutant.
      (72)   USED OIL means any oil that:
         (A)   has been refined from crude oil or a synthetic oil;
         (B)   as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable
for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original
properties; and
         (C)   may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance
with state and federal law.
      (73)   WASTEWATER means domestic wastewater, industrial waste, or other
water-carried waste that is discharged into the wastewater system and passes
through the wastewater system to the city’s wastewater treatment plant for
treatment.
      (74)   WASTEWATER SYSTEM means the system of pipes, conduits, and other
conveyances owned and operated by the city that carries industrial waste and
domestic wastewater, whether treated or untreated, from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions
to the city’s wastewater treatment plant, and into which system stormwater,
surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
      (75)   WATER QUALITY STANDARD means the designation of a body or segment
of surface water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and
numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses,
as specified in Chapter 307, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, as
amended.
      (76)   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES:
         (A)   means, to the extent the waters are located wholly or partially
within the city:
            (i)   all waters that are currently used, were used in the past, or
may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all
waters subject to the ebb and flow of the tide;
            (ii)   all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;
            (iii)   all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of
which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce;
            (iv)   all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of
the United States under this definition;
            (v)   all tributaries of waters identified in this definition;
            (vi)   all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this
definition; and
            (vii)   any waters within the federal definition of the term as
described in 40 CFR Section 122.2, as amended; and
         (B)   does not include any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds,
or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.
      (77)   WETLANDS means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
      (78)   YARD WASTE means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris,
and brush that result from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing
operations. (Ord. Nos. 24033; 27697; 28461)
SEC. 19-118.1.   ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The director, the city environmental health officer, and any code
compliance officer have the power to enforce this article.
   (b)   The municipal court has the power to issue administrative search
warrants, or other process allowed by law, to a police officer, the director,
the city environmental health officer, or a code compliance officer of the city
where necessary to aid in enforcing this article.
   (c)   A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
continued. Each offense is punishable by a fine of not less than $250 and not
more than $2,000.
   (d)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this article is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (e)   A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this article if
the person:
      (1)   commits or assists in the commission of the violation or causes or
permits another person to commit the violation; or
      (2)   owns, operates, or manages a site or facility determined to be the
cause of the violation.
   (f)   This article may also be enforced by civil court action as provided by
state or federal law.
   (g)   This article, to the extent applicable to the activity or facility
permitted, is incorporated by reference as part of any construction permit,
street or sidewalk cut permit, fill permit, or plat approval or other
development approval process required by this code. If a person who has
received one of the permits or approvals mentioned in this subsection violates
an applicable provision of this article, the director may issue a correction
order for the site, activity, or facility where the violation occurred. If the
violation is not corrected within the time period stipulated in the correction
order, the director may either:
      (1)   revoke or cause the revocation of the permit or approval; or
      (2)   halt the permitted or approved activity or facility until the
violation is abated or corrected. (Ord. Nos. 24033; 28461)
SEC. 19-118.2.   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he discharges or causes to be
discharged any water that does not consist entirely of stormwater into the
stormwater drainage system, waters of the United States, or state water.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that a discharge
of water not composed entirely of stormwater resulted or occurred exclusively
from one or more of the following sources, activities, or events:
      (1)   Full compliance with an NPDES permit or TPDES permit, other than
the NPDES permit or TPDES permit granted to the city for discharges from the
stormwater drainage system.
      (2)   Fire fighting by the fire department.
      (3)   Agricultural stormwater runoff.
      (4)   Water line flushing, excluding a flushing from water line
disinfection by superchlorination or other means unless:
         (A)   the total chlorine residual has been reduced to less than one
mg/L;
         (B)   the discharge does not contain any hazardous substance or exceed
the specific surface water quality standards established in Chapter 307, Title
30 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended; and
         (C)   the discharge does not cause erosion of soil.
      (5)   Lawn watering, landscape irrigation, or other irrigation water.
      (6)   A diverted stream flow or natural spring.
      (7)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater.
      (8)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, as that term is defined in
40 CFR Section 35.2005(b)(20), into the stormwater drainage system.
      (9)   A foundation drain, crawl space pump, footing drain, or sump pump,
if the discharge is uncontaminated.
      (10)   A potable water source that does not contain:
         (A)   a harmful quantity of a pollutant; or
         (B)   any harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining
of a storage tank or other container.
      (11)   Air conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a
cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or other source of
pollutant.
      (12)   Individual residential car washing.
      (13)   A riparian habitat or wetlands.
      (14)   Water used in washing streets, sidewalks, parking lots, driveways,
or other structures that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent,
degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or a harmful quantity of any other
cleaning substance.
      (15)   Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any
runoff or discharge from an emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or other
source of pollutant.
      (16)   Swimming pool water that:
         (A)   has been dechlorinated so that total chlorine residual is less
than one mg/L;
         (B)   is not able to be discharged into the wastewater system because:
            (i)   the swimming pool discharge point is located more than 200
linear feet from the closest access point to the wastewater system; or
            (ii)   the property on which the swimming pool is located:
               (aa)   does not receive service from the city’s wastewater
system; and
               (bb)   is not served by an on-site wastewater treatment facility
with adequate capacity to receive the discharge of the swimming pool water;
         (C)   is not the result of pool filter backwash; and
         (D)   does not contain:
            (i)   any chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of
swimming pool water or in pool cleaning;
            (ii)   a pH of the water of less than five;
            (iii)   algaecides or visible algae; or
            (iv)   a specific conductivity in excess of 150 micromhos per
centimeter at 25 degrees Centigrade.
      (17)   A temporary car wash sponsored by a civic group, school, or a
religious or other nonprofit organization.
      (18)   Other allowable non-stormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR Section
122.26(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1), as amended.
   (c)   No defense to prosecution is available under Subsection (b) if:
      (1)   the discharge in question has been determined by the director to be
the source of a pollutant to the stormwater drainage system, waters of the
United States, or state water;
      (2)   written notice of such determination has been provided to the
discharger; and
      (3)   the discharge has occurred more frequently than or beyond the
limits permitted by the director on a case by case basis.
   (d)   In any civil or criminal action, the discharger has the burden of
proving that a discharge in violation of Subsection (a) is uncontaminated or
falls within a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b). Prima facie proof
that a discharge is uncontaminated must be made in the form of an analysis by a
certified laboratory, using standard methods or procedures prescribed by EPA or
TCEQ regulations. A copy of the laboratory analysis must be sent to the
director.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if he discharges or causes to be
discharged into the stormwater drainage system, waters of the United States, or
state water a pollutant or substance that causes or contributes in causing the
city to violate a water quality standard, the city’s NPDES permit or TPDES
permit, or any state- issued discharge permit for discharges from the city’s
stormwater drainage system.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if he discharges or allows or permits the
discharge of any of the following into the stormwater drainage system:
      (1)   Oil, used oil, or any motor vehicle fluid.
      (2)   Industrial waste.
      (3)   Hazardous waste, including household hazardous waste.
      (4)   Domestic wastewater, septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit
trap waste.
      (5)   Garbage, rubbish, or yard waste.
      (6)   Wastewater from:
         (A)   any commercial vehicle washing facility, including any
commercial car wash located on the premises of any office building or in any
parking garage;
         (B)   any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used
automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop,
or maintenance facility;
         (C)   any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business,
commercial, or public service vehicle (including a truck, bus, or heavy
equipment) by a business or public entity that operates more than two of such
vehicles;
         (D)   the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of
aircraft;
         (E)   any mobile power washing operation if the wastewater contains a
harmful quantity of any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier,
dispersant, or other cleaning substance or pollutant;
         (F)   floor, rug, or carpet cleaning;
         (G)   the washdown or other cleaning of pavement if the wastewater
contains a harmful quantity of any soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser,
emulsifier, dispersant, or other cleaning substance or pollutant;
         (H)   the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill,
leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum product or
hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of the released
material have been previously removed; or
         (I)   a portable restroom or other temporary sanitary facility.
      (7)   Effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions
scrubber, or emissions filter or the blowdown from a boiler.
      (8)   Ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic or asphalt base material, or
hydromulch material, or wastewater from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment
containing or used in transporting or applying such material.
      (9)   Runoff or washdown water from any animal pen, kennel, or fowl or
livestock containment area.
      (10)   Filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain, or spa.
      (11)   Swimming pool water that:
         (A)   has a total chlorine residual of one mg/L or more;
         (B)   is from a swimming pool with a discharge point located 200
linear feet or less from the closest access point to the wastewater system;
         (C)   is from a swimming pool that is served by an on-site wastewater
treatment facility with adequate capacity to receive the discharge of the
swimming pool water; or
         (D)   contains:
            (i)   a quantity of muriatic acid sufficient to reduce the pH of
the water to less than five;
            (ii)   any other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of
swimming pool water or in pool cleaning;
            (iii)   algaecides or visible algae; or
            (iv)   a specific conductivity in excess of 150 micromhos per
centimeter at 25 degrees Centigrade.
      (12)   Discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or
other means if:
         (A)   the total chlorine residual is at one mg/L or more;
         (B)   the discharge contains any hazardous substance or exceeds the
specific surface water quality standards established in Chapter 307, Title 30
of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended; or
         (C)   the discharge causes erosion of the soil.
      (13)   Fire protection water containing oil or a hazardous substance or
material, unless treatment adequate to remove pollutants occurs prior to
discharge, except that this prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow
from fire fighting by the fire department.
      (14)   Water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting
vehicles or equipment.
      (15)   Contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking yard.
      (16)   Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the
stormwater drainage system.
      (17)   Any discharge from a petroleum storage tank, any leachate or
runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking petroleum storage tank, or any
discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of a
petroleum storage tank release, unless the discharge complies with all state
and federal standards and requirements and does not contain a harmful quantity
of any pollutant.
      (18)   Any paint, finish, or paint cleaning material, including but not
limited to auto body paint, latex paint, wood finishing material, texturing
product, varnish, paint thinner, or paint solvent of any kind.
      (19)   A harmful quantity of dust resulting from sanding, grinding,
cutting, sawing, or storage of any materials.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if he discharges into the stormwater
drainage system a harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other
material associated with:
      (1)   clearing, grading, excavating, or other construction activities; or
      (2)   landfilling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other
earth materials in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by
employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent
practicable.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if he connects a line that conveys
domestic wastewater or industrial waste to the stormwater drainage system or
knowingly allows such a connection to continue. (Ord. Nos. 24033; 28461)
SEC. 19-118.3.   REGULATION OF PESTICIDES, HERBICIDES, AND FERTILIZERS.
   (a)   Any sale, distribution, application, labeling, manufacture,
transportation, storage, or disposal of a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer
within the city must comply fully with all applicable state and federal
statutes and regulations, including but not limited to:
      (1)   the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA);
      (2)   federal regulations promulgated pursuant to FIFRA; and
      (3)   applicable provisions of Chapters 63 and 76 of the Texas
Agriculture Code, as amended, and state regulations promulgated pursuant to
those chapters.
   (b)   A license, permit, registration, certification, or evidence of
financial responsibility required by state or federal law for the sale,
distribution, application, manufacture, transportation, storage, or disposal of
a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer must be presented to the director, the
environmental health officer, any city code compliance officer, and any police
officer for examination upon request.
   (c)   No person shall, within the city, use or cause to be used any
pesticide or herbicide contrary to any directions for use on any labeling
required by state or federal statute or regulation.
   (d)   No person shall, within the city, use, dispose of, discard, store, or
transport a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer or a pesticide, herbicide, or
fertilizer container in a manner that the person knows or reasonably should
know is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide,
herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the stormwater drainage system, waters of the
United States, or state water. (Ord. Nos. 24033; 28461)
SEC. 19-118.4.   USED OIL REGULATION; HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   discharges used oil into the stormwater drainage system, into a
private drainage system that feeds into the stormwater drainage system, or into
any septic tank, surface water, groundwater, or watercourse within the city;
      (2)   mixes or commingles used oil with solid waste that is to be
disposed of in a landfill, or knowingly and directly disposes of used oil on
land or in a landfill; or
      (3)   applies used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed
abatement, or other similar use that introduces used oil into the environment.
   (b)   All businesses that change motor oil for the public, all municipal
landfills, and all fire stations are encouraged to serve as public used-oil
collection centers as provided for in Section 371.024 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended.
   (c)   Any retail dealer that annually sells directly to the public more than
500 gallons of oil in containers for use off premises shall post in a prominent
place on its premises a sign, provided by the city or by the state, informing
the public that improper disposal of used oil is prohibited by law. The sign
must prominently display the toll-free telephone number of the state used-oil
information center.
   (d)   Household hazardous waste must be segregated from other household
waste and discarded only at certain specified locations, such as at a Dallas
County household hazardous waste collection event or at the permanent household
hazardous waste collection site. (Ord. Nos. 24033; 28461)
SEC. 19-118.5.   DISCHARGE PREVENTION, REPORTING, AND CLEANUP.
   (a)   A secondary containment device used by an operator as a best
management practice or installed or constructed in accordance with a stormwater
pollution prevention plan must:
      (1)   be designed, installed, and constructed in a manner sufficient to
contain a spill or leak from the storage container and prevent a discharge;
      (2)   have:
         (A)   an overfill protection device, such as a direct vision gauge, an
alarm with audible or visual signal, or a bypass to an alternate containment
device;
         (B)   sufficient freeboard to prevent spillage from an uncovered
storage container; and
         (C)   a controlled drainage system; and
      (3)   hold:
         (A)   a volume of at least:
            (i)   110 percent of the storage container volume for a single
storage container; or
            (ii)   150 percent of the volume of the largest storage container
or 110 percent of the aggregate volume of all storage containers, whichever is
greater, for multiple storage containers; and
         (B)   an additional capacity of at least:
            (i)   4.5 inches of rainwater, if the secondary containment device
is open to precipitation; and
            (ii)   the amount of water produced by 20 minutes of flow from all
fire sprinkler heads, if any, situated over the secondary containment device.
   (b)   Discharge materials must be discharged to separate containment devices
or systems if, when combined, the materials could cause:
      (1)   a fire;
      (2)   an explosion;
      (3)   a flammable, toxic, or poisonous gas; or
      (4)   the deterioration of a storage container or secondary containment
device.
   (c)   An operator shall keep the drainage system of a secondary containment
device closed and any drainage pumps turned off, except when the drainage
process is monitored for compliance with the surface water quality standards
set forth in Chapter 307, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, as
amended.
   (d)   No operator may release accumulated rainwater or sprinkler flow water
from a secondary containment device until the operator has received
confirmation from an EPA-certified laboratory that the water to be discharged
meets the surface water quality standards set forth in Chapter 307, Title 30 of
the Texas Administrative Code, as amended. A copy of the laboratory analysis
must be provided to the director upon request.
   (e)   A discharger of a reportable quantity of a hazardous or extremely
hazardous substance into the stormwater drainage system, waters of the United
States, or state water shall telephone and notify the director, the TCEQ, and
the fire department immediately after becoming aware of the discharge. A
discharger of a reportable quantity of any of the following substances into the
stormwater drainage system, waters of the United States, or state water shall
telephone and notify the director concerning the incident within 24 hours after
its occurrence:
      (1)   An amount of oil that either:
         (A)   violates applicable water quality standards; or
         (B)   causes a film or sheen upon, or discoloration of, the surface of
the water or an adjoining shoreline, or causes a sludge or emulsion to be
deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon an adjoining shoreline.
      (2)   A harmful quantity of any other pollutant that is not a hazardous
or extremely hazardous substance but has been discharged in a quantity that
exceeds surface water quality standards as set forth in Chapter 307, Title 30
of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended.
   (f)   The notification required by Subsection (e) of this section must
include all of the following information:
      (1)   The identity or chemical name of the substance released and whether
the substance is an extremely hazardous substance.
      (2)   The exact location of the discharge, including any known name of
the waters involved or threatened and any other environmental media affected.
      (3)   The time and duration of the discharge at the moment of
notification.
      (4)   An estimate of the quantity and concentration, if known, of the
substance discharged.
      (5)   The source of the discharge.
      (6)   Any known or anticipated health risks associated with the discharge
and, where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention that may be
necessary for exposed individuals.
      (7)   Precautions that should be taken as a result of the discharge.
      (8)   Steps that have been taken to contain or clean up the discharged
substance and related material and to minimize the impact of the discharge.
      (9)   The name and telephone number of each person to be contacted for
further information.
   (g)   Within 15 days after a discharge under this section, the discharger
shall, unless expressly waived in writing by the director, submit a written
report containing each item of information required by Subsection (f), as well
as the following additional information:
      (1)   The ultimate duration, concentration, and quantity of the
discharge.
      (2)   All actions taken to respond to, contain, and clean up the
discharged substances, and all precautions taken to minimize the impact of the
discharge.
      (3)   Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated
with the discharge.
      (4)   Where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention necessary for
exposed individuals.
      (5)   The identity of each governmental entity and private sector
representative responding to the discharge.
      (6)   Measures taken or to be taken by the discharger to prevent similar
future occurrences.
   (h)   The notifications required by Subsections (f) and (g) of this section
do not relieve the discharger from any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability that may be incurred as a result of the discharge, including any
liability for damage to the city, to natural resources, or to any other person
or property. The notifications also do not relieve the discharger from any
fine, penalty, or other liability that may be imposed under this article or
under state or federal law.
   (i)   A release report required by a state or federal regulatory authority
that contains the information described in Subsections (f) and (g) of this
section meets the reporting requirements of Subsection (g), upon submittal of
the report to the director.
   (j)   The owner or operator of any facility, vehicle, or other source
responsible for a discharge described in Subsection (e) of this section shall:
      (1)   comply with all state, federal, and local law requiring reporting,
cleanup, containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in response to
the discharge; and
      (2)   reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city in responding
to the discharge.
   (k)   A discharger commits an offense if he:
      (1)   fails or refuses to report the discharge within the time required
by Subsection (e) after becoming aware of the discharge;
      (2)   knowingly provides false or incorrect information in a notification
or report required under this section; or
      (3)   fails or refuses to take the necessary action to clean up pollution
or damage to the stormwater drainage system, waters of the United States, or
state water, or to other property, that is caused by the discharge. (Ord. Nos.
24033; 28461)
SEC. 19-118.6.   STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   (a)   An operator of a construction site shall comply with all terms and
conditions of a construction general permit or an individual permit, whichever
is obtained for or applicable to the construction site. An operator of a
construction site shall provide the director with a copy of the stormwater
pollution prevention plan required by the construction general permit or
individual permit and shall implement best management practices to control and
minimize the discharge into the stormwater drainage system, waters of the
United States, and state water of any sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other
material from the construction site. Erosion control elements meeting the
criteria for best management practices must be installed before any
construction site is established in accordance with an installation schedule as
specified in a stormwater pollution prevention plan required by the
construction general permit or individual permit.
   (b)   The best management practices referred to in Subsection (a) of this
section may include, but are not limited to, the following measures:
      (1)   Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where feasible and
that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized as soon as practicable in
portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily (as
described in EPA and TCEQ regulations) or permanently ceased. Stabilization
measures may include:
         (A)   temporary or permanent seeding;
         (B)   mulching;
         (C)   geotextiles;
         (D)   sod stabilization;
         (E)   vegetative buffer strips;
         (F)   protection of trees;
         (G)   preservation of mature vegetation; and
         (H)   other appropriate measures.
      (2)   Using structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils,
store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the
site to the maximum extent feasible.
      (3)   Minimizing the tracking of sediments off site by vehicles, the
generation of dust, and the escape of other windblown waste from the site.
      (4)   Preventing the discharge of building materials, including cement,
lime, concrete, concrete washout water, concrete residue, and mortar, into the
stormwater drainage system, waters of the United States, or state water.
      (5)   Providing general good housekeeping measures to prevent and contain
spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other hazardous chemicals
and pollutants associated with construction, and to ensure proper cleanup and
disposal of any spills in compliance with state, federal, and local
requirements;
      (6)   Implementing effective waste disposal and waste management
techniques, including providing secondary containment, covering waste
materials, and minimizing ground contact with hazardous chemicals and trash.
      (7)   Providing for the timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion, and
sediment control devices, and other best management practices to keep
vegetation, erosion, and sediment control devices in good and effective
operating condition.
      (8)   Installing structural measures during the construction process to
control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur during construction
activities and after construction operations have been completed. Structural
measures should be placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Installed
structural measures may include, but are not limited to:
         (A)   stormwater detention structures, including wet ponds;
         (B)   stormwater retention structures;
         (C)   flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural
depressions;
         (D)   other velocity dissipation devices;
         (E)   infiltration of runoff on site; and
         (F)   sequential systems that combine several practices.
      (9)   Preventing dust caused by the sanding, grinding, cutting, or sawing
of any materials from accumulating in an area greater than 25 square feet.
      (10)   Taking all of the following actions for an on-site concrete batch
plant used in connection with the construction site:
         (A)   Constructing continuous interior berms around all:
            (i)   concrete batch plant equipment, including but not limited to
concrete mixing equipment, silos, concrete drop points, conveyor belts, and
admixture tanks;
            (ii)   concrete truck loading and unloading areas; and
            (iii)   concrete truck washout facilities.
          (B)   Directing all stormwater and non- stormwater from the concrete
batch plant to containment ponds, tanks, or other stormwater detention
structures.
         (C)   Providing on-site lined concrete batch plant washout facilities
with sufficient volume to contain all liquid and waste generated by on-site
concrete batch plant operations.
         (D)   Conforming on-site concrete batch plant operations to all
requirements of the construction general permit or individual permit applicable
to the construction site.
      (11)   Storing bagged, boxed, and bucketed materials on pallets and
covering those materials when they are not in use and prior to and during any
precipitation event.
      (12)   Maintaining an adequate supply of appropriate spill cleanup
material near the designated storage area for bagged, boxed, and bucketed
materials.
      (13)   Preventing the operation of tracked equipment within any body or
course of surface water unless the director has determined that the surface
water has been suitably diverted around the active construction area.
   (c)   The operator of a construction site is responsible for the
installation and maintenance of stormwater management measures until final
stabilization of the site has been completed and the notice of termination has
been received by the director.
   (d)   The operator of a construction site shall inspect the site and any
facilities on the site in accordance with the requirements of the construction
general permit or the individual permit, whichever is obtained for or
applicable to the site.
   (e)   The director may require that plans and specifications prepared for
the construction of site improvements illustrate and describe what best
management practices will be implemented at the construction site.
   (f)   The city may deny approval of any building permit, street or sidewalk
cut permit, plumbing permit, service connection permit, grading permit,
subdivision plat, site development plan, or other city approval necessary to
commence or continue construction or development, if the management practices
described in the plans and specifications, or observed upon a site inspection
by the director, are determined not to control and reduce, to the maximum
extent practicable, the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other
materials associated with clearing, grading, demolishing, excavating, and other
construction activities.
   (g)   An owner of a construction site is jointly and severally responsible
with the operator for compliance with the requirements of this section, even if
the owner is not an operator of the site.
   (h)   Any contractor or subcontractor on a construction site, who is not an
owner or operator of the site but who is responsible under the construction
contract or subcontract for implementing a best management practices control
measure, is jointly and severally responsible for any intentional, willful, or
negligent failure to adequately implement that control measure if such failure
causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard,
the city’s NPDES permit or TPDES permit, or any other discharge permit issued
by a state or federal regulatory authority for discharges from the stormwater
drainage system.
   (i)   An owner or operator of a construction site shall provide copies of
all notices of intent, construction site notices, notices of change, and
notices of termination to the director in accordance with the requirements of
the construction general permit or the individual permit.
   (j)   The director may, in the interest of public safety, issue a written
notice to an operator of a construction site that:
      (1)   authorizes the temporary removal or alteration of structural
measures being used as a best management practice under Subsection (b) if:
         (A)   flooding or significant standing of water occurs in a public
right-of-way near the construction site during a representative storm event; or
         (B)   the director determines that a representative storm event is
impending, and flooding or significant standing water previously occurred in a
public right-of-way near the construction site during a representative storm
event; and
      (2)   requires the replacement of all structural measures removed
pursuant to the notice upon the earlier of recession of standing water from the
public right-of-way or 24 hours following the last rainfall. (Ord. Nos. 24033;
28461)
SEC. 19-118.7.   STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.
   (a)   An operator of an industrial facility shall comply with all terms and
conditions of the multi- sector general permit or an individual NPDES or TPDES
permit, whichever is obtained for the activity conducted at the industrial
facility. An operator of an industrial facility shall use best management
practices to control and minimize the discharge into the stormwater drainage
system, waters of the United States, and state water of any material or
substance handled, stored, or generated by the industrial facility and any
pollutant that may be attributed to those materials or substances. An operator
is required to retain records of all monitoring information collected for a
six-year period from the date of sample collection. An operator shall submit
any monitoring results or a summary of results as required by the multi-sector
general permit or an individual permit to the director and, upon request, shall
submit copies of discharge monitoring reports to the director.
   (b)   The best management practices referred to in Subsection (a) of this
section may include, but are not limited to, the following measures:
      (1)   Providing general good housekeeping measures to ensure that areas
within the industrial facility that may contribute pollutants to stormwater
discharge are routinely cleaned and kept orderly.
      (2)   Implementing effective waste disposal and waste management
techniques, including but not limited to providing secondary containment,
covering waste materials, and minimizing ground contact with hazardous
chemicals and trash.
      (3)   Implementing and maintaining spill prevention and response
measures, including but not limited to secondary containment, labeling, and
cleanup techniques.
      (4)   Implementing and maintaining erosion prevention measures, including
but not limited to soil stabilization through vegetative cover, contouring
slopes, paving, and structural controls.
      (5)   Implementing and maintaining structural controls, including but not
limited to oil- water separators, sediment ponds, catch basins, grassed swales,
and berms.
      (6)   Eliminating or reducing exposure of garbage and refuse materials to
precipitation or runoff prior to disposal.
      (7)   Eliminating or reducing exposure of containers or equipment that
are covered or partially covered with oil, grease, rust, or other potentially
polluting substances to precipitation or runoff.
   (c)   If an industrial facility is required by an individual permit or
multi-sector general permit to conduct annual, semi-annual, or other periodic
monitoring, the operator shall:
      (1)   submit to the director a signed copy of each monitoring report
prepared in compliance with the applicable individual permit or multi-sector
general permit;
      (2)   retain records of the monitoring results at the facility and make
them available to the director upon request; and
      (3)   when requested by the director, prepare a written report of any
monitoring conducted by the operator and submit it to the director.
   (d)   If an industrial facility is required by an individual permit or
multi-sector general permit to prepare an annual comprehensive site compliance
evaluation report, the operator shall submit to the director a signed copy of
each report.
   (e)   By written notice, the director may require any industrial facility
identified as not being in compliance with this section to implement a
monitoring program that includes the written submission of quantitative data on
the following constituents:
      (1)   Any pollutant listed in any applicable multi-sector general permit
or in Chapter 307, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended.
      (2)   Any information on discharges required under 40 CFR Part 122.
   (f)   By written notice, the director may require any industrial facility
regulated by this section to conduct semi-annual or annual monitoring of
stormwater discharges, or the director may specify an alternative monitoring
frequency or specify additional parameters to be analyzed. The director may
require written reports of any additional monitoring to be submitted.
   (g)   An operator of an industrial facility regulated by this section shall
retain the stormwater pollution prevention plan, all records of monitoring
information, copies of all required reports, and records of all data used to
complete the notice of intent for at least three years after submitting a
notice of termination required by Subsection (i) of this section.
   (h)   No stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity may
contain any hazardous metals in a quantity that exceeds the maximum allowable
concentrations listed in the individual permit, multi- sector general permit,
or Chapter 307, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended,
whichever limit is more stringent.
   (i)   The operator of an industrial facility regulated by this section shall
submit a notice of termination to the director, which includes the information
required for notices of termination under the individual permit or multi-sector
general permit, whenever:
      (1)   all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity that
are authorized by this article and by the NPDES permit or TPDES permit are
eliminated at the facility; or
      (2)   the operator of stormwater discharges associated with industrial
activity at the facility changes.
   (j)   An owner of a facility with a stormwater discharge associated with
industrial activity regulated by this section, whether or not the owner is an
operator of the facility, is jointly and severally responsible for compliance
with:
      (1)   the best management practices measures required in the stormwater
pollution prevention plan for the facility; and
      (2)   the effluent limitations for hazardous metals specified in
Subsection (h) of this section.
   (k)   Upon request by the director, an owner or operator of any industrial
facility that experiences a problem complying with the requirements of this
section, the multi-sector general permit, or any applicable individual permit
issued for stormwater discharges from the facility shall consult with the
director in an attempt to achieve compliance as soon as practicable. If
compliance is not achieved to the director’s satisfaction, the director may
report the noncompliance to the EPA or to the TCEQ, or the director may
commence or request commencement of any enforcement action authorized under
Section
19-118.1 of this article. Exercising the option for consultation under this
subsection is not a bar against, or prerequisite to, the taking of any other
enforcement action against an owner or operator of a facility.
   (l)   The operator of an industrial facility that qualifies for a no
exposure exclusion under the multi- sector general permit shall provide the
director with a copy of the no exposure certification provided to the TCEQ as
required by the multi-sector general permit and a copy of the written
notification of coverage and the authorization number received from the TCEQ.
The director may inspect the industrial facility and conduct monitoring and
sampling of any discharge from the industrial facility to verify the no
exposure exclusion.
   (m)   Upon request by the director, an owner or operator of an industrial
facility shall provide the director with documentation of the standard
industrial classification of the operation conducted at the industrial
facility. The documentation may include, but is not limited to, a copy of the
business license application filed for the industrial facility or copies of
organizational or tax documents for the business entity that operates the
industrial facility, provided the standard industrial classification is stated
on the copies provided. If an owner or operator fails or refuses to provide
documentation of the standard industrial classification upon request by the
director, then, for purposes of enforcing this section, the director may assign
to the industrial facility the standard industrial classification under the
multi-sector general permit that best describes the activities observed at the
industrial facility, as determined by the director. (Ord. Nos. 24033; 28461)
SEC. 19-118.8.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (a)   The director may enter the premises of any person who is discharging
stormwater into the stormwater drainage system, waters of the United States, or
state water to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements
of this article and of any applicable state or federal discharge permit,
limitation, or requirement.
   (b)   A discharger shall:
      (1)   allow the director ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the
performance of any additional duties;
      (2)   make available to the director, within two hours of request, any
stormwater pollution prevention plans or modifications to plans, self-
inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of
intent, and other records, reports, and documents required by the NPDES permit
or TPDES permit; and
      (3)   retain and provide to the director, upon request, any annual, semi-
annual, or periodic monitoring reports as required by the NPDES or TPDES
permit.
   (c)   If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper
identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the discharger
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the director is permitted to enter
without delay for the purpose of performing the director’s responsibilities.
   (d)   The director shall have the right to install on the discharger’s
property, or to require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling or metering of the discharger’s operations.
   (e)   The director may require any discharger that contributes a harmful
quantity of a pollutant to the stormwater drainage system, waters of the United
States, or state water to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and
other monitoring of its stormwater discharges. The director may specify the
frequency and parameters of any required monitoring.
   (f)   The director may require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary at the discharger’s expense. The discharger, at its own
expense, shall at all times maintain the facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment in a safe and proper operating condition. Each device used to measure
stormwater flow and quality must be calibrated to ensure accuracy.
   (g)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to a
facility that is to be inspected or sampled must be promptly removed by the
discharger at the written or verbal request of the director and may not be
replaced. The cost of clearing access to the facility must be borne by the
discharger.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   lawfully consents to the director’s entry into a facility that
discharges stormwater, but then knowingly obstructs or hinders the director in
accessing the facility for the lawful purposes of inspection or sampling; or
      (2)   knowingly obstructs or hinders the director in accessing, for the
lawful purposes of inspection or sampling pursuant to a lawfully issued
administrative search warrant, a facility that discharges stormwater.
   (i)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from exercising the
constitutional right to require that entry to a site or any other property be
made pursuant to a validly issued administrative or other search warrant,
except where a search warrant is not required by law. (Ord. Nos. 24033; 28461)
ARTICLE X.
LIQUID WASTE.
Division 1. Generally.
SEC. 19-119.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (2)   CITY ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICER means the environmental health
officer of the city appointed by the city manager pursuant to Section
19-1(b) of this code, or an authorized representative.
      (3)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s
designated representative.
      (4)   EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or,
where appropriate, the regional administrator or other duly authorized official
of the agency.
      (5)   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT means any industrial user engaged
primarily or incidentally in the preparation of food for human or animal
consumption, except that the term does not include any user discharging
domestic wastewater from premises used exclusively for residential purposes.
The term includes but is not limited to restaurants, motels, hotels,
cafeterias, hospitals, schools, bars, delicatessens, meat processing
operations, bakeries, and similar operations.
      (6)   GREASE means oils, fats, cellulose, starch, proteins, wax, or other
types of grease, oil, or fat regardless of origin and whether or not
emulsified.
      (7)   GREASE TRAP/INTERCEPTOR means a device that:
         (A)   is designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate
and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to
the wastewater entering the wastewater system; and
         (B)   serves to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food
preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap/interceptor and
entering the wastewater system.
      (8)   HAZARDOUS WASTE MATERIAL means liquid waste that:
         (A)   may have any of the following characteristics:
            (i)   toxic;
            (ii)   corrosive;
            (iii)   an irritant;
            (iv)   a strong sensitizer;
            (v)   flammable or combustible;
            (vi)   explosive; or
            (vii)   otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or
illness; and
         (B)   is hazardous as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or
the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
      (9)   INDUSTRIAL USER means a source of indirect discharge or a
nondomestic source of pollutants into the wastewater system.
      (10)   INDUSTRIAL WASTE MATERIAL means liquid waste resulting from or
incidental to industry, manufacturing, mining, or agriculture.
      (11)   LIQUID WASTE means water-borne solids, liquids, and gaseous
substances derived from certain sources, including, but not limited to, grease
trap waste, septic tank waste, chemical toilet waste, sand trap waste, and used
oils, but not including hazardous waste.
      (12)   LIQUID WASTE DISPOSER or DISPOSER means a person who receives and
processes or disposes of liquid waste of a producer. The terms processing and
disposal are as defined in the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act.
      (13)   LIQUID WASTE TRANSPORTER or TRANSPORTER means a person who
operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste.
      (14)   LIQUID WASTE PRODUCER or PRODUCER means a person who causes,
creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid waste.
      (15)   PERMIT HOLDER means a person issued a liquid waste transport
permit under
Division 2 of this article or a trap/interceptor permit under
Division 3 of this article, whichever applies.
      (16)   PERSON means any individual, corporation, nonprofit corporation,
organization, partnership, association, or governmental entity.
      (17)   PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) means that term as defined
in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.3(o), as amended.
      (18)   SPILL means any unplanned discharge of liquid waste.
      (19)   TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
      (20)   VEHICLE means a mobile device in which or by which liquid waste
may be transported upon a public street or highway.
      (21)   WASTEWATER SYSTEM means:
         (A)   all treatment plants, mains, conveyances, pumps, interceptors,
lift stations, connections, meters, sludge storage facilities, appurtenances,
and other facilities of the city employed in the collection, treatment, and
disposal of wastewater; or
         (B)   the publicly-owned treatment works of the city and of a
governmental entity receiving or treating wastewater of the city under a
contract with the city. (Ord. Nos. 14218; 15456; 17226; 18416; 22927; 28084)
Division 2. Liquid Waste Transportation.
SEC. 19-120.   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a
vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste without a valid liquid
waste transport permit issued under this article. A separate permit is required
for each vehicle operated. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection
that the vehicle was operated within the city solely for the purpose of
transporting liquid waste through the city, and no waste was received,
unloaded, stored, or parked within the city.
   (b)   A person who desires to obtain a permit must make application on a
form provided by the director. The applicant must be the person who will own,
control, or operate the liquid waste transport business.
   (c)   The director shall not issue a permit unless:
      (1)   the applicant submits proof of current registration as a
transporter with the TCEQ or submits written documentation from the TCEQ that
registration is not required for the type of liquid waste the applicant will be
transporting;
      (2)   the applicant submits to the director for inspection each vehicle
to be used to transport liquid waste; and
      (3)   each vehicle is found by the director to be constructed, equipped,
and identified in accordance with this article and all other applicable city
ordinances and state and federal laws.
   (d)   A permit is not transferable.
   (e)   A permit prohibits the commingling of hazardous and nonhazardous
materials.
   (f)   Any person transporting hazardous or nonhazardous liquid wastes within
the city must comply with all applicable city ordinances and state and federal
laws.
   (g)   Each applicant must specify which disposal site or sites are proposed
to be used. (Ord. Nos. 13387; 14218; 15456; 18416; 22927; 26925; 28084)
SEC. 19-121.   FEE AND DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may not issue a liquid waste transport permit to an
applicant until the appropriate fee is paid. The permit fee is $385.53 for each
vehicle operated by the applicant. Each permit must be renewed annually.
   (b)   The director shall number permits consecutively. Before operating any
vehicle to transport liquid waste, a permit holder shall cause to be displayed
on each side of the vehicle, in a color contrasting with the background and in
letters at least three inches high, the company name and the following:
   DAL             .
The blank space must contain the permit number. Whenever a liquid waste
transport permit for a vehicle is revoked or otherwise becomes invalid, the
permit holder shall immediately remove the permit number from the vehicle.
   (c)   The permit holder shall keep the permit receipt, or a copy, in the
vehicle at all times and shall allow the director to inspect it upon request.
(Ord. Nos. 13387; 14218; 15456; 18411; 18416; 18876; 19300; 22927; 27698;
28084; 33232)
SEC. 19-122.   LIQUID WASTE VEHICLES; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (a)   A liquid waste transporter shall:
      (1)   maintain hoses, tanks, and valves on a vehicle in good repair and
free from leaks;
      (2)   provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank;
      (3)   use a vehicle with a single tank capacity of not less than 500
gallons to transport septic tank, grease trap, or sand trap liquid waste,
except when operating a vehicle for portable toilet cleaning; and
      (4)   cause a vehicle exterior to be clean and the vehicle odor-free at
the beginning of each work day.
   (b)   The director may cause to be impounded any vehicle that is being
operated in violation of this article and may authorize the holding of the
vehicle until the violation is corrected. The vehicle owner or operator shall
pay all towing, storage, and other fees associated with the impoundment of the
vehicle. The director may also revoke the liquid waste transport permit for the
improperly operated vehicle. If a vehicle is impounded or if a permit is
revoked, an appeal may be filed by the transporter pursuant to Section
19-126. (Ord. Nos. 13387; 14218; 15456; 18416; 22927; 28084)
SEC. 19-123.   RESPONSIBILITIES OF A LIQUID WASTE TRANSPORTER.
   (a)   Before accepting a load of liquid waste for transportation, a liquid
waste transporter shall determine the nature of the material to be transported
and that the equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without
spillage, leaks, or release of toxic or harmful gasses, fumes, liquids, or
other substances. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the transporter
shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste.
   (b)   A permit holder may not transport any hazardous waste material in any
vehicle permitted by the city for transporting liquid waste.
   (c)   A permit holder must use a disposal site permitted or approved by the
State of Texas.
   (d)   A permit holder must ensure that when pumping out a grease trap/
interceptor, the grease trap/interceptor is completely emptied within 24 hours.
   (e)   A permit holder shall not store wastes for more than four days in a
mobile closed container. An example of a “mobile closed container” is a
vehicle’s holding tank.
   (f)   A manifest system, consisting of a five-part trip ticket, is used to
control the transporting and disposal of all applicable liquid waste generated
in the city and must be used and maintained by the transporter as follows:
      (1)   The trip ticket books, which must be used exclusively for a single
vehicle, are purchased by the transporter from the director for an established
fee.
      (2)   A transporter must complete one trip ticket for each location
serviced, except that a chemical toilet company servicing its own units must
complete one trip ticket for each vehicle load transported.
      (3)   The first copy of the manifest form must be signed by the
transporter and producer at the time of waste collection and left with the
producer for its files.
      (4)   The second copy of the manifest form (which has the transporter and
producer’s signatures) must be signed by the disposer at the time of disposal
and maintained by the disposer.
      (5)   The third copy of the manifest form (which has the signatures of
the transporter, producer, and disposer) must be maintained by the transporter.
      (6)   The fourth copy of the manifest form (which is in a form approved
by the director and has the signatures of the transporter, producer, and
disposer) must be returned by the transporter to the producer within 15 days
after the waste is received by the disposer.
      (7)   The transporter shall deliver to the director all completed trip
ticket books containing the original manifest form with all required signatures
no later than the 10th day of the month following the month in which the trip
ticket books were completed.
      (8)   A copy of all manifests must be maintained by the transporter at
its business office for five years.
      (9)   A transporter shall make all records required to be kept available
for inspection by the director at any reasonable time. (Ord. Nos. 14218; 15456;
18416; 22026; 22927; 26925; 28084)
SEC. 19-124.   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The director may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this article and protect the public
from health and safety hazards. (Ord. Nos. 14218; 15456; 18416; 22927; 28084)
SEC. 19-125.   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may suspend or revoke one or more liquid waste transport
permits held by a liquid waste transporter if the director determines that the
transporter or an employee of the transporter:
      (1)   violated any provision of this article, any rule or regulation
promulgated by the director under this article, or any other applicable city
ordinance or state or federal law;
      (2)   failed to comply with procedures for developing, maintaining, or
delivering manifest records required to be developed, maintained, or delivered
pursuant to this article, Chapter 49 of this code, or state or federal laws or
regulations for the transfer, transportation, or disposal of industrial waste;
or
      (3)   falsified or improperly altered manifest records required to be
developed, maintained, or delivered pursuant to this article, Chapter 49 of
this code, or state or federal laws or regulations for the transfer,
transportation, or disposal of industrial waste.
   (b)   Reinstatement. After suspension under this section, a permit holder
may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. The director shall
reinstate the permit if the director determines that:
      (1)   the permit holder is again qualified under Section
19-120;
      (2)   all violations of this article, Chapter 49 of this code, and
applicable federal pretreatment standards and requirements have been corrected;
      (3)   precautions have been taken by the permit holder to prevent future
violations; and
      (4)   all fees required by this article have been paid.
   (c)   New permit after revocation. If the director revokes a permit, the
permit holder may not apply for or be issued a new permit for the same vehicle
earlier than 180 days after the date of revocation of the old permit, except
that, if, subsequent to the revocation, the director determines that all of the
conditions prescribed in Section
19-120 are completely satisfied, the permit holder may apply for and the
director may issue a new permit before the 180-day period expires. (Ord. Nos.
13387; 14218; 15456; 18416; 22927; 28084)
SEC. 19-126.   APPEAL.
   If the director denies the issuance or renewal of a liquid waste transport
permit or suspends or revokes a liquid waste transport permit, the director
shall send to the applicant or permit holder, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, written notice of the action and of the right to an appeal. The
applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the director to the
permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the
permit and license appeal board stays an action of the director revoking a
permit until the permit and license appeal board makes a final decision. (Ord.
Nos. 14218; 15456; 18200; 18416; 22927; 28084)
Division 3. Liquid Waste Production.
SEC. 19-126.1.   PRODUCER OF WASTE AND MANIFEST SYSTEM.
   (a)   Producers of waste. A person who is an industrial waste generator that
transports or permits the transport of industrial waste off the person’s
premises for disposal shall dispose, or direct disposal to be made, of the
waste at a permitted facility conforming to the requirements of state, federal,
and local laws and regulations.
   (b)   Manifest system. A person who is a producer of grease or sand trap/
interceptor waste shall comply with the city’s manifest program for
documentation of disposal as specified in Section
19-123(f). A copy of each manifest must be retained for three years on the
premises where the waste is produced, in such a place and manner that a city
inspector can inspect the manifest record at any reasonable time. (Ord. 28084)
SEC. 19-126.2.   TRAPS/INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Owner/operator to provide trap/ interceptor. The owner or operator of
premises from which industrial waste is discharged shall provide grease and
sand traps/interceptors for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
grease, floatable substances, or sand.
   (b)   Requirements of trap/interceptor. The traps/interceptors must be of a
type and capacity approved by the director to adequately handle grease and sand
and must be located so that they are easily accessible for cleaning,
inspection, and monitoring.
   (c)   Cleaning of trap/interceptor. Grease and sand traps/interceptors must
be cleaned in such a manner that the volume of grease or sand trap/interceptor
waste removed from each trap/ interceptor equals the nominal volume capacity of
each respective trap/interceptor whenever it is cleaned. A grease trap/
interceptor located upon the premises of a food service establishment must be
100 percent pumped out at least the earlier of:
      (1)   every 90 days; or
      (2)   when at least 25 percent or more of the wetted height of the grease
trap/interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the grease trap/interceptor to
the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils, or
grease. (Ord. 28084)
SEC. 19-126.3.   PERMIT REQUIRED FOR TRAPS/INTERCEPTORS.
   (a)   Trap/interceptor permits. A person who owns, manages, or operates a
food service establishment commits an offense if the food service establishment
uses a grease or sand trap/interceptor, or discharges industrial waste,
wastewater, or other pollutants through a grease or sand trap/interceptor,
without obtaining or maintaining a valid trap/ interceptor permit from the
director.
   (b)   Application procedures. Application for a trap/interceptor permit
required under Subsection (a) must be made to the director upon a form provided
for the purpose. The director may establish further regulations and procedures
not in conflict with this chapter, Chapter 49 of this code, or other laws
regarding the granting and enforcement of permits, including but not limited to
administrative orders issued for the purpose of bringing a violator back into
compliance with a permit.
   (c)   Permit issuance. The director shall not issue a permit unless the
director determines that:
      (1)   the applicant is in compliance with the requirements of this
article, any rule or regulation promulgated by the director under this article,
or any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to grease or
sand traps/interceptors; and
      (2)   each trap/interceptor of the applicant meets the requirements for
type, capacity, and location set forth in this article, any rule or regulation
promulgated by the director under this article, or any other city ordinance or
state or federal law applicable to grease or sand traps/interceptors.
   (d)   Terms and conditions of permit. The director shall prescribe such
terms and conditions of a trap/interceptor permit as are required and
authorized by the EPA and the TCEQ and as necessary to ensure full compliance
with this article, Chapter 49 of this code, and all state and federal
pretreatment standards and regulations. The term of a permit may not exceed
five years. A person commits an offense if the person violates or allows a
violation of any term or condition of a permit issued under this section. The
director may enforce the terms and conditions of the permit as authorized under
this chapter.
   (e)   Nontransferability. Permits issued under this section are not
transferable or assignable.
   (f)   Amending a permit. The director may amend a permit with additional
requirements to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. (Ord.
28084)
SEC. 19-126.4.   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (a)   Grounds for suspension or revocation. The director may suspend or
revoke a trap/interceptor permit if the director determines that a permit
holder:
      (1)   violated any provision of this article, any rule or regulation
promulgated by the director under this article, or any other applicable city
ordinance or state or federal law;
      (2)   failed to comply with procedures for developing, maintaining, or
delivering manifest records required to be developed, maintained, or delivered
pursuant to this article, Chapter 49 of this code, or state or federal laws or
regulations for the transfer, transportation, or disposal of industrial waste;
or
      (3)   falsified or improperly altered manifest records required to be
developed, maintained, or delivered pursuant to this article, Chapter 49 of
this code, or state or federal laws or regulations for the transfer,
transportation, or disposal of industrial waste.
   (b)   Appeals. If the director denies the issuance or renewal of a trap/
interceptor permit or suspends or revokes a trap/interceptor permit, the
director shall send to the applicant or permit holder, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, written notice of the action and of the right to an
appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the director
to the permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the
permit and license appeal board stays an action of the director revoking a
permit until the permit and license appeal board makes a final decision.
   (c)   Reinstatement. After suspension under this section, a permit holder
may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. The director shall
reinstate the permit if the director determines that:
      (1)   the permit holder is again qualified under Section
19-126.3;
      (2)   all violations of this article, Chapter 49 of this code, and
applicable federal pretreatment standards and requirements have been corrected;
      (3)   precautions have been taken by the permit holder to prevent future
violations; and
      (4)   all fees required by this chapter have been paid.
   (d)   New permit after revocation. If the director revokes a permit, the
permit holder may not apply for or be issued a new permit for the same facility
earlier than 180 days after the date of revocation of the old permit, except
that, if, subsequent to the revocation, the director determines that all of the
conditions prescribed in Section
19-126.3 are completely satisfied, the permit holder may apply for and the
director may issue a new permit before the 180-day period expires.
   (e)   Discharge without permit. A permit holder whose permit is suspended or
revoked shall not discharge industrial waste into the wastewater system. (Ord.
28084)
SEC. 19-126.5.   RESPONSIBILITIES OF LIQUID WASTE PRODUCER.
   (a)   A producer of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste material picked
up from the producer’s premises by a person holding a valid liquid waste
transport permit from the city and transported to an approved site for
disposal.
   (b)   A producer of liquid waste shall determine if the liquid waste is
hazardous and shall not have hazardous waste material, or liquid waste in
combination with hazardous waste material, removed from the producer’s premises
by a liquid waste transporter operating under a city permit.
   (c)   A producer shall sign the manifest from the transporter when a load is
picked up by the transporter and shall keep a copy of all trip tickets at the
producer’s business office for three years. The director may inspect these
records at any reasonable time.
   (d)   A producer shall:
      (1)   install or provide a grease, sand, or grit collection device of a
size and type specified in accordance with the Dallas Plumbing Code;
      (2)   maintain a grease, sand, or grit collection device in continuous,
proper operation;
      (3)   supervise proper cleaning of a grease, sand, or grit collection
device;
      (4)   report any spill or accident involving a grease, sand, or grit
collection device to the director as soon as is practicable within 24 hours
after the spill or accident occurred;
      (5)   clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have material
disposed of using proper means by a transporter permitted by the city; and
      (6)   comply with all city ordinances and state and federal laws
applicable to liquid waste producers. (Ord. 28084)
Division 4. Liquid Waste Accumulation and Disposal.
SEC. 19-127.   ACCUMULATION OF LIQUID WASTE.
   A person commits an offense if he allows liquid waste that emits noxious or
offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health to accumulate
upon property under the person’s control. (Ord. Nos. 14218; 15456; 18416;
22927; 28084)
SEC. 19-128.   SEPTAGE AND CHEMICAL TOILET WASTE.
   (a)   Transported septage and chemical toilet waste may not be discharged
into the wastewater system, except at such locations and times as are
designated by the director.
   (b)   The director may collect samples of each transported load to ensure
compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the transporter
to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. (Ord. 28084)
SEC. 19-129.   DISPOSAL OF LIQUID WASTE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he unloads or offers for sale or
exchange any liquid waste, except at a place permitted or approved by the
state.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he deposits or discharges any liquid
waste onto a street or into a storm or sanitary sewer or an area that drains
into the wastewater or stormwater system.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if:
      (1)   from a vehicle, portable tank, or other container used for
transporting water, normal domestic wastewater, or industrial waste, the person
discharges or causes the discharge of water, normal domestic wastewater, or
industrial waste into the wastewater system or a private sewer facility
directly or indirectly connected to the wastewater system;
      (2)   by any means, the person discharges or causes the discharge of
water, normal domestic wastewater, or industrial waste into a part of the
wastewater system generally used for maintenance or monitoring, including but
not limited to manholes, cleanouts, or sampling chambers; or
      (3)   by means of a mechanical device or extraneous water, the person
forces normal domestic wastewater or industrial waste collected in a grease
trap/interceptor, sand trap/interceptor, or other waste collection device into
the wastewater system or a private sewer facility directly or indirectly
connected to the wastewater system. (Ord. Nos. 14218; 15456; 18416; 22927;
28084)
SEC. 19-130.   RESPONSIBILITIES OF LIQUID WASTE DISPOSERS.
   (a)   A liquid waste disposer commits an offense if he allows accumulation
of liquid waste on the disposer’s premises so that rainfall could carry the
material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or
health hazard.
   (b)   A liquid waste disposer shall:
      (1)   comply with all city ordinances and state and federal laws
applicable to liquid waste disposers;
      (2)   accept liquid waste only from a transporter permitted by the city;
      (3)   maintain manifest copies for three years;
      (4)   accept only those classes of wastes authorized under city, state,
or federal requirements; and
      (5)   make available all records required to be kept for inspection by
the director at any reasonable time. (Ord. Nos. 15456; 18416; 22927; 28084)
Division 5. Enforcement.
SEC. 19-131.   CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY OF CORPORATIONS OR ASSOCIATIONS.
   In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by individuals, it is the intent
of this article to hold a corporation or association criminally responsible for
prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or
association and within the scope of the agent’s office or employment. (Ord.
Nos. 15456; 18416; 22927; 28084)
SEC. 19-131.1.   RIGHT OF ENTRY OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
   The director, the city environmental health officer, and other duly
authorized employees of the city acting as their duly authorized agents and
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to gain
access to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 28084)
SEC. 19-131.2.   ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Authority to enforce. The director and the city environmental health
officer shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this article. For
purposes of this article, state law, and federal law, the wastewater system is
a publicly-owned treatment works.
   (b)   Administrative search warrants. The municipal court shall have the
power to issue to the city environmental health officer administrative search
warrants, or other process allowed by law, where necessary to aid in enforcing
this article.
   (c)   Penalties. A person who violates any provision of this article or any
term or condition of permit granted pursuant to this article is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
continued. Each offense is punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000 or more
than $2,000.
   (d)   Criminal responsibility. A person is criminally responsible for a
violation of this article if the person knowingly, recklessly, intentionally,
or with criminal negligence:
      (1)   commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or
permits another person to commit a violation; or
      (2)   owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the
cause of the illegal discharge under this article.
   (e)   Civil actions. This article or the terms and conditions of a permit
granted pursuant to this article may be enforced by civil court action as
provided by state or federal law. (Ord. 28084)
ARTICLE XI.
DISPOSAL OF FETAL MATERIAL.
SEC. 19-132.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   (1)   CREMATION means the reduction of fetal material through the process of
complete combustion.
   (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the city
manager to enforce and administer this article, or the director’s designated
representative.
   (3)   DISPOSER means a person who knowingly cremates, buries or otherwise
disposes of fetal material.
   (4)   FETAL MATERIAL means a fetus or fetal material that has experienced
fetal death as defined by Title 25, Section 181.1 of the Texas Administrative
Code.
   (5)   PERSON means an individual, association, corporation, or partnership.
   (6)   SPONTANEOUS MISCARRIAGE means a termination of pregnancy that is not
artificially induced and which occurs prior to fetal viability.
   (7)   TRANSPORTER means a person who knowingly operates a vehicle for the
purpose of transporting fetal material as defined herein. (Ord. 18441)
SEC. 19-133.   PERMIT REQUIRED - TRANSPORTER.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly operates a vehicle, or
causes a vehicle to be operated, on a public street, highway or alley for the
purpose of transporting fetal material without a transporter permit.
   (b)   To obtain a permit a person must make application to the director on a
form provided by the director for that purpose.
   (c)   The director shall issue a transporter permit, valid for one year, if:
      (1)   the applicant submits for inspection each vehicle to be used;
      (2)   the director determines that each vehicle will appropriately
protect public health; and
      (3)   the applicant tenders to the director an annual fee of $40 for the
first vehicle and $25 for each additional vehicle to be operated under the
permit. (Ord. 18441)
SEC. 19-134.   PERMIT REQUIRED - DISPOSER.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly disposes of fetal material
by any means without a disposer permit.
   (b)   To obtain a permit for disposal a person must make application to the
director on a form provided by the director for that purpose.
   (c)   The director shall issue an annual disposer permit if:
      (1)   he determines that the applicant has appropriate facilities to
dispose of fetal material by cremation or burial or other means which are
sanitary and protect the public health and welfare;
      (2)   the applicant tenders to the director an annual fee of $40. (Ord.
18441)
SEC. 19-135.   EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   The permit requirements of Sections
19-133 and
19-134 shall not apply to:
      (1)   any hospital or other health or sanitation facility licensed by the
State of Texas or operated by the city, the state or federal government; or
      (2)   any mortician licensed by the state operating in compliance with
state law regarding the cremation or burial of humans; or
      (3)   any medical laboratory directed and staffed by a pathologist
licensed by the state to practice medicine.
   (b)   The requirements of Sections
19-133,
19-134 and
19-136 shall not apply to any person who passes fetal material as a result of a
spontaneous miscarriage. (Ord. 18441)
SEC. 19-136.   METHOD OF DISPOSAL.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly disposes of fetal material
by any means not approved by the director.
   (b)   The director shall approve of those methods of disposal of fetal
material which provide adequate sanitation and which the director determines
adequately protect the public health and safety.
   (c)   In accordance with Section 325.136 of the Municipal Solid Waste
Management Regulations of the Texas Department of Health no person shall:
      (1)   place fetal material in solid waste containers or otherwise co-
mingle fetal material with routine solid waste; or
      (2)   place fetal material for transport without first placing the fetal
material in conspicuously marked double-bagged plastic bags not less than 1.5
mil thick each. (Ord. 18441)
CHAPTER 19A
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. 16926)
CHAPTER 20
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
CHAPTER 20A
FAIR HOUSING AND MIXED INCOME HOUSING
ARTICLE I.
FAIR HOUSING
Sec.
20A-1.   Short title.
Sec.
20A-2.   Declaration of policy.
Sec.
20A-3.   Definitions.
Sec.
20A-4.   Discriminatory housing practices.
Sec.
20A-4.1.   Housing voucher incentives.
Sec.
20A-5.   Defenses to criminal prosecution and civil action.
Sec.
20A-6.   Fair housing administrator.
Sec.
20A-7.   Complaint and answer.
Sec.
20A-8.   Investigation.
Sec.
20A-9.   Temporary or preliminary relief.
Sec.
20A-10.   Conciliation.
Sec.
20A-11.   Violation of conciliation agreement.
Sec.
20A-12.   Reasonable cause determination and charge.
Sec.
20A-13.   Dismissal of complaint.
Sec.
20A-14.   Civil action in state district court.
Sec.
20A-15.   Enforcement by private persons.
Sec.
20A-16.   Effect of civil action on certain contracts.
Sec.
20A-17.   Service of notice and computation of time.
Sec.
20A-18.   Additional remedies.
Sec.
20A-19.   Education and public information.
Sec.
20A-20.   Effect on other law.
Sec.
20A-21.   Criminal penalties for violation.
ARTICLE II.
MIXED-INCOME HOUSING
Sec.
20A-22.   Purpose.
Sec.
20A-23.   Applicability.
Sec.
20A-23.1.   Alternative methods of provision and incentives.
Sec.
20A-24.   Definitions and interpretations.
Sec.
20A-25.   Market value analysis category and reserved dwelling unit
verifications.
Sec.
20A-26.   Mixed-income restrictive covenant.
Sec.
20A-27.   Administration of the mixed-income housing program.
Sec.
20A-28.   Tenant selection and other written policies.
Sec.
20A-29.   Reserved.
Sec.
20A-30.   Non-discrimination.
Sec.
20A-31.   Compliance, reporting, and recordkeeping.
Sec.
20A-32.   Violations, corrective action period, and penalty.
Sec.
20A-33.   Mixed income housing development bonus fund.
Sec.
20A-34.   Fees.
ARTICLE I.
FAIR HOUSING
SEC. 20A-1.   SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the Dallas Fair Housing ordinance. (Ord. Nos.
13456; 14809; 20652; 20780)
SEC. 20A-2.   DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city of Dallas, through fair, orderly, and lawful
procedures, to promote the opportunity for each person to obtain and maintain
habitable housing without regard to race, color, sex, religion, handicap,
familial status, national origin, or source of income. This policy is grounded
upon a recognition of the right of every person to have access to adequate
habitable housing of the person's own choice, and to maintain the same free
from the denial of this right because of race, color, sex, religion, handicap,
familial status, national origin, or source of income, which denial is
detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city
and constitutes an unjust deprivation of rights, which is within the power and
proper responsibility of government to prevent. (Ord. Nos. 13456; 14809; 20652;
20780; 30246; 32157)
SEC. 20A-3.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, unless the context requires a different definition:
      (1)   ACCESSIBLE means that an area of a housing accommodation can be
approached, entered, and used by a person with a physical handicap.
      (2)   ACCESSIBLE ROUTE means a continuous unobstructed path connecting
accessible elements and spaces in a housing accommodation that can be
negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair and that is
also safe for and usable by a person with other disabilities.
      (3)   ADMINISTRATOR means the administrator of the fair housing office
designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this chapter and
includes the administrator’s designated representative.
      (4)   AGGRIEVED PERSON means a person claiming to be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice.
      (5)   BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE means an accessible
entrance to a covered multi-family dwelling that is connected by an accessible
route to public transportation stops, to accessible parking and passenger
loading zones, or to the public streets or sidewalks, if available.
      (6)   COMPLAINANT means a person, including the administrator, who files
a complaint under Section
20A-7.
      (7)   COVERED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING means:
         (A)   a building consisting of four or more dwelling units if the
building has one or more elevators; and
         (B)   a ground floor dwelling unit in any other building consisting of
four or more dwelling units.
      (8)   DEFENSE means a defense to criminal prosecution in municipal court
as explained in the Texas Penal Code. Defense also means, where specifically
provided, an exemption from a civil action.
      (9)   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE means conduct that is an offense
under Section
20A-4 of this chapter.
      (10)   DWELLING UNIT means a single unit of residence for a family.
      (11)   FAMILIAL STATUS means the status of a person resulting from being:
         (A)   pregnant;
         (B)   domiciled with an individual younger than 18 years of age in
regard to whom the person:
            (i)   is the parent or legal custodian; or
            (ii)   has the written permission of the parent or legal custodian
for domicile with the individual; or
         (C)   in the process of obtaining legal custody of an individual
younger than 18 years of age.
      (12)   FAMILY includes a single individual.
      (13)   FINANCIAL AWARD means a public subsidy matter, as that term is
defined in Section 12A-15.2 of this code, as amended, or any loan, grant, tax
abatement, or monies awarded by the city.
      (14)   HANDICAP:
         (A)   means:
            (i)   a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one
or more major life activities;
            (ii)   a record of an impairment described in Subparagraph (i) of
this paragraph; or
            (iii)   being regarded as having an impairment described in
Subparagraph (i) of this paragraph; and
         (B)   does not mean a current, illegal use of or addiction to a drug
or illegal or federally-controlled substance.
      (15)   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION means:
         (A)   any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied, or designed or intended for occupancy, as a residence for one or
more families; or
         (B)   any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or
structure described by Paragraph (A) of this subsection.
      (16)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, partnership, association,
labor organization, legal representative, mutual company, joint-stock company,
trust, unincorporated organization, trustee, receiver, or fiduciary or any
employee, representative, or agent of the person.
      (17)   RENT means lease, sublease, or otherwise grant for a consideration
the right to occupy premises that are not owned by the occupant.
      (18)   RESIDENCE does not include a hotel, motel, or similar public
accommodation where occupancy is available exclusively on a temporary, day-to-
day basis.
      (19)   RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION means:
         (A)   the making or purchasing of loans or the providing of other
financial assistance:
            (i)   for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a housing accommodation; or
            (ii)   secured by residential real estate; or
         (B)   the selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real
property.
      (20)   RESPONDENT means a person identified in a complaint or charge as
having committed a discriminatory housing practice under this chapter.
      (21)   SOURCE OF INCOME means lawful, regular, and verifiable income from
whatever source derived (including housing vouchers and other subsidies
provided by government or non-governmental entities, child support, or spousal
maintenance), except as prohibited by Texas Local Government Code, Section
250.007, as amended. For purposes of housing accommodations that benefit from a
subsidy approved by the city council on or after the effective date of this
ordinance, source of income includes housing choice vouchers and other federal,
state, and local housing subsidies.
      (21.1)   SEX means a person's biological gender as well as a person's
sexual orientation and gender identity.
      (22)   SUBSIDY means a public subsidy matter, as that term is defined in
Section 12A-15.2 of this code, as amended, or a density bonus, and that was
approved by city council. (Ord. Nos. 13456; 14809; 20652; 20780; 30246; 30489;
32157)
SEC. 20A-4.   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he, because of race, color, sex,
religion, handicap, familial status, national origin, or source of income:
      (1)   refuses to negotiate with a person for the sale or rental of a
housing accommodation or otherwise denies or makes unavailable a housing
accommodation to a person;
      (2)   refuses to sell or rent, or otherwise makes unavailable, a housing
accommodation to another person after the other person makes an offer to buy or
rent the accommodation; or
      (3)   discriminates against a person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of, or in providing a service or facility in connection with, the
sale or rental of a housing accommodation.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he, because of race, color, sex,
religion, handicap, familial status, national origin, or source of income:
      (1)   represents to a person that a housing accommodation is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental if the accommodation is available;
      (2)   discriminates against a prospective buyer or renter in connection
with the showing of a housing accommodation; or
      (3)   with respect to a multiple listing service, real estate brokers’
organization, or other business relating to selling or renting housing
accommodations:
         (A)   denies a person access to or membership in the business; or
         (B)   discriminates against a person in the terms or conditions of
access to or membership in the business.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   for profit, induces or attempts to induce another person to sell or
rent a housing accommodation by a representation that a person of a particular
race, color, sex, religion, handicap, familial status, national origin, or
source of income is in proximity to, is present in, or may enter into the
neighborhood in which the housing accommodation is located;
      (2)   makes an oral or written statement indicating a policy of the
respondent or a person represented by the respondent to discriminate on the
basis of race, color, sex, religion, handicap, familial status, national
origin, or source of income in the selling or renting of a housing
accommodation; or
      (3)   prints or publicizes or causes to be printed or publicized an
advertisement that expresses a preference or policy of discrimination based on
race, color, sex, religion, handicap, familial status, national origin, or
source of income in the selling or renting of a housing accommodation.
   (d)   A person who engages in a residential real estate-related transaction
commits an offense if he, because of race, color, sex, religion, handicap,
familial status, national origin, or source of income, discriminates against a
person:
      (1)   in making a residential real estate-related transaction available;
or
      (2)   in the terms or conditions of a residential real estate-related
transaction.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   discriminates in the sale or rental of a housing accommodation to
any buyer or renter because of a handicap of:
         (A)   that buyer or renter;
         (B)   a person residing in or intending to reside in the housing
accommodation after it is sold, rented, or made available; or
         (C)   any person associated with that buyer or renter; or
      (2)   discriminates against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a housing accommodation, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with the housing accommodation, because of
a handicap of:
         (A)   that person;
         (B)   a person residing in or intending to reside in the housing
accommodation after it is sold, rented, or made available; or
         (C)   any person associated with that person.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   refuses to permit, at the expense of a handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the
handicapped person, if the modifications may be necessary to afford the
handicapped person full use of the premises; except that, in the case of a
rental, the landlord may, where reasonable to do so, condition permission for
modification on the renter’s agreeing to restore the interior of the premises
to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear
excepted;
      (2)   refuses to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when the accommodations may be necessary to afford a
handicapped person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a housing accommodation;
      (3)   fails to design or construct a covered multi-family dwelling, for
first occupancy after March 13, 1991, to have at least one building entrance on
an accessible route, unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain
or unusual characteristics of the site; or
      (4)   fails to design and construct a covered multi-family dwelling, for
first occupancy after March 13, 1991, that has a building entrance on an
accessible route in such a manner that:
         (A)   the public and common use areas of the dwelling are readily
accessible to and usable by a handicapped person;
         (B)   all the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by a handicapped person in a
wheelchair; and
         (C)   all premises within a dwelling unit contain the following
features of adaptive design:
            (i)   an accessible route into and through the dwelling unit;
            (ii)   light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
            (iii)    reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
            (iv)   usable kitchens and bathrooms that allow a person in a
wheelchair to maneuver about the space.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if he coerces, intimidates, threatens, or
otherwise interferes with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on
account of that person having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of that
person having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment
of, any right granted or protected by this chapter.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if he retaliates against any person for
making a complaint, testifying, assisting, or participating in any manner in a
proceeding under this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 13456; 14809; 20652; 20780; 21055;
30246)
SEC. 20A-4.1.   HOUSING VOUCHER INCENTIVES.
   In accordance with Section 250.007(c) of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, the city hereby creates and implements the following voluntary program
to encourage acceptance of housing vouchers, including vouchers directly or
indirectly funded by the federal government.
   (a)   Subsidy or financial award. All housing accommodations that benefit
from a subsidy or financial award, as defined in Section 20A-3, approved by the
city council on or after the effective date of this ordinance must:
      (1)    not discriminate against holders of any housing vouchers,
including vouchers directly or indirectly funded by the federal government; and
      (2)    comply with Section
20A-28 regarding tenant selection criteria, Section
20A-31(e)(6) regarding registering as a vendor with local providers of housing
vouchers, and Section
20A-31(g) regarding compliance with an affirmative fair housing marketing plan.
   (b)   Financial award. Multifamily housing accommodations that benefit from
a financial award approved by the city council on or after the effective date
of this ordinance must make best efforts to lease up to 10 percent of the
dwelling units to holders of housing vouchers, including vouchers directly or
indirectly funded by the federal government, for a minimum of 15 years from the
date of the initial issuance of the housing accommodation's certificate of
occupancy. Multifamily has the meaning assigned in Section
51A-4.209(b)(5) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended. In this section,
best efforts means compliance with Section
20A-4.1(a), compliance with the incentive agreement related to the financial
award, and submission of the evidence of compliance to the director of the
department administering the financial award. (Ord. Nos. 30246; 32195)
SEC. 20A-5.   DEFENSES TO CRIMINAL PROSECUTION AND CIVIL ACTION.
   (a)   It is a defense to criminal prosecution or civil action under Section
20A-4 that:
      (1)   the housing accommodation is owned, controlled, or managed by:
         (A)   a religious organization, or a nonprofit organization that
exists in conjunction with or is operated, supervised, or controlled by a
religious organization, and the organization sells or rents the housing
accommodation only to individuals of the same religion as the organization;
except that, this defense is not available if:
            (i)   the offense involves discrimination other than on the basis
of religion;
            (ii)   the organization owns, controls, or manages the housing
accommodation for a commercial purpose; or
            (iii)   membership in the religion is limited to individuals on the
basis of race, color, sex, handicap, familial status, national origin, or
source of income.
         (B)   a nonprofit religious, educational, civic, or service
organization or by a person who rents the housing accommodation to individuals,
a predominant number of whom are associated with the same nonprofit religious,
educational, civic, or service organization, and the organization or person,
for the purposes of privacy and personal modesty, rents the housing
accommodation only to individuals of the same sex or provides separate
accommodations or facilities on the basis of sex; except that, this defense is
not available if the offense involves:
            (i)    discrimination other than on the basis of sex; or
            (ii)   a sale of the housing accommodation; or
         (C)   a private organization and, incidental to the primary purpose of
the organization, the organization rents the housing accommodation only to its
own members; except that, this defense is not available if:
            (i)   the organization owns, controls, or manages the housing
accommodation for a commercial purpose; or
            (ii)   the offense involves a sale of the housing accommodation; or
      (2)   compliance with this chapter would violate a federal, state, or
local law restricting the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a
dwelling unit.
   (b)   It is a defense to criminal prosecution or civil action under all of
Section
20A-4 except Section
20A-4(c)(2) and (3) that the housing accommodation is:
      (1)   a single-family dwelling owned by the respondent; except that, this
defense is not available if the respondent:
         (A)   owns an interest or title in more than three single-family
dwellings, whether or not located inside the city, at the time the offense is
committed;
         (B)   has not resided in the dwelling within the preceding 24 months
before the offense is committed; or
         (C)   uses the services or facilities of a real estate agent, or any
other person in the business of selling or renting real estate, in connection
with a sale or rental involved in the offense; or
      (2)   occupied or intended for occupancy by four or fewer families living
independently of each other, and the respondent is the owner of the
accommodation and occupies part of the accommodation as a residence; except
that, this defense is not available if the offense involves a sale of all or
part of the housing accommodation.
   (c)   It is a defense to criminal prosecution or civil action under Section
20A-4 as it relates to handicap that occupancy of a housing accommodation by
the aggrieved person would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety
of another person or result in physical damage to another person’s property.
   (d)   It is a defense to criminal prosecution or civil action under Section
20A-4 as it relates to familial status that the housing accommodation is:
      (1)   provided under a state or federal program that is specifically
designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or
federal program;
      (2)   intended for, and solely occupied by, a person at least 62 years of
age, except that:
         (A)   an employee of the housing accommodation who performs
substantial duties directly related to the management or maintenance of the
housing accommodation may occupy a dwelling unit, with family members in the
same unit; and
         (B)   a person under age 62 years residing in the housing
accommodation on September 13, 1988 may occupy a dwelling unit, provided that
all new occupants following that date are persons at least 62 years of age; and
         (C)   all vacant units are reserved for occupancy by persons at least
62 years of age; or
      (3)   intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per dwelling unit, provided that:
         (A)   the housing accommodation has significant facilities and
services specifically designed to meet the physical and social needs of an
older person or, if it is not practicable to provide such facilities and
services, the housing accommodation is necessary to provide important housing
opportunities for an older person;
         (B)   at least 80 percent of the dwelling units in the housing
accommodation are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per
dwelling unit; except that a newly constructed housing accommodation for first
occupancy after March 12, 1989 need not comply with this requirement until 25
percent of the dwelling units in the housing accommodation are occupied; and
         (C)   the owner or manager of the housing accommodation publishes and
adheres to policies and procedures that demonstrate an intent by the owner or
manager to provide housing to persons at least 55 years of age.
   (e)   It is a defense to criminal prosecution or civil action under Section
20A-4(d) that the person, in the purchasing of loans, considered factors that
were justified by business necessity and related to the transaction’s financial
security or the protection against default or reduction in the value of the
security, but were unrelated to race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
status, national origin, or source of income.
   (f)   It is a defense to criminal prosecution under Section
20A-4 that the aggrieved person has been convicted by a court of competent
jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled
substance as defined by Section 481.002 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as
amended, or by Section 802, Title 21 of the United States Code Annotated, as
amended.
   (g)   It is a defense to criminal prosecution under Section
20A-4(d) that the person was engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals
of real property and considered factors other than race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, national origin, or source of income.
   (h)   It is a defense to criminal prosecution or civil action under Sections
20A-4 regarding source of income and under
20A-4.1 regarding housing voucher incentives that the following are leased to
housing voucher holders:
      (1)   the minimum required percentage or number of reserved dwelling
units as defined in Section
20A-24, as required by the applicable zoning district;
      (2)   the minimum required percentage or number of affordable dwelling
units, as required by the subsidy or financial award; or
      (3)   if neither (1) nor (2) applies, at least 10 percent of the dwelling
units in a multifamily use, as defined in Section
51A-4.209(b)(5) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
   (i)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits:
      (1)   conduct against a person because of the person’s conviction by a
court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a
controlled substance as defined by Section 481.002 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended, or by Section 802, Title 21 of the United States Code
Annotated, as amended; or
      (2)   a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real
property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, national origin, or source of income.
(Ord. Nos. 13456; 14809; 20652; 20780; 21055; 30246; 32195)
SEC. 20A-6.   FAIR HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   The administrator shall implement and enforce this chapter and may
establish such rules and regulations as are determined necessary to perform the
duties of that office.
   (b)   The administrator is encouraged to cooperate with the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development and the Attorney General of the United States in
the enforcement of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. § 3601, et seq., as
amended, and may assist the secretary or attorney general in any way consistent
with the policy of this chapter. The administrator is encouraged to cooperate
with the Texas Commission on Human Rights in the enforcement of the Texas Fair
Housing Act, Article 1f, Vernon’s Texas Revised Civil Statutes, as amended, and
may assist the commission in any way consistent with the policy of this
chapter.
   (c)   The administrator may order discovery in aid of investigations under
this chapter. Such discovery may be ordered to the same extent and is subject
to the same limitations as would apply if the discovery were ordered in aid of
a civil action in a state district court of Dallas County, Texas. (Ord. Nos.
13456; 14809; 17393; 20652; 20780)
SEC. 20A-7.   COMPLAINT AND ANSWER.
   (a)   An aggrieved person, or any authorized representative of an aggrieved
person, may report a discriminatory housing practice to the administrator and
file a complaint with the administrator not later than one year after an
alleged discriminatory housing practice has occurred or terminated. A complaint
may also be filed by the administrator, not later than one year after an
alleged discriminatory housing practice has occurred or terminated, if the
administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed a
discriminatory housing practice.
   (b)   The administrator shall treat a complaint referred by the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development or the Attorney General of the United States
under the Fair Housing Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. § 3601, et seq., as amended, or
by the Texas Commission on Human Rights under the Texas Fair Housing Act,
Article 1f, Vernon’s Texas Revised Civil Statutes, as amended, as a complaint
filed under Subsection (a). No action will be taken under this chapter against
a person for a discriminatory housing practice if the referred complaint was
filed with the governmental entity later than one year after an alleged
discriminatory housing practice occurred or terminated.
   (c)   A complaint must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and
contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the respondent.
      (2)   Name, address, and signature of the complainant.
      (3)   Name and address of the aggrieved person, if different from the
complainant.
      (4)   Date of the occurrence or termination of the discriminatory housing
practice and date of the filing of the complaint.
      (5)   Description and address of the housing accommodation involved in
the discriminatory housing practice, if appropriate.
      (6)   Concise statement of the facts of the discriminatory housing
practice, including the basis of the discrimination (race, color, sex,
religion, handicap, familial status, national origin, or source of income).
   (d)   Upon the filing of a complaint, the administrator shall, in writing:
      (1)   notify the complainant, and the aggrieved person if different from
the complainant, that a complaint has been filed; and
      (2)   advise the complainant, and the aggrieved person if different from
the complainant, of time limits applicable to the complaint and of any rights,
obligations, and remedies of the aggrieved person under this chapter.
   (e)   Not more than 10 days after the filing of a complaint, the
administrator shall, in writing:
      (1)   notify the respondent named in the complaint that a complaint
alleging the commission of a discriminatory housing practice has been filed
against the respondent;
      (2)   furnish a copy of the complaint to the respondent;
      (3)   advise the respondent of the procedural rights and obligations of
the respondent, including the right to file a written, signed, and verified
informal answer to the complaint within 10 days after service of notice of the
complaint; and
      (4)   advise the respondent of other rights and remedies available to the
aggrieved person under this chapter.
   (f)   Not later than the 10th day after service of the notice and copy of
the complaint, a respondent may file an answer to the complaint. The answer
must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number, and signature of the respondent or
the respondent’s attorney, if any.
      (2)   Concise statement of facts in response to the allegations in the
complaint and facts of any defense or exemption.
   (g)   A complaint or answer may be amended at any time before the
administrator notifies the city attorney under Section
20A-12 of a discriminatory housing practice upon which the complaint is based.
The administrator shall furnish a copy of each amended complaint or answer,
respectively, to the respondent or complainant, and any aggrieved person if
different from the complainant, as promptly as is practicable.
   (h)   The administrator may not disclose or permit to be disclosed to the
public the identity of a respondent before the administrator notifies the city
attorney under Section
20A-12 of a discriminatory housing practice alleged against the respondent in a
complaint or while the complaint is in the process of being investigated and
prior to completion of all negotiations relative to a conciliation agreement.
   (i)   A complaint, except a referred complaint described in Subsection (b)
of this section, shall be finally disposed of either through dismissal,
execution of a conciliation agreement, or issuance of a charge within one year
after the date on which the complaint was filed unless it is impracticable to
do so, in which case, the administrator shall notify the complainant, the
aggrieved person if different from the complainant, and the respondent, in
writing, of the reasons for the delay. (Ord. Nos. 13456; 14809; 20652; 20780;
30246)
SEC. 20A-8.   INVESTIGATION.
   (a)   Not more than 30 days after the filing of a complaint by an aggrieved
person or by the administrator, the administrator shall commence an
investigation of the complaint to determine whether there is reasonable cause
to believe a discriminatory housing practice was committed and the facts of the
discriminatory housing practice.
   (b)   The administrator shall seek the voluntary cooperation of any person
to:
      (1)   obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and any
other possible source of information;
      (2)   examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and
      (3)   take and record testimony or statements of any person reasonably
necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
   (c)   The administrator, in consultation with the city attorney, may, at the
administrator's discretion or at the request of the respondent, the
complainant, or the aggrieved person if different from the complainant, issue a
subpoena or subpoena duces tecum to compel the attendance of a witness or the
production of relevant materials or documents in accordance with Section
2-8 of
Chapter 2 of the city code. Violation of a subpoena issued under this
subsection is punishable by the same fines and penalties for contempt as are
authorized before the county court.
   (d)   An investigation shall remain open until a reasonable cause
determination is made under Section
20A-12, a conciliation agreement is executed and approved under Section
20A-10, or the complaint is dismissed under Section
20A-13. Unless impracticable to do so, the administrator shall complete the
investigation within 100 days after the date of filing of the complaint. If the
administrator is unable to complete the investigation within the 100-day
period, the administrator shall notify the complainant, the aggrieved party if
different from the complainant, and the respondent, in writing, of the reasons
for the delay.
   (e)   This section does not limit the authority of the administrator to
conduct such other investigations or to use such other enforcement procedures,
otherwise lawful, as the administrator considers necessary to enforce this
chapter.
   (f)   The administrator shall prepare a final investigative report showing:
      (1)   the names of and dates of contact with witnesses;
      (2)   a summary, including dates, of correspondence and other contacts
with the aggrieved person and the respondent;
      (3)   a summary description of other pertinent records;
      (4)   a summary of witness statements; and
      (5)   answers to interrogatories. (Ord. Nos. 13456; 14809; 20652; 20780;
32157)
SEC. 20A-9.   TEMPORARY OR PRELIMINARY RELIEF.
   (a)   If at any time following the filing of a complaint the administrator
concludes that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out the purposes of
this chapter, the administrator may request the city attorney to initiate a
civil action in the state district court of Dallas County, Texas for
appropriate temporary or preliminary relief pending final disposition of the
complaint.
   (b)   On receipt of the administrator’s request, the city attorney shall
promptly file the action in the state district court. Venue is in Dallas
County, Texas.
   (c)   A temporary restraining order or other order granting preliminary or
temporary relief under this section is governed by the applicable Texas Rules
of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 20780)
SEC. 20A-10.   CONCILIATION.
   (a)   During the period beginning with the filing of a complaint and ending
with the issuance of a charge under Section
20A-12, the dismissal of the complaint under Section
20A-13, or the dismissal of the criminal action in municipal court, the
administrator shall try to conciliate the complaint. In conciliating a
complaint, the administrator shall try to achieve a just resolution and obtain
assurances that the respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violation of the
aggrieved person’s rights and take action to assure the elimination of both
present and future discriminatory housing practices.
   (b)   If a conciliation agreement is executed under this section, a party to
the agreement may not be prosecuted in municipal court, nor may the
administrator issue a charge against a party, for the discriminatory housing
practice specified in the agreement under Subsection (d)(1) unless the
administrator determines that the agreement has been violated and notifies the
city attorney in writing of the violation.
   (c)   A conciliation agreement must be in writing in the form approved by
the city attorney and must be signed and verified by the respondent, the
complainant, and the aggrieved person if different from the complainant,
subject to approval of the administrator who shall indicate approval by signing
the agreement. A conciliation agreement that is not executed before the
expiration of 100 days after the date the complaint is filed must include the
approval of the city attorney. A conciliation agreement is executed upon its
signing and verification by all parties to the agreement.
   (d)   A conciliation agreement executed under this section must contain:
      (1)   an identification of the discriminatory housing practice and
corresponding respondent that gives rise to the conciliation agreement under
Subsection (a) and the identification of any other discriminatory housing
practice and respondent that the parties agree to make subject to the
limitation on prosecution in Subsection (b);
      (2)   an identification of the housing accommodation subject to the
conciliation agreement; and
      (3)   a statement that each party entering into the conciliation
agreement agrees:
         (A)   not to violate this chapter or the conciliation agreement; and
         (B)   that the respondent shall file with the administrator a periodic
activity report, in accordance with the following regulations, if the
discriminatory housing practice giving rise to the conciliation agreement under
Subsection (a) involves a respondent who engages in a business relating to
selling or renting housing accommodations; a housing accommodation occupied or
intended for occupancy on a rental or sale basis; or a violation of Section
20A-4(d):
            (i)   Unless the discriminatory housing practice involves a
violation of Section
20A-4(c)(1), the activity report must state, with respect to each person of the
specified class (the race, color, sex, religion, handicap, familial status,
national origin, or source of income alleged as the basis of discrimination in
the complaint on the discriminatory housing practice) who in person contacts a
party to the conciliation agreement concerning either sale, rental, or
financing of a housing accommodation or a business relating to selling or
renting housing accommodations, the name and address or telephone number of the
person, the date of each contact, and the result of each contact.
            (ii)   If the discriminatory housing practice involves a violation
of Section
20A-4(c)(1), the activity report must state the number and manner of
solicitations concerning housing accommodations made by the party and the
approximate boundaries of each neighborhood in which the solicitations are
made.
            (iii)   The party who prepares the activity report must sign and
verify the report.
            (iv)   An activity report must be filed each month on the date
specified in the conciliation agreement for a period of not less than three
months nor more than 36 months, as required by the conciliation agreement.
   (e)   In addition to the requirements of Subsection (d), a conciliation
agreement may include any other term or condition agreed to by the parties,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   monetary relief in the form of damages, including humiliation and
embarrassment, and attorney fees; and
      (2)   equitable relief such as access to the housing accommodation at
issue, or to a comparable housing accommodation, and provision of services and
facilities in connection with a housing accommodation.
   (f)   Nothing said during the course of conciliation may be made public or
used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter without the
written consent of any person concerned.
   (g)   A conciliation agreement shall be made public, unless the aggrieved
person and the respondent request nondisclosure and the administrator
determines that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of this
chapter. Notwithstanding a determination that disclosure of a conciliation
agreement is not required, the administrator may publish tabulated descriptions
of the results of all conciliation efforts.
   (h)   If the aggrieved person brings a civil action under a local, state, or
federal law seeking relief for the alleged discriminatory housing practice and
the trial in the action begins, the administrator shall terminate efforts to
conciliate the complaint unless the court specifically requests assistance from
the administrator. The administrator may also terminate efforts to conciliate
the complaint if:
      (1)   the respondent fails or refuses to confer with the administrator;
      (2)   the aggrieved person or the respondent fails to make a good faith
effort to resolve any dispute; or
      (3)   the administrator finds, for any reason, that voluntary agreement
is not likely to result. (Ord. Nos. 13456; 14809; 20652; 20780; 30246)
SEC. 20A-11.   VIOLATION OF CONCILIATION AGREEMENT.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, after the person executes a
conciliation agreement under Section
20A-10, he violates any term or condition contained in the agreement.
   (b)   It is no defense to criminal prosecution in municipal court or to
civil action in state district court under this section that, with respect to a
discriminatory housing practice that gave rise to the conciliation agreement
under Section
20A-10:
      (1)   the respondent did not commit the discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   the administrator did not have probable cause to believe the
discriminatory housing practice was committed.
   (c)   If the administrator determines that a conciliation agreement has been
violated, the administrator shall give written notice to all parties subject to
the agreement.
   (d)   When the administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
respondent has breached a conciliation agreement, the administrator shall refer
the matter to the city attorney’s office with a recommendation that a civil
action be filed under Section
20A-14 for the enforcement of the agreement. The administrator shall also file
a criminal action in municipal court for a violation of the agreement. (Ord.
Nos. 13456; 14809; 20652; 20780)
SEC. 20A-12.   REASONABLE CAUSE DETERMINATION AND CHARGE.
   (a)   Upon notification by the administrator that a conciliation agreement
has not been executed by the complainant and the respondent and approved by the
administrator in accordance with Section
20A-10, the city attorney, within the time limits set forth in Subsection (b),
shall determine whether, based upon all facts known at the time of the
decision, reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing
practice has occurred. In making the reasonable cause determination, the city
attorney shall consider whether the facts concerning the alleged discriminatory
housing practice are sufficient to warrant the initiation of a criminal action
in municipal court or a civil action in state district court.
   (b)   The city attorney shall make a reasonable cause determination within
100 days after the filing of a complaint unless it is impracticable to do so.
If the city attorney is unable to make the determination within the 100-day
period, the administrator shall notify the complainant, the aggrieved person if
different from the complainant, and the respondent, in writing, of the reasons
for the delay.
   (c)   Upon determination by the city attorney that reasonable cause exists
to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, the
administrator shall immediately issue a charge on behalf of the aggrieved
person. The administrator may also file a criminal action in municipal court.
Not more than 20 days after the administrator issues the charge, the
administrator shall notify the complainant, the aggrieved person if different
from the complainant, and the respondent, in writing, of the issuance of a
charge and include a copy of the charge.
   (d)   A charge issued by the administrator:
      (1)   shall consist of a short and plain written statement of the facts
upon which the city attorney has found reasonable cause to believe that a
discriminatory housing practice has occurred;
      (2)   shall be based on the final investigative report; and
      (3)   need not be limited to the facts or grounds alleged in the
complaint filed under Section
20A-7 of this chapter.
   (e)   If the city attorney determines that no reasonable cause exists to
believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, the city attorney
shall issue to the administrator a short and plain written statement of the
facts upon which the city attorney based the no reasonable cause determination.
   (f)   The administrator may not issue a charge and the city attorney may not
bring or maintain a civil action in state district court for an alleged
discriminatory housing practice after the aggrieved person has brought a civil
action under local, state, or federal law seeking relief for the alleged
discriminatory housing practice and the trial in the action has begun. If a
charge may not be issued by the administrator or a civil action may not be
brought or maintained by the city attorney because of the trial of a civil
action brought by the aggrieved party, the administrator shall notify the
complainant, the aggrieved person if different from the complainant, and the
respondent, in writing. (Ord. Nos. 13456; 14809; 20652; 20780; 21055)
SEC. 20A-13.   DISMISSAL OF COMPLAINT.
   (a)   A complaint may be dismissed by the administrator:
      (1)    during the investigation and prior to referral to the city
attorney when the administrator determines that:
         (A)   the complaint was not filed within the required time period;
         (B)   the location of the alleged discriminatory housing practice is
not within the city’s jurisdiction;
         (C)   the alleged discriminatory housing practice is not a violation
of this chapter;
         (D)   the complainant or aggrieved person refuses to cooperate with
the administrator in the investigation of the complaint or enforcement of the
executed conciliation agreement;
         (E)   the complainant, or the aggrieved person if different from the
complainant, cannot be located after the administrator has performed a
reasonable search; or
         (F)   a conciliation agreement has been executed by the respondent,
complainant, and aggrieved person if different from the complainant; or
      (2)   within 10 days after receipt of a statement of no reasonable cause
from the city attorney.
   (b)   A criminal action may be dismissed by a municipal judge upon motion of
the city attorney, if after the city attorney files the action charging a
respondent with a discriminatory housing practice, a conciliation agreement is
executed under Section
20A-10 before the trial begins in municipal court.
   (c)   The administrator shall notify the complainant, the aggrieved person
if different from the complainant, and the respondent of the dismissal of the
complaint, including a written statement of facts, and make public disclosure
of the dismissal by issuing a press release, unless the respondent requests
that no public disclosure be made. (Ord. Nos. 13456; 14809; 20652; 20780)
SEC. 20A-14.   CIVIL ACTION IN STATE DISTRICT COURT.
   (a)   If a respondent has been found by the administrator and the city
attorney to have breached an executed conciliation agreement or if the
administrator has issued a charge under Section
20A-12, the city attorney, upon the request of the administrator, shall
initiate and maintain a civil action on behalf of the aggrieved person in the
state district court seeking relief under this chapter.
   (b)   An aggrieved person may intervene in the action.
   (c)   If the court finds in the civil action that the conciliation agreement
has been violated or a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, the court
may award to the plaintiff:
      (1)   actual and punitive damages;
      (2)   civil penalties payable to the city for vindication of the public
interest in an amount that does not exceed:
         (A)   $10,000 if the respondent has not been adjudged by order of a
court to have committed a prior discriminatory housing practice;
         (B)   except as provided by Subparagraph (D) of this paragraph,
$25,000 if the respondent has been adjudged by order of a court to have
committed one other discriminatory housing practice during the five-year period
ending on the date of the filing of the charge; and
         (C)   except as provided by Subparagraph (D) of this paragraph,
$50,000 if the respondent has been adjudged by order of a court to have
committed two or more discriminatory housing practices during the seven-year
period ending on the date of the filing of the charge.
         (D)   If the acts constituting the discriminatory housing practice
that is the subject of the charge are committed by the same individual who has
been previously adjudged to have committed acts constituting a discriminatory
housing practice, the civil penalties in Subparagraphs (B) and (C) of this
paragraph may be imposed without regard to the period of time within which any
other discriminatory housing practice occurred;
      (3)   reasonable attorney’s fees;
      (4)   costs of court; and
      (5)   any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order,
or other order, including an order enjoining the defendant from engaging in the
discriminatory housing practice or ordering appropriate affirmative action.
   (d)   If actual damages are sought for the benefit of an aggrieved person
who does not intervene in the civil action, the court may not award the actual
damages if the aggrieved person has not complied with discovery orders entered
by the court.
   (e)   The city shall not be subject to orders for sanctions for the failure
of the complainant, if other than the administrator, or aggrieved person to
comply with discovery requests of the defendant or discovery orders of the
court.
   (f)   Any resolution of a charge before a final order is signed by the state
district court under this section requires the consent of the aggrieved person
on whose behalf the charge is issued. (Ord. Nos. 20780; 21055; 32157)
SEC. 20A-15.   ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
   (a)   An aggrieved person may file a civil action in state district court
not later than two years after the occurrence or termination of an alleged
discriminatory housing practice or after the breach of a conciliation agreement
entered into under this chapter, whichever occurs last, to obtain appropriate
relief with respect to the discriminatory housing practice or the breach of the
conciliation agreement. Except for civil actions due to the breach of a
conciliation agreement, computation of the two-year period does not include any
time during which an administrative proceeding under this article was pending
with respect to a complaint or charge under this article based upon a
discriminatory housing practice.
   (b)   An aggrieved person may file an action under this section whether or
not a complaint has been filed under Section
20A-7 of this chapter and without regard to the status of any complaint filed
under Section
20A-7 of this chapter.
   (c)   An aggrieved person may not file an action under this section for an
alleged discriminatory housing practice that forms the basis of a charge issued
by the administrator if:
      (1)   the administrator has obtained a conciliation agreement with the
consent of the aggrieved person; or
      (2)   the city attorney has filed a civil action on the charge in state
district court on behalf of the aggrieved person.
   (d)   In an action under this section, if the court finds that a
discriminatory housing practice has occurred, the court may award to the
plaintiff:
      (1)   actual and punitive damages;
      (2)   reasonable attorney’s fees;
      (3)   court costs; and
      (4)   subject to Section 20(A)-16 of this chapter, any permanent or
temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, including an
order enjoining the defendant from engaging in the discriminatory housing
practice or ordering appropriate affirmative action.
   (e)   A court in a civil action brought under this section may award
reasonable attorney’s fees to the prevailing party and assess court costs
against the non- prevailing party. (Ord. Nos. 20780; 32157)
SEC. 20A-16.   EFFECT OF CIVIL ACTION ON CERTAIN CONTRACTS.
   Relief granted under Section
20A-14 or
20A-15 does not affect a contract, sale, encumbrance, or lease that:
      (1)   was consummated before the granting of the relief; and
      (2)   involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant who did not
have actual notice of the filing of a complaint under this chapter or a civil
action under Section
20A-17. (Ord. 20780)
SEC. 20A-17.   SERVICE OF NOTICE AND COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (a)   For purposes of this chapter, any notice, paper, or document required
to be served on any person under this chapter may be served in person or by
United States mail to the person’s last known address.
   (b)   When service is by mail, three days will be added to the prescribed
time period allowed under this chapter for timely filing.
   (c)   Service is complete and time periods begin to run at the time the
required notice, paper, or document is delivered in person or deposited in a
United States postal receptacle. (Ord. 20780)
SEC. 20A-18.   ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   The procedures prescribed by this chapter do not constitute an
administrative prerequisite to another action or remedy available to the city
or to an aggrieved person under federal or state law. (Ord. Nos. 13456; 14809;
20652; 20780)
SEC. 20A-19.   EDUCATION AND PUBLIC INFORMATION.
   The administrator may conduct educational and public information activities
that are designed to promote the policy of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 13456;
14809; 20652; 20780)
SEC. 20A-20.   EFFECT ON OTHER LAW.
   This ordinance does not affect any local, state, or federal restriction:
      (1)   on the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling
unit; or
      (2)   relating to health or safety standards. (Ord. 20780)
SEC. 20A-21.   CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of Section
20A-4 or
20A-11 of this chapter commits a criminal offense. A person is guilty of a
separate criminal offense for each day or part of a day during which a
violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
   (b)   A criminal offense under this chapter is punishable in municipal court
by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500. (Ord. Nos. 20652; 20780)
ARTICLE II.
MIXED-INCOME HOUSING.
SEC. 20A-22.   PURPOSE.
   This article is adopted to implement the provisions and goals of the
comprehensive housing policy, affirmatively further fair housing, create and
maintain available and affordable housing throughout Dallas, promote greater
fair housing choices, and overcome patterns of segregation and concentrations
of poverty. (Ord. Nos. 31142; 32195)
SEC. 20A-23.   APPLICABILITY.
   This article applies to developments seeking a development bonus under
Division
51A-4.1100 and other properties enrolled in a mixed-income housing program.
(Ord. Nos. 31142; 32195)
SEC. 20A-23.1.   ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROVISION AND INCENTIVES.
   (a)   Alternative methods of provision. Developments seeking a bonus under
this article may:
      (1)   provide the required units on the same building site as the market
rate units;
      (2)   provide the units as part of a phased development as provided in
Section
51A-4.1105(e); or
      (3)   pay a fee in lieu of on-site or phased development.
   (b)   On-site provision and phased on-site provision. Units provided on-site
must comply with all requirements in Division
51A-4.1100 unless specifically exempted in the applicable zoning district.
   (c)   Fee in lieu. The requirement for reserved dwelling units may be
satisfied by making a payment to the city's Mixed Income Housing Development
Bonus Fund established by Resolution No. 22-0744.
      (1)   If the floor area devoted to non-residential uses is more than 20
percent of the total floor area, the fee is calculated by multiplying the
applicable per square foot amount in Section
20A-34 by the total floor area as floor area is defined in Section
51A-2.102(38); otherwise the fee is calculated by multiplying the applicable
per square foot amount in Section
20A-34 by the residential floor area as floor area is defined in Section
51A-2.102(38).
      (2)   The amount of the fee applies to each building using the bonus
separately and will vary by the number of stories in that building according to
Section
20A-34.
      (3)   After payment is received, the director shall issue a letter
confirming that the development has met the affordability requirements of
Division
51A-4.1100 to receive a mixed income housing development bonus. This letter
must be recorded and made a part of the deed records of the county or counties
in which the Property is located. The recorded letter will serve as the
restrictive covenant required in Section
51A-4.1105 and in this article.
      (4)   Compliance with Sections
20A-26,
20A-27,
20A-28,
20A-29, and
20A-31 is not required.
   (d)   Financial incentives.
      (1)   Developments that use the on-site or phased on-site provisions in
Section
51A-4.1105(e) may also qualify for financial incentives.
      (2)   Financial incentives are not available to developments that choose
the fee in lieu option. (Ord. 32195)
SEC. 20A-24.   DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   (a)   Definitions. In this article:
      (1)   AFFIRMATIVE FAIR HOUSING MARKETING PLAN means a marketing strategy
designed to attract renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless of
race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, national origin, or
source of income.
      (2)   AFFORDABLE RENT means: (i) a monthly rental housing payment, in
compliance with a rent and income schedule produced annually by the office, or
(ii) the voucher payment standard for voucher holders.
      (3)   ANNUAL INCOME has the definition assigned to that term in 24 CFR
§5.609, "Annual Income," as amended.
      (4)   APPLICANT means a household applying to lease a reserved dwelling
unit.
      (5)   AREA MEDIAN FAMILY INCOME ("AMFI") means the median income for the
Dallas, TX HUD Metro Fair Market Rent Area, adjusted for family size, as
determined annually by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
      (6)   DEVELOPMENT means the structure or structures located on the
Property receiving a development bonus.
      (7)   DEVELOPMENT BONUS means yard, lot, and space bonuses that can be
obtained by meeting the requirements in this division and
Chapter 51A.
      (8)   DEVELOPMENT BONUS RESTRICTIVE COVENANT means a covenant running
with the land that meets the requirements of this chapter.
      (9)   DIRECTOR means the director of the office of housing and community
empowerment and includes representatives, agents, or office employees
designated by the director.
      (10)   ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLDS means households with an income within the
required income band or voucher holders regardless of income.
      (11)   FAMILY means family as defined in 24 CFR §5.403, "Definitions," as
amended.
      (12)   HANDBOOK means the HUD Handbook 4350.3: Occupancy Requirements of
Subsidized Multifamily Housing Programs, as periodically revised and published
by HUD.
      (13)   HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
      (14)   INCOME means income as defined by 24 CFR §5.609, "Annual Income."
      (15)   INCOME BAND means the range of household adjusted incomes between
a pre- determined upper limit and a pre-determined lower limit generally stated
in terms of a percentage of area median family income adjusted for family size.
         (A)   INCOME BAND 1 means an income between 81 and 100 percent of
AMFI.
         (B)   INCOME BAND 2 means an income between 61 and 80 percent of AMFI.
         (C)   INCOME BAND 3 means an income between 51 and 60 percent of AMFI.
      (16)   MARKET VALUE ANALYSIS ("MVA") means the most recent official study
that was commissioned by and prepared for the city to assist residents and
policy-makers to understand the elements of their local residential real estate
markets.
      (17)   MIXED-INCOME HOUSING PROGRAM means a program administered by the
office in which each owner using a development bonus participates.
      (18)   MIXED-INCOME HOUSING RESTRICTIVE COVENANT means the instrument
securing the terms and enforcement of this division.
      (19)   [RESERVED.]
      (20)   OFFICE means the office of housing and community empowerment.
      (21)   OPTIONAL AMENITIES means services or features that are not
included in the monthly rent, including access to premium parking and concierge
services, among other services.
      (22)   OWNER means the entity or person who owns the development or
Property during the rental affordability period, including the owner's
employees, agents, or contractors.
      (23)   PROGRAM MANUAL means the guidebook published, maintained, and
updated by the office that includes specific guidance for program
implementation.
      (24)   PROPERTY means the land and all improvements as more particularly
described in the mixed-income restrictive covenant.
      (25)   RENTAL AFFORDABILITY PERIOD means the period that the reserved
dwelling units may only be leased to and occupied by eligible households.
      (26)   RESERVED DWELLING UNIT means the rental units in a development
available to be leased to and occupied by eligible households, or which are
currently leased to and occupied by eligible households and are leased at
affordable rental rates.
      (27)   UNIT TYPE means the kind of unit broken out by number of bedrooms
in the unit, or, if the unit is a specialty unit, a description of the type of
specialty unit, such as efficiency, one bedroom, two bedroom, loft, penthouse,
etc.
      (28)   VOUCHER HOLDER means a holder of a housing voucher, including
vouchers directly or indirectly funded by the federal, state, or local
government.
      (29)   VOUCHER PAYMENT STANDARD means the maximum monthly assistance
payment for a family assisted in the voucher program (before deducting the
total tenant payment by the family).
   (b)   Interpretations. For uses or terms found in Chapter 51, the
regulations in Section
51A-4.702 (a)(6)(C) apply in this division. (Ord. Nos. 31142; 32195; 32864;
33233)
SEC. 20A-25.   MARKET VALUE ANALYSIS CATEGORY AND RESERVED DWELLING UNIT
VERIFICATIONS.
   (a)   In general. An owner shall comply with this section before applying
for a construction permit. An owner shall:
      (1)   submit an application to the office detailing the proposed project,
which includes the following information:
         (A)   the legal description and address of the property;
         (B)   any restrictive covenants or contracts that will require the
owner to lease dwelling units at a specific rent for a specific term of years,
along with the number of units; and
         (C)   any other information determined by the director to be necessary
to aid in the determination of whether the owner is eligible to participate in
the mixed-income housing program;
      (2)   obtain a certified verification of the building site's market value
analysis ("MVA") category;
      (3)   sign a reserved dwelling unit verification form provided by the
office where the owner acknowledges receipt of information regarding the
minimum and maximum percentage of reserved dwelling units for that category,
states the intended pro-rata distribution of the reserved dwelling units, if
applicable, and provides any other pertinent information requested by the
director;
      (4)   acknowledge its intent to participate in the mixed income housing
development bonus program.
   (b)   Reserved dwelling unit verification. A development using a mixed-
income development bonus in Division
51A-4.1100 may reserve no more than 50 percent of the dwelling units in each
development for households at or below 80 percent of Area Median Family Income.
This maximum percentage of reserved dwelling units may be waived for
developments that are enrolled in a program administered by the office and
authorized by the city council that furthers the public purposes and goals of
the city's housing policy.
   (c)   Conflicts. In case of a conflict between the documents required in
this section and the requirements of:
      (1)   the base zoning district, the base zoning district controls; and
      (2)   the restrictive covenant, the restrictive covenant controls.
   (d)   Expiration of market value analysis category, reserved dwelling unit,
and participation verifications. Verifications expire one year after the date
of issuance if the owner has not filed a mixed-income restrictive covenant in
the real property records related to the property for which the verifications
were issued and made reasonable progress, as defined in Section 311.3 of
Chapter 52 of the Dallas City Code, on the Property that will be subject to the
mixed-income restrictive covenant. (Ord. Nos. 31142; 32195; 33233)
SEC. 20A-26.   MIXED-INCOME RESTRICTIVE COVENANT.
   (a)   In general. A mixed-income restrictive covenant must be executed and
recorded in accordance with this section on a form provided by the city. The
instrument must:
      (1)   be signed by all owners of the Property;
      (2)   be signed by all lienholders, other than taxing entities, having an
interest in the Property;
      (3)   contain a legal description of the Property;
      (4)   specify the number of any required reserved dwelling units and the
income band applicable to each unit;
      (5)   be a covenant running with the land;
      (6)   be for a term of 20 years with one-year automatic renewals (to
allow for periods of noncompliance until the full 20-year term is met) and it
is terminated by a subsequent written instrument;
      (7)   state that all signatories agree to defend, indemnify, and hold
harmless the City of Dallas from and against all claims or liabilities arising
out of or in connection with the instrument;
      (8)   state that it may only be amended or terminated by a subsequent
written instrument that is:
         (A)   signed by all owners of the Property and all lienholders, other
than taxing entities;
         (B)   approved by the director;
         (C)   approved as to form by the city attorney; and
         (D)   recorded and made a part of the deed records of the county or
counties in which the Property is located;
      (9)   state that the owner agrees to comply with all the requirements of
this article, including the submission of quarterly unit status reports,
maintaining the development in compliance with the city’s health and safety
ordinances, full cooperation with any audits and inspections conducted pursuant
to the mixed-income housing program including providing access to all records
required to be maintained in accordance with this article and allowing the
physical inspection of the property, compliance with the city’s Program Manual
maintained by the office, and continued compliance with maintenance of the
physical attributes of the property in accordance with this article;
      (10)   state that the owner agrees to maintain the property in compliance
with all federal, state, and local health and safety regulations;
      (11)   state that the owner agrees to notify the city within 30 days of
any change in ownership, default, foreclosure, or bankruptcy;
      (12)   state that it may be enforced by the City of Dallas;
      (13)   state that it shall be governed by the laws of the State of Texas;
and
      (14)   be approved by the director and be approved as to form by city
attorney.
   (b)   Commencement and termination of rental affordability period. The
rental affordability period begins on the date the first reserved dwelling unit
is occupied by an eligible household and continues until the expiration of the
term of years stated in the mixed-income restrictive covenant, unless the term
has been tolled and extended due to the owner's substantial noncompliance with
the mixed-income housing program.
   (c)   Instrument to be recorded. A true and correct copy of the fully
executed mixed-income restrictive covenant must be recorded in the deed records
of the county or counties in which the property is located. The instrument will
not be considered effective until it is recorded in the deed records in
accordance with this article and a recorded copy of the instrument is filed
with the director.
   (d)   Amendment of instrument. A recorded mixed-income restrictive covenant
may be amended to adjust the number of reserved dwelling units in a development
if the total number of dwelling units has changed. (Ord. Nos. 31142; 32195;
33233)
SEC. 20A-27.   ADMINISTRATION OF THE MIXED-INCOME HOUSING PROGRAM.
   (a)   Compliance. Except as provided in this article, the owner shall
provide reserved units and conduct eligibility determinations in accordance
with the handbook, 24 CFR Part 5, “General HUD Program Requirements; Waivers,”
and the office’s program manual. Where the program manual provides specific
exceptions to the handbook or to 24 CFR Part 5, the program manual controls
with respect to the mixed income housing development bonus program.
   (b)   Exceptions. The following mandatory items in the handbook do not apply
to the mixed-income housing program:
      (1)   inquiries regarding or documentation of the immigration status of
an applicant or eligible household;
      (2)   use of HUD forms, unless specifically required in this division;
      (3)   compliance with HUD requirements that are specific to a HUD program
and are not generally-applicable; and
      (4)   use of the Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) system.
   (c)   Determination of family size. An owner shall use the broad definition
of family as defined in 24 CFR §5.403, "Definitions," and may not engage in any
discriminatory housing practices as defined in Section 20A-4 of this chapter.
   (d)   Rent and income limits. The office will annually publish rent and
income limits to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility to lease a
reserved dwelling unit or a household’s eligibility to renew the lease on a
reserved dwelling unit. The office shall use the income limits published
annually by HUD for the Dallas, TX HUD Metro Fair Market Rent Area, adjusted
for family size, as the basis for the office’s income limits and use the nine
percent housing tax credit limits published annually by the Texas Department of
Housing and Community Affairs as the rent limits.
   (e)   Income bands.
      (1)   An owner shall ensure that reserved dwelling units are only leased
to and occupied by eligible households in accordance with the development bonus
restrictive covenant.
      (2)   Eligible households making less than the minimum AMFI for a
particular income band, including voucher holders, may be counted for that
income band provided that they are charged an affordable rent.
   (f)   Affordable rents.
      (1)   An owner shall ensure that an affordable rent is charged to
eligible households occupying reserved dwelling units and shall re-certify
eligibility and rent annually.
      (2)   An owner shall provide a minimum of 30 days written notice to the
eligible household before a rent change. The notice must include a summary of
how the change was calculated.
      (3)   The affordable rent must include all monthly charges or fees that
are mandatory for all tenants but does not need to include charges or fees for
optional amenities. The owner may not impose expenses or fees that are
applicable only to reserved dwelling units.
   (g)   Annual certification of eligibility. An owner shall conduct an annual
certification of household income and composition for each eligible household
in accordance with the program manual.
      (1)   An owner shall not conduct a certification on less than an annual
basis unless requested to do so by an eligible household. An owner shall
conduct the interim certification in the same manner as conducting an annual
certification. An owner may charge a reasonable fee to cover the administrative
costs associated with conducting an interim certification.
      (2)   If an owner fails to complete the annual certification within 120
days of the lease anniversary date, the reserved dwelling unit will be
considered out of compliance and the mixed-income restrictive covenant term
will be extended for the period of non-compliance. The non-compliance can be
cured by completing the annual certification or designating another unit as a
reserved dwelling unit and leasing it to an eligible household.
   (h)   Additional requirements and prohibitions.
      (1)   The reserved dwelling unit for which an applicant is applying to
lease, or for which an eligible household leases, must be the applicant's or
eligible household's only residence.
      (2)   An owner may not allow an eligible household to sublease or
otherwise accept compensation for allowing a person or persons who are not
documented members of the eligible household, pursuant to the owner's lease
agreement with the eligible household, to occupy a reserved dwelling unit,
regardless of the terms or length of the occupancy.
      (3)   Any financial assistance that a student receives under the Higher
Education Act of 1965, from private sources, or from an institution of higher
education that is in excess of the amounts received for tuition shall be
included in annual income, except if the student will live with his or her
parents and his or her parents are voucher holders.
      (4)   The office shall conduct regular inspections and monitoring in
accordance with the published program manual.
(Ord. Nos. 31142; 32195; 33233)
SEC. 20A-28.   TENANT SELECTION AND OTHER WRITTEN POLICIES.
   (a)   Tenant selection and other policies must comply with the program
manual and:
      (1)   be reasonably related to the mixed-income housing program
eligibility criteria and the applicant's ability to perform the obligations of
the lease;
      (2)   prioritize holders of housing vouchers, including vouchers directly
or indirectly funded by the federal government, for lease and occupancy of
reserved units;
      (3)   provide for the selection of tenants from a written waiting list in
the chronological order of their application, insofar as is practicable;
      (4)   give prompt written notification to any rejected applicant stating
the grounds for the rejection; and
      (5)   be consistent with this article.
   (b)   Owners shall create the following written policies and retain written
records related to the following policies:
      (1)   reasonable accommodations;
      (2)   affirmative marketing;
      (3)   applicant screening criteria;
      (4)   tenant selection criteria;
      (5)   policies for opening and closing the waiting list;
      (6)   waiting list preferences, if any;
      (7)   procedures for rejecting ineligible tenants;
      (8)   occupancy standards;
      (9)   non-renewal and termination notices; and
      (10)   unit transfers. (Ord. Nos. 31142; 32195)
SEC. 20A-29.   [RESERVED.]
 
SEC. 20A-30.   NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this section, an owner receiving a
mixed income development bonus under Division
51A-4.1100 shall not discriminate against holders of housing vouchers,
including vouchers directly or indirectly funded by the federal government.
   (b)   Exception. It is a defense to criminal prosecution or civil action
under this section that at least the minimum required percentage of reserved
units are leased to eligible households and that all applicable requirements of
this article have been met. (Ord. Nos. 31142; 32195)
SEC. 20A-31.   COMPLIANCE, REPORTING, AND RECORDKEEPING.
   (a)   In general. An owner must comply with the city's mixed-income housing
program during the term of the mixed-income restrictive covenant.
   (b)   Use of forms. If the director publishes mandatory forms to be used in
the mixed-income housing program, which may be amended from time to time, the
owner shall use those forms. The director may also publish non-mandatory forms
that an owner may use.
   (c)   Management policies. An owner is responsible for ensuring that his or
her employees and agents, including third-party management companies, are aware
of and comply with the development bonus restrictive covenant and the mixed-
income housing program.
   (d)   Recordkeeping.
      (1)   An owner shall maintain documentation during the rental
affordability period including, but not limited to, applications, waitlists,
first-hand or third-party verification of income and assets, leases for
reserved dwelling units, and rents and any fees charged for reserved dwelling
units.
      (2)   An owner shall maintain all required documentation in the eligible
household's file on site at the development or maintain the documentation in an
electronic format as long as the documentation can be accessed by onsite
employees and provided in a timely fashion to the director upon request.
      (3)   An owner shall maintain documentation of all income verification
efforts and household composition reviews throughout the term of each eligible
household's tenancy and for at least three years after the eligible household
moves out.
   (e)   Quarterly status reports. An owner shall submit quarterly status
reports on a form provided by the director, as described below, in January,
April, July, and October on or before the 10th day of the month. The report
must include:
      (1)   the total number of dwelling units on the property;
      (2)   the total number of reserved dwelling units on the property;
      (3)   a list of all reserved dwelling units on the property, identified
by unit number and unit type;
      (4)   for each reserved dwelling unit:
         (A)   the applicable income bands;
         (B)   the current affordable rent, utility allowance, and any fees
charged;
         (C)   the occupancy status as of the last day of the previous month
for the reporting period. For example, the report due October 10th should
report occupancy as of September 30th of the same year;
         (D)   the income of the eligible household leasing and occupying the
unit; and
         (E)   the most recent eligibility date for the eligible household
leasing and occupying the unit;
      (5)   a signed statement by the owner acknowledging compliance with this
division;
      (6)   certification that the development:
         (A)   has maintained vendor registration with one or more local
providers of housing vouchers;
         (B)   has reported available units to one or more local providers of
housing vouchers each quarter; and
         (C)   that the development will pass the provider's required
inspections; and
      (7)   any other information requested by the director that is reasonably
related to the mixed-income housing program.
   (f)   First and final quarterly status reports. An owner shall submit:
      (1)   the first quarterly status report before the 10th day of the month
following the end of the first quarter in which the affordability period began;
and
      (2)   the final quarterly status report on the 20th anniversary of the
beginning of the rental affordability period, or a date determined by the
director due to the tolling of and extension of the rental affordability
period. The director shall verify that the owner has completed all applicable
requirements of this division. If all requirements are completed, the director
shall sign the submitted final quarterly status report before it is filed with
the building official.
   (g)   Affirmative fair housing marketing plan.
      (1)   In this subsection ADMINISTRATOR means the administrator of the
fair housing division of the office of housing and community empowerment or its
successor.
      (2)   Before an eligible household leases and occupies a reserved
dwelling unit, an owner shall create an affirmative fair housing marketing plan
and shall follow the affirmative fair housing marketing plan at all times
during the rental affordability period.
      (3)   The affirmative fair housing marketing plan shall be in writing and
shall be submitted to and receive written approval from the director at least
30 days before an owner starts marketing a unit in the property for initial
occupancy.
      (4)   The affirmative fair housing marketing plan must describe the
advertising, outreach, community contacts, and other marketing activities that
inform potential renters of the existence of the reserved dwelling units.
      (5)   The administrator shall approve or deny the affirmative fair
housing marketing plan within 60 days after a complete plan is submitted to the
director.
         (A)   Approval. The administrator shall approve the affirmative fair
housing marketing plan if it complies with the requirements of this division.
         (B)   Denial. The administrator shall deny the affirmative fair
housing marketing plan if it does not comply with this division. If the
administrator denies the affirmative fair housing marketing plan, he or she
shall state in writing the specific reasons for denial. If denied, the owner
shall immediately submit a new affirmative fair housing marketing plan.
   (h)   Audit and inspection.
      (1)   Any report, policy, or procedure that is required to be created and
maintained by this article may be reviewed and audited by the director. An
owner shall provide the director with all documentation necessary for the
director to verify the accuracy of the information included in the report,
policy, or procedure.
      (2)   The director may also randomly, regularly, and periodically select
a sample of tenants occupying reserved dwelling units for the purpose of income
verification. Any information received pursuant to this subsection is
confidential and may only be used for the purpose of verifying income to
determine eligibility for occupancy of the reserved dwelling units.
   (i)   Consent to substitute.
      (1)   For properties with three-bedroom or larger dwelling units, if an
owner cannot locate eligible households to lease three-bedroom or larger
dwelling units, and if the director is satisfied that the owner has made best
efforts to lease the three bedroom or larger dwelling units, if applicable,
including full compliance with the affirmative fair housing marketing plan,
with written consent from the director, an owner may from time to time
substitute on a two-for-one basis additional two bedroom dwelling units and/or
on a three-to-one basis additional one bedroom dwelling units to meet the pro
rata distribution requirements described in Section
51A-4.1106(f).
      (2)   Before granting written consent, the director shall review and
approve an amended affirmative fair housing marketing plan detailing how the
owner will target marketing to larger households who could qualify to lease the
three-bedroom dwelling units (and larger dwelling units, if applicable). The
director's written consent must include a time period during which the agreed-
upon substitutions satisfy the pro rata distribution requirements. (Ord. Nos.
31142; 32195; 33233)
SEC. 20A-32.   VIOLATIONS, CORRECTIVE ACTION PERIOD, AND PENALTY.
   (a)   In general. An owner who fails to take an action required by this
article or who takes an action prohibited by this division commits an offense.
   (b)   Form of notice. The director shall give an owner written notice any
time the director determines that an owner is not in compliance with the mixed-
income housing program or the mixed-income restrictive covenants.
   (c)   Corrective action period and extensions of mixed-income restrictive
covenants.
      (1)   For a violation other than a violation that poses an imminent
hazard or threat to health and safety, the director shall provide written
notice of a reasonable corrective action period for failure to file a quarterly
unit status report and a reasonable corrective action period for other
violations.
      (2)   During the corrective action period, an owner will have the
opportunity to show that either the owner or the property was never in
noncompliance or that the event of noncompliance has been corrected. Sufficient
documentation of correction must be received by the director during the
corrective action period for an event to be considered corrected during the
corrective action period.
      (3)   If an owner fails to resolve all violations of this article during
the corrective action period, the director may issue citations, seek relief
provided in the deed restrictions, extend the mixed-income restrictive
covenants term for the period equal to a term of non-compliance, and take any
other actions allowed by law. (Ord. Nos. 31142; 32195)
SEC. 20A-33.   MIXED INCOME HOUSING DEVELOPMENT BONUS FUND.
   (a)   Use. The mixed income housing development bonus fund may only be used
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Funding programs authorized by the comprehensive housing policy
that affirmatively further fair housing.
      (2)   Funding for data and analysis in support of housing programs
authorized by the comprehensive housing policy that affirmatively further fair
housing.
      (3)   Funding staff and expenses for management and administration of
mixed income housing development bonus program and the mixed income housing
development bonus fund.
   (b)   Administration. The mixed income housing development bonus fund will
be administered by the office. (Ord. Nos 32195; 33233)
SEC. 20A-34.   FEES.
   (a)   Program participation fees.
      (1)   Effective until December 31. 2022. the following fees apply:
 
Program Participation Fees                                       Fee
Pre-application meeting                                          $92.00
Initial first year activities (including receiving a development
bonus, filing the mixed-income restrictive covenant, and initial $625.00
leasing.)
Compliance monitoring during affordability period                $3,736.0 0
 
      (2)   Effective January 1, 2023, the following fees apply:
 
Program Participation Fees                                              Fee
Pre-application meeting                                                 $1,390
Initial first year activities (including receiving a development bonus, $485
filing the mixed-income restrictive covenant, and initial leasing.)
Compliance monitoring during affordability period                       $11,082
 
   (b)   Fees in lieu of on-site provision of units.
 
Fees in Lieu of On-Site Provision
of Units
Fee to be multiplied by the       Fee MVA Categories A-F Fee MVA Categories G-I
square footage of floor area as
specified in Section
20A-23.1
Under six stories                 $3.07                  $2.15
Between six and eight stories     $4.91                  $3.44
Between nine and 12 stories       $6.14                  $4.30
Over 12 stories                   $7.98                  $5.59
 
Consumer Price Index adjustment. The fees in lieu will be increased yearly by a
percentage equal to the percentage change in the consumer price index
statistics published by the United States Bureau of Labor. Comparisons will be
made using the index entitled, "Housing in Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington, TX, all
urban consumers, not seasonally adjusted," series ID CUURS37ASAH (1982-1984 =
100)," or similar comparable United States Bureau of Labor data on changes in
the cost of living, if the initial index is no longer published. Beginning
January 2023, the change will be determined by comparison of the figure for the
previous January with that of January of the current year. This calculation may
not reduce the fee in lieu below the listed amount for the preceding year.
(Ord. Nos. 31142; 32195; 32310)
CHAPTER 21
RESERVED
CHAPTER 22
RESERVED
   (Ord. 21310)
CHAPTER 23
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. 21450)
CHAPTER 24
LIBRARY
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
24-1.   “Public library” defined.
Sec.
24-2.   Failure to return library property.
Sec.
24-3.   Public library fees and charges.
Sec.
24-4.   Library fee amnesty periods.
Sec.
24-5.   Books from houses where there is contagious disease - Generally.
Sec.
24-6.   Same - Notice to be given by director of public health.
Sec.
24-6.1.   Penalty.
ARTICLE II.
MUNICIPAL LIBRARY BOARD.
Sec.
24-7.   Created.
Sec.
24-8.   Powers and duties.
ARTICLE III.
THE MUNICIPAL LIBRARY DEPARTMENT.
Sec.
24-9.   Created.
Sec.
24-10.   Library director - Office created; appointment.
Sec.
24-11.   Same - Powers and duties.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 24-1.   “PUBLIC LIBRARY” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the words "public library" shall mean the
public library of the city. (Ord. 31215)
SEC. 24-2.   FAILURE TO RETURN LIBRARY PROPERTY.
   A person commits an offense if he takes or borrows from the public library
any property, including, but not limited to, books, pamphlets, periodicals,
papers, and works of art, and fails to return the property to the public
library within 30 days after the date the property is due. (Code 1941, Art. 72-
2; Ord. Nos. 18093; 31215)
SEC. 24-3.   PUBLIC LIBRARY FEES AND CHARGES.
   (a)   A person who damages an item of library property shall reimburse the
public library the costs of repairing or rebinding the item.
   (b)   A person who loses or damages beyond repair an item of library
property shall pay an amount equal to the retail cost of replacing the item,
plus a reprocessing fee of $20. The retail cost and reprocessing fee for
replacement of a lost or damaged item may be waived if a person replaces the
lost or damaged item with a comparable item of equal or greater value.
   (c)   Nonresident user fees.
      (1)   Nonresidents of the city who use the public library shall pay a fee
of:
         (A)   $25 to borrow five items of library property;
         (B)   $60 to borrow 15 items of library property; and
         (C)   $250 to borrow unlimited items of library property during a 12-
consecutive-month period.
      (2)   The following nonresidents are exempt from the fees established by
this subsection:
         (A)   a city of Dallas employee;
         (B)   an active volunteer for the city of Dallas public library
system;
         (C)   all students or teachers in any educational institution located
in the city of Dallas;
         (D)   a person participating in the TexShare Card program, but only
for items and services covered by that program; and
         (E)   any other person exempted by city council resolution.
   (d)   Photograph reproduction fees.
      (1)   The fee for a digital reproduction of a photograph is $25 per image
for a one-time publication or website use in a single language in one country.
This fee does not include charges for broadcast or publishing copyright
permission.
      (2)   In addition to the fee required in Subsection (d)(1), the following
fees will be charged for for-profit broadcast or publishing copyright
permission based on usage:
         (A)   $50 per image for commercial exhibition.
         (B)   $200 per image for commercial reproduction or re-sale.
         (C)   $50 per image for a one-time print use in a single language
worldwide.
         (D)   $100 per image for a one-time print or electronic (e-book) use
in all languages worldwide.
         (E)   $100 per image for a one-country broadcast use in a single
language only.
         (F)   $150 per image for a world broadcast use in a single language
only.
         (G)   $300 per image for a world broadcast use in all languages.
      (3)   In addition to the fee required in Subsection (d)(1), the following
fees will be charged for non-profit broadcast or publishing copyright
permission based on usage:
         (A)   $25 per image for commercial exhibition.
         (B)   $100 per image for commercial reproduction or re-sale.
         (C)   $25 per image for a one-time print use in a single language
worldwide.
         (D)   $50 per image for a one-time print or electronic (ebook) use in
all languages worldwide.
         (E)   $50 per image for a one-country broadcast use in a single
language only.
         (F)   $75 per image for a world broadcast use in a single language
only.
         (G)   $150 per image for a world broadcast use in all languages.
      (4)   The total fee calculated under Subsections (d)(1), (d)(2), and (d)
(3) will be increased by:
         (A)   100 percent if a one- to five-day turn-around time is requested;
and
         (B)   50 percent if a six- to 10-day turn- around time is requested.
      (5)   The following additional fees for delivery and media will be
charged if required for an order:
         (A)   $3 for postage and handling.
         (B)   $3 for CD authoring.
   (e)   A person requesting research by a staff member of the public library
shall pay a fee of $20 per half hour, which fee will include up to four
photocopies. Additional photocopies may be purchased for $0.25 per page. Each
person making a request under this subsection will be limited to one hour of
research and 50 photocopies per month. The director may waive up to 25 percent
of the charges for research requested by a corporate member of the Friends of
the Dallas Public Library.
   (f)    The fee for a printout from an electronic database is $0.25 per page
for a black and white printout and $0.75 a page for a color printout.
   (g)   A fee of $20 will be charged for each public library account turned
over to a collection agency for the purpose of recovering any money or property
owed to the public library.
   (h)   A person making an interlibrary loan request shall pay a fee of $3 for
each item received from a library outside of the city of Dallas public library
system pursuant to the request. (Ord. Nos. 20612; 21431; 22206; 24411; 24929;
25048; 25754; 26598; 27353; 28792; 29149; 31215; 32020; 32863)
SEC. 24-4.   LIBRARY FEE AMNESTY PERIODS.
   (a)   The library director is authorized to administer two annual amnesty
periods during which the library, at the request of a library card holder, may
forgive some or all fees and charges accrued in accordance with Sections
24-3(a) and
24-3(b).
   (b)   The amnesty periods may not occur for longer than one month in
duration, and the library director shall not administer more than two amnesty
periods in any fiscal year. (Ord. 31215)
SEC. 24-5.   BOOKS FROM HOUSES WHERE THERE IS CONTAGIOUS DISEASE - GENERALLY.
   Every person in any house where there is a contagious or infectious disease
shall deliver to the director of public health, at such house, any book,
periodical or publication that he may have which belongs to the public library.
The director of public health shall at once cause such book, periodical or
publication to be disinfected and returned to the public library. (Code 1941,
Art. 72-5; Ord. 31215)
SEC. 24-6.   SAME - NOTICE TO BE GIVEN BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH.
   It is hereby made the duty of the director of public health of the city,
whenever he finds that there is any contagious or infectious disease in any
house in the city, to at once give written notice of this fact to the librarian
of the public library. (Code 1941, Art. 72-4; Ord. 31215)
SEC. 24-6.1.   PENALTY.
   A person violating a provision of this article is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed,
continued, or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$50. (Ord. Nos. 18093; 31215)
ARTICLE II.
MUNICIPAL LIBRARY BOARD.
SEC. 24-7.   CREATED.
   (a)   There is hereby created the municipal library board, which shall be an
advisory body to the library director. The board shall be composed of 15
members. Each city council member shall appoint one member to the board. The
mayor shall appoint the chair, and the full city council shall appoint the
vice-chair. Board members shall serve without pay and shall adopt rules and
regulations for the governing of their actions, proceedings, and deliberations
and set the time and place of their meetings.
   (b)   Board members must be residents of the city and shall be appointed for
a two-year term beginning on October 1 of each odd-numbered year. All members
shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. (Ord. Nos.
14165; 14942; 21153; 21514; 22414; 29645)
SEC. 24-8.   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The municipal library board shall make recommendations to the city council,
city manager, and library director concerning:
      (1)   the operating policy of the library;
      (2)   long-range capital improvement planning and policy;
      (3)   the purchase of books, journals, and publications; and
      (4)   the display and exhibit of art objects, paintings, and other items
having cultural, historic, or artistic value to the community. (Ord. Nos.
14165; 22414)
ARTICLE III.
THE MUNICIPAL LIBRARY DEPARTMENT.
SEC. 24-9.   CREATED.
   There is hereby created the municipal library department, which shall be
under the direction of the city manager. (Ord. 14165)
SEC. 24-10.   LIBRARY DIRECTOR - OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the office of library director who shall be
appointed by the city manager and shall be a person professionally competent by
experience and training to manage the municipal library department. (Ord.
14165)
SEC. 24-11.   SAME - POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The library director shall have the following duties:
   (a)   to adopt and enforce all necessary rules and regulations deemed
necessary for the administration, government, and protection of the libraries,
reading rooms, and all other library property;
   (b)   to cause to be purchased by the purchasing agent of the city, in the
manner provided by the charter and ordinances of the city, all books, journals,
publications, and other necessary personal property, including furniture,
appliances, and supplies for the operation of the public library and the
municipal library department;
   (c)   to select and engage a librarian and other assistants and employees as
may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the libraries and public
reading rooms; and
   (d)   to provide for the sale, exchange, or other disposition of surplus
library material in accordance with Section
2-37.13 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 14165; 18623)
CHAPTER 25
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
CHAPTER 25A
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec.
25A-1.   Definitions.
Secs. 25A-2 thru 25A-9.   Reserved.
Sec.
25A-10.   Hours of operation; living, etc., quarters therein prohibited.
Secs. 25A-11 thru 25A-12.   Reserved.
Sec.
25A-13.   Operation in residential area prohibited.
Secs. 25A-14 thru 25A-15.   Reserved.
SEC. 25A-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   MASSAGE means a massage as defined by Texas Occupations Code
Chapter 455, as amended.
      (2)   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT means a massage establishment as defined by
Texas Occupations Code Chapter 455, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 13752; 15526; 17226;
32224)
SECS. 25A-2 THRU 25A-9.   RESERVED.  
(Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 25A-10.   HOURS OF OPERATION; LIVING, ETC., QUARTERS THEREIN PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A massage establishment must be closed for business and may not be
open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
   (b)   A massage establishment may not be operated or conducted in connection
either directly or indirectly, with any place used for living or sleeping
quarters. (Ord. Nos. 13752; 33224)
SECS. 25A-11 THRU 25A-12.   RESERVED. 
(Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 25A-13.   OPERATION IN RESIDENTIAL AREA PROHIBITED.
   A massage establishment may not operate in any section of the city which is
zoned for residential purposes. (Ord. Nos. 13752; 33224)
SECS. 25A-14 THRU 25A-15.   RESERVED.  
(Ord. No. 33224)
CHAPTER 26
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. 21363)
CHAPTER 27
MINIMUM PROPERTY STANDARDS
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
27-1.   Legislative findings of fact.
Sec.
27-2.   Purpose of chapter.
Sec.
27-3.   Definitions.
Sec.
27-3.1.   Code enforcement official.
ARTICLE II.
ADMINISTRATION.
Sec.
27-4.   Violations; penalty.
Sec.
27-5.   Inspection.
Sec.
27-5.1.   Donation of noncomplying property to a nonprofit corporation.
Sec.
27-5.2.   Retaliation against tenants prohibited.
Sec.
27-6.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-7.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-8.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-9.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-10.   Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
MINIMUM STANDARDS.
Sec.
27-11.   Minimum property standards; responsibilities of owner.
Sec.
27-12.   Responsibilities of occupant.
ARTICLE IV.
VACATION, REDUCTION OF OCCUPANCY LOAD, AND SECURING OF STRUCTURES AND
RELOCATION OF OCCUPANTS.
Sec.
27-13.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-14.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-14.1.   Treatment for insects and rodents.
Sec.
27-14.2.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-14.3.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-15.   Occupancy limits.
Sec.
27-15.1.   Placarding of a structure by the director.
Sec.
27-16.   Securing of a structure by the director.
Sec.
27-16.1.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-16.2.   Reserved.
ARTICLE IV-a.
MUNICIPAL COURT JURISDICTION OVER URBAN NUISANCES.
Sec.
27-16.3.   Municipal court jurisdiction, powers, and duties relating to urban
nuisances.
Sec.
27-16.4.   Initiation of proceeding; petition requirements.
Sec.
27-16.5.   Notice of hearing before the municipal court.
Sec.
27-16.6.   Request for continuance of hearing.
Sec.
27-16.7.   Hearing procedures before the municipal court; court orders.
Sec.
27-16.8.   Noncompliance with court orders; civil penalties; liens.
Sec.
27-16.9.   Modification of court orders.
Sec.
27-16.10.   Appeal of court orders.
Sec.
27-16.11.   Miscellaneous notice provisions.
ARTICLE IV-b.
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE FOR PREMISES, PROPERTY, AND CERTAIN OTHER
VIOLATIONS.
Sec.
27-16.12.   Alternative administrative adjudication procedure.
Sec.
27-16.13.   Administrative citation.
Sec.
27-16.14.   Service of an administrative citation.
Sec.
27-16.15.   Answering an administrative citation.
Sec.
27-16.16.   Failure to appear at an administrative hearing.
Sec.
27-16.17.   Hearing officers; qualifications, powers, duties, and functions.
Sec.
27-16.18.   Hearing for disposition of an administrative citation; citation as
rebuttable proof of offense.
Sec.
27-16.19.   Financial inability to comply with an administrative order, pay for
transcription of a record, or post an appeal bond.
Sec.
27-16.20.   Appeal to municipal court.
Sec.
27-16.21.   Disposition of administrative penalties, fees, and court costs.
Sec.
27-16.22.   Dallas Tomorrow Fund.
Sec.
27-16.23.   Administration of the Dallas Tomorrow Fund.
ARTICLE V.
PUBLIC SAFETY NUISANCE.
Sec.
27-17.   Public safety nuisance.
Secs. 27-18 thru 27-23.   Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
MASTER METERED UTILITIES.
Sec.
27-24.   Definitions.
Sec.
27-25.   Records of ownership and management maintained by utility companies.
Sec.
27-26.   Notice to tenants.
Sec.
27-27.   Notice of utility interruption.
Sec.
27-28.   Nonpayment of utility bills - Essential utility service.
ARTICLE VII.
REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF RENTAL PROPERTIES AND CONDOMINIUMS.
Sec.
27-29.   Authority of director.
Sec.
27-30.   Registration and posting requirements; defenses.
Sec.
27-31.   Registration; fees; renewal.
Sec.
27-32.   Registration application.
Sec.
27-33.   Review and acceptance of registration application.
Secs.
27-34 thru 27-37.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-38.   Registrant’s records.
Sec.
27-39.   Required emergency response.
Sec.
27-40.   Failure to pay ad valorem taxes.
Sec.
27-41.   Reserved.
Sec.
27-42.   Property inspections; inspection and reinspection fees; self-
certification process.
Sec.
27-42.1.   Revocation of certificate of occupancy.
Sec.
27-43.   Crime prevention addendum required.
Sec.
27-44.   Attendance at crime watch safety meetings.
Sec.
27-44.1.   Presumptions.
ARTICLE VIII.
HABITUAL CRIMINAL AND NUISANCE PROPERTIES.
Sec.
27-45.   Purpose.
Sec.
27-46.   Definitions.
Sec.
27-47.   Authority of the chief of police and director.
Sec.
27-48.   Presumptions.
Sec.
27-49.   Accord meeting.
Sec.
27-50.   Annual review.
Sec.
27-51.   Appeal from chief’s or director’s determination.
Sec.
27-52.   Placarding; conditions; inspections; notification to plan commission.
Sec.
27-53.   Habitual criminal property fees.
Sec.
27-53.1.      Habitual nuisance property fees..
Sec.
27-54.   Delivery of notices.
Secs.
27-55 thru 27-58.   Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
RESERVED.
Secs.
27-59 thru 27-72.   Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 27-1.   LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS OF FACT.
   There exists in the city of Dallas, Texas, structures used for human
habitation and nonresidential purposes that are substandard in structure and
maintenance. Furthermore, inadequate provision for light and air, insufficient
protection against fire, lack of proper heating, insanitary conditions, and
overcrowding constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare, and
reasonable comfort of the citizens of the city of Dallas. The existence of such
conditions will create slum and blighted areas requiring large scale clearance,
if not remedied. Furthermore, in the absence of corrective measures, such areas
will experience a deterioration of social values, a curtailment of investment
and tax revenue, and an impairment of economic values. The establishment and
maintenance of minimum structural and environmental standards are essential to
the prevention of blight and decay and the safeguarding of public health,
safety, morals, and welfare. (Ord. Nos. 15198; 19234)
SEC. 27-2.   PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, morals,
and welfare of the citizens of the city of Dallas by establishing minimum
standards applicable to residential and nonresidential structures. Minimum
standards are established with respect to utilities, facilities, and other
physical components essential to make structures safe, sanitary, and fit for
human use and habitation.
   (b)   This chapter is found to be remedial and essential to the public
interest, and it is intended that this chapter be liberally construed to effect
its purpose. All structures within the city on the effective date of this
chapter, or constructed thereafter, must comply with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. Nos. 15198; 19234; 24961)
SEC. 27-3.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   BATHROOM means an enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs,
showers, or both, and which may also include toilets, lavatories, or fixtures
serving similar purposes.
      (2)   BUILDING means a structure for the support or shelter of any use or
occupancy.
      (3)   CITY ATTORNEY means the city attorney of the city of Dallas and
includes the assistants and other authorized representatives of the city
attorney.
      (4)   CONDOMINIUM has the meaning assigned in Chapter 82 of the Texas
Property Code, as amended.
      (5)   CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION means a corporation whose members are
condominium unit owners in a condominium and who are charged with governing,
operating, managing, or overseeing a condominium or its common elements.
      (6)   CONSTRUCTION CODES means the Dallas Building Code, Chapter 53 of
the Dallas City Code, as amended; Dallas Plumbing Code, Chapter 54 of the
Dallas City Code, as amended; Dallas Mechanical Code, Chapter 55 of the Dallas
City Code, as amended; Dallas Electrical Code, Chapter 56 of the Dallas City
Code, as amended; Dallas One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, Chapter 57 of the
Dallas City Code, as amended; Dallas Existing Building Code, Chapter 58 of the
Dallas City Code, as amended; Dallas Fuel Gas Code, Chapter 59, Dallas Energy
Conservation Code; Chapter 60 of the Dallas City Code, as amended; Dallas Green
Construction Code, Chapter 61 of the Dallas City Code, as amended; Dallas Fire
Code, Chapter 16 of the Dallas City Code, as amended; and the Housing Standards
Manual, as amended.
      (7)   CRIME PREVENTION ADDENDUM means an addendum to a residential lease
or rental agreement for the use of a rental property as required by Section
27-43 of this chapter.
      (8)   DALLAS ANIMAL WELFARE FUND means the Dallas Animal Welfare Fund as
described in Section
7-8.4 of
Chapter 7 of this code.
      (9)   DEPARTMENT means the department designated by the city manager to
enforce and administer this chapter.
      (10)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter and includes
representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director.
      (11)   DWELLING means a structure or building used, intended, or designed
to be used, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied, or that is
occupied for living purposes.
      (12)   DWELLING UNIT has the definition given that term in Section
51A-2.102 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (13)   GRADED INSPECTION means an inspection of a rental property in
which the property is given a score by the director based on the number of code
violations found to exist on the premises.
      (14)   HABITABLE ROOM means a space in a building or structure for
living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls,
storage and utility spaces, and other similar areas, are not considered
habitable rooms.
      (15)   HOUSING STANDARDS MANUAL means the manual by that title and which
is kept on file in the office of the city secretary.
      (16)   INFESTATION means the presence, within or contiguous to a
structure or premises, of insects, rodents, vectors, or other pests.
      (17)   KITCHEN means an area used, or designated to be used, for cooking
or preparation of food.
      (18)   LANDLORD has the same meaning as in Chapter 92 of the Texas
Property Code, as amended.
      (19)   MULTIFAMILY DWELLING means a multifamily use as defined in Section
51A-4.209(b)(5) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended, or, for purposes of
this chapter, three or more single dwelling units on the same premises and
which are under common ownership.
      (20)   MULTITENANT PROPERTY means property containing any of the
following uses:
         (A)   A multifamily dwelling as defined in this section.
         (B)   A lodging or boarding house as defined in Section
51A-4.205(2) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
         (C)   A group residential facility as defined in Section
51A-4.209(b)(3) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
         (D)   An extended stay hotel or motel as defined in Section
51A-4.205(1.1) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
         (E)   A residential hotel as defined in Section
51A-4.209(b)(5.1) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (21)   OCCUPANT means a person who has possessory rights to and is
actually in possession of a premise.
      (22)   OPEN AND VACANT STRUCTURE means a structure that is, regardless of
its structural condition:
         (A)   unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees; and
         (B)   unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be
entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage
or could be entered or used by children.
      (23)   OPERATING CONDITION means free of leaks, safe, sanitary,
structurally sound, and in good working order.
      (24)   OWNER means a person who has ownership or title of real property:
         (A)   including, but not limited to:
            (i)   the holder of fee simple title;
            (ii)   the holder of a life estate;
            (iii)   the holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of
five years or more;
            (iv)   the buyer in a contract for deed;
            (v)   a mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of
real property; and
            (vi)   the named grantee in the last recorded deed; or
         (B)   the owner's representative with control over the property.
      (25)   PERSON means any natural person, corporation, organization,
estate, trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity.
      (26)   PEST means an invertebrate animal that can cause disease or damage
to humans or building materials.
      (27)   PLUMBING FIXTURES means gas pipes, water pipes, toilets,
lavatories, urinals, sinks, laundry tubs, dishwashers, garbage disposal units,
clothes-washing machines, catch basins, wash basins, bathtubs, shower baths,
sewer pipes, sewage system, septic tanks, drains, vents, traps, and other fuel-
burning or water-using fixtures and appliances, together with all connections
to pipes.
      (28)   PREMISES or PROPERTY means a lot, plot, or parcel of land,
including any structures on the land.
      (29)   PROPERTY MANAGER means a person who, for compensation, has
managing control of real property, including an on-site manager of a building
or structure.
      (30)   PUBLIC SEWER means a sewer operated by a public authority or
public utility and available for public use.
      (31)   REGISTRANT means a person submitting a rental property
registration or renewal application or a person whose application the director
deems complete under
Article VII of this chapter.
      (32)   RENTAL PROPERTY means a multitenant property or a single dwelling
unit that is leased or rented to one or more persons other than the owner of
the property, regardless of whether the lease or rental agreement is oral or
written, or the compensation received by the lessor for the lease or rental of
the property is in the form of money, services, or any other thing of value.
      (33)   SANITARY means any condition of good order and cleanliness that
precludes the probability of disease transmission.
      (34)   SECURITY DEVICE has the definition given that term in Chapter 92
of the Texas Property Code, as amended.
      (35)   SHORT-TERM RENTAL has the definition given that term in Section
156.001(b) of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
      (36)   SINGLE DWELLING UNIT means a single family or duplex, as defined
in the Dallas Development Code, as amended, or a condominium dwelling unit.
      (37)   SOLID WASTE means:
         (A)   industrial solid waste as defined in Section
18-2(22) of the Dallas City Code, as amended; or
         (B)   municipal solid waste as defined in Section
18-2(28) of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
      (38)   STRUCTURE means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or
building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite manner.
      (39)   TOILET ROOM means a room containing a toilet or urinal but not a
bathtub or shower.
      (40)   URBAN NUISANCE means a premises or structure that:
         (A)   is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a
hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare;
         (B)   regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its
owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to
the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited
persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or
         (C)   boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if:
            (i)   the structure constitutes a danger to the public even though
secured from entry; or
            (ii)   the means used to secure the structure are inadequate to
prevent unauthorized entry or use of the structure in the manner described by
Paragraph (B) of this subsection.
      (41)   VECTOR means an insect or other animal that is capable of
transmitting a disease-producing organism.
      (42)   WORKMANLIKE means executed in a skilled manner, for example,
generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged, and without marring
adjacent work. (Ord. Nos. 15198; 15919; 16473; 17226; 19234; 19896; 22154;
24086; 24961; 25522; 26455; 27147; 27751; 29403; 30236)
SEC. 27-3.1.   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   (a)   The director, or a designated representative, shall serve as the code
enforcement official of the city.
   (b)   The code enforcement official has the power to render interpretations
of this chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to
this chapter as the code enforcement official deems necessary to clarify the
application of this chapter. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations must
be in conformity with the purpose of this chapter.
   (c)   The code enforcement official has the power to obtain:
      (1)   search warrants for the purpose of investigating a violation of a
health and safety or nuisance abatement, including an urban nuisance,
regulation, statute, or ordinance; and
      (2)   seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or
demolishing an offending property and removing the debris from the premises.
(Ord. Nos. 20433; 30236)
ARTICLE II.
ADMINISTRATION.
SEC. 27-4.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to
perform an act required of him by this chapter, commits an offense. A person
commits a separate offense each day during which a violation is committed,
permitted, or continued.
   (b)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$2,000; except, that an offense under Section
27-5.2 and
27-25 of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
      (2)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less
than:
         (A)   $150 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
27-11(c)(1), (c)(2), or (c)(6); Section
27-11(d)(2), (d)(3)(A), (d)(4), (d)(5), (d)(6), (d)(7), (d)(9)(A), (d)(9)(C),
(d)(9)(D), (d)(10)(A), (d)(11), (d)(13), (d)(15)(A), or (d)(16)(C); Section
27-11(e)(1)(B), (e)(1)(C), or (e)(3); Section
27-11(f)(1)(A), (f)(1)(B), (f)(3)(C), (f)(3)(F), or (f)(4)(C); Section
27-11(g)(5); Section
27-11(i)(1)(B), (i)(3), (i)(4)(i), (i)(4)(ii), (i)(4)(iii), (i)(6)(A), or (i)
(6)(B); Section
27-11(j); Section
27-12(1), (2), (3), or (5); and
         (B)   $500 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
27-11(d)(1), (d)(9)(B), (d)(12), (d)(14)(A), (d)(14)(B), (d)(15)(B), (d)(15)
(C), (d)(16)(A), or (d)(16)(B); Section
27-11(e)(1)(A) or (e)(2)(A); Section
27-11(f)(2), (f)(3)(A), (f)(3)(B), (f)(3)(D), (f)(3)(E), (f)(3)(G), (f)(4)(A),
(f)(4)(B), (f)(4)(D), (f)(4)(E) or (f)(4)(F); Section
27-11(g)(1) or (g)(2); Section
27-11(h)(1)(A), (h)(2), or (h)(5); or Section
27-15.1(c).
      (3)   The minimum fines established in Subsection (b)(2) will be doubled
for the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and
trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any
24-month period. At no time may the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine
established in Subsection (b)(1).
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (d)   In addition to imposing the criminal penalty prescribed in Subsection
(b) or exercising the other remedies provided by this chapter, the city may, in
accordance with Chapter 54, Subchapter B of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, bring a civil action against a person violating a provision of this
chapter. The civil action may include, but is not limited to, a suit to recover
a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted.
   (e)   The penalties provided for in Subsections (b), (d), and (h) are in
addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under city
ordinances and state law.
   (f)   The director has the authority to enforce provisions of
Chapter 7A and
Article II,
Chapter 18 of this code.
   (g)   A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this chapter if:
      (1)   the person commits the violation or assists in the commission of
the violation; or
      (2)   the person is an owner of the property and, either personally or
through an employee or agent, allows the violation to exist.
   (h)   For purposes of Subsection (g), an employee of the owner of real
property that is a single dwelling unit rental property, or has been issued a
certificate of occupancy or received final approval from the building official
with respect to improvements on the property, is not personally liable for a
violation of this chapter if, not later than the fifth calendar day after the
date the citation is issued, the employee provides the property owner's name,
current street address, and current telephone number to the enforcement
official who issues the citation or to the director.
   (i)   As an alternative to imposing the criminal penalty prescribed in
Subsection (b), the city may impose administrative penalties, fees, and court
costs in accordance with
Article IV-b of this chapter, as authorized by Section 54.044 of the Texas
Local Government Code, as amended, for an offense under this chapter. The
alternative administrative penalty range for an offense is the same as is
prescribed for a criminal offense in Subsection (b). (Ord. Nos. 19234; 19896;
20017; 20599; 22695; 24457; 25522; 25927; 26455; 26955; 27458; 27751; 30236)
SEC. 27-5.   INSPECTION.
   (a)   For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this chapter or
other city ordinances exist, the director is authorized, at a reasonable time,
to inspect:
      (1)   the exterior of a structure and premises that do not contain a
structure; and
      (2)   the interior of a structure, if the owner, occupant, or person in
control gives his permission to the director.
   (b)   Nothing in this section limits the director's ability to seek and
obtain an administrative search warrant authorizing an interior or exterior
inspection of a structure or a vacant premises. (Ord. Nos. 15198; 19234; 25522;
26455; 30236)
SEC. 27-5.1.   DONATION OF NONCOMPLYING PROPERTY TO A NONPROFIT CORPORATION.
   (a)   A judge of the municipal court may dismiss one or more citations of a
property owner who is charged with violating this chapter, if the property
owner donates the property, for which the citations have been issued, to a
nonprofit corporation selected by the city.
   (b)   The city is authorized to contract with a nonprofit corporation for
the acceptance of property donated pursuant to Subsection (a) of this section.
The terms of the contract must provide that the nonprofit corporation will:
      (1)   within 90 days from the date of acceptance of the donated property,
bring the property into compliance with this chapter, including, but not
limited to, providing all necessary cleanup, maintenance, repairs, and
alterations; and
      (2)   within 120 days from the date of acceptance of the donated
property, sell the property directly to an occupant owner or rent the property
directly to an occupant tenant. (Ord. Nos. 19234; 19896; 21973; 26455)
SEC. 27-5.2.   RETALIATION AGAINST TENANTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A landlord commits an offense if he raises a tenant’s rent, diminishes
services to a tenant, or attempts eviction of a tenant within six months after:
      (1)   the tenant files a valid complaint with the director complaining of
a violation of this chapter on property occupied by the tenant; a complaint is
considered valid if it results in an action described in Paragraph (2), (3), or
(4) of this subsection;
      (2)   the director issues to the landlord or the landlord’s agent a
written notice or citation listing any violation of this chapter that exists on
property occupied by the tenant;
      (3)   the city attorney files an action under
Article IV-a of this chapter or under Chapter 54, 211, or 214 of the Texas
Local Government Code relating to any violation of this chapter that exists on
property occupied by the tenant;
      (4)   the tenant, after filing a complaint with the director and the
landlord or the landlord’s agent, files a written complaint with the city
attorney complaining of a violation of this chapter on property occupied by the
tenant, unless the complaint is later withdrawn by the tenant or dismissed on
the merits; or
      (5)   repairs are completed on property occupied by the tenant in
compliance with either a written notice or citation issued by the director or a
court order.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   rent was increased pursuant to an escalation clause in a written
lease which provided for changes in costs of utilities, taxes, and insurance;
      (2)   rent was increased, services were reduced, or notices to vacate
were issued as part of a pattern of rent increases, service reductions, or
evictions for an entire multidwelling project;
      (3)   the tenant was delinquent in rent when the landlord gave notice to
vacate or filed an eviction action;
      (4)   the tenant was responsible for or caused a violation of this
chapter that existed on property occupied by the tenant;
      (5)   the tenant’s written lease fixing the rent, services, or term of
occupancy had expired, unless, at the time an action described in Subsection
(a)(1), (2), or (3) occurred, a violation of this chapter that was reasonably
dangerous to the physical health or safety of the tenant or another person
existed on property occupied by the tenant;
      (6)   the tenant holds over after giving notice of termination or intent
to vacate;
      (7)   the tenant holds over after the landlord gives notice of
termination at the end of the rental term and, at the time the notice of
termination was given, the landlord or the landlord’s agent had not received
actual notice that a valid complaint had been filed with the city complaining
of violations of this chapter on property occupied by the tenant;
      (8)   before filing a complaint with the city complaining of a violation
of this chapter on property occupied by the tenant, other than a violation that
is reasonably dangerous to the physical health or safety of the tenant or
another person, the tenant fails to comply with a written lease provision
requiring the tenant to:
         (A)   notify the landlord or the landlord’s agent, in writing, of the
violation; and
         (B)   allow the landlord 15 days to correct the violation; or
      (9)   the landlord proves that the rent increase, service reduction, or
attempted eviction was for good cause and not for purposes of retaliation
against the tenant.
   (c)   An offense under this section may be prosecuted upon the filing of a
written complaint by the tenant with the city attorney. (Ord. Nos. 20017;
26455)
SEC. 27-6.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 26455)
SEC. 27-7.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 26455)
SEC. 27-8.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 26455)
SEC. 27-9.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 26455)
SEC. 27-10.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 24457)
ARTICLE III.
MINIMUM STANDARDS.
SEC. 27-11.   MINIMUM PROPERTY STANDARDS; RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   The regulations in this article are minimum property standards for
vacant and occupied buildings, properties, and structures. In addition to the
minimum property standards, all buildings, properties, and structures must
comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including the
construction codes.
      (2)   The minimum property standards are intended to complement existing
laws and regulations. If any provision of this chapter is less restrictive than
another applicable law or regulation, the more restrictive law or regulation
shall apply.
      (3)   An owner who enters into a written lease shall, upon the occupant's
request, provide the occupant with a written lease in the occupant's primary
language, if the primary language is English, Spanish, or Vietnamese.
   (b)   Repairs. All repairs required by this section must be performed in a
workmanlike manner and in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and
local laws, rules, and regulations, including the construction codes.
   (c)   Property standards. An owner shall:
      (1)   maintain his or her premises in operating condition without any
holes, excavations, or sharp protrusions, and without any other object or
condition that exists on the land and is reasonably capable of causing injury
to a person;
      (2)   securely cover or close any wells, cesspools, or cisterns;
      (3)   provide solid waste receptacles or containers when required by
Chapter 18 of this code, as amended;
      (4)   provide drainage to prevent standing water and flooding on the
land;
      (5)   remove dead trees and tree limbs that are reasonably capable of
causing injury to a person;
      (6)   keep the doors and windows of a vacant structure or vacant portion
of a structure securely closed to prevent unauthorized entry; and
      (7)   protect, by periodic application of paint or other weather-coating
materials, any exposed metal or wood surfaces from the elements and against
decay or rust.
   (d)   Structural and material standards.
      (1)   In general. An owner shall maintain structural members free from
deterioration so that they are capable of safely supporting imposed dead and
live loads.
      (2)   Construction materials. An owner shall maintain building and
structural materials, including wood, gypsum products, glass, fiberglass,
paper, canvas, fabric, plastic, vinyl, masonry, ceramic, plaster, brick, rock,
stucco, slate, concrete, asphalt, tin, copper, steel, iron, aluminum, and other
metals, in operating condition.
      (3)   Roofs. An owner shall:
         (A)   maintain roofs in operating condition, free from leaks, holes,
charred or deteriorated roofing materials, rotted wood, and other unsafe
conditions; and
         (B)   maintain gutters and downspouts, if any, in operating condition
and securely fastened.
      (4)   Chimneys and towers. An owner shall maintain chimneys, cooling
towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances in operating condition.
      (5)   Foundations. An owner shall maintain foundations and foundation
components in operating condition, and keep all foundation components securely
fastened.
      (6)   Floors. An owner shall maintain all flooring in operating
condition, free from holes, cracks, decay, and trip hazards.
      (7)   Shower enclosures. An owner shall maintain shower enclosure floors
and walls in operating condition, free of holes, cracks, breaches, decay, rust,
and rot.
      (8)   Countertops and backsplashes. An owner shall maintain kitchen and
bathroom countertops and backsplashes surrounding kitchen sinks and lavatory
sinks in operating condition free of decay, rust, and rot.
      (9)   Interior walls, ceilings, and surfaces; doors. An owner shall:
         (A)   maintain all interior walls and ceilings in operating condition;
         (B)   keep all interior walls and ceilings securely fastened to
eliminate collapse hazards;
         (C)   maintain all interior surfaces, including windows and doors, in
operating condition;
         (D)   repair, remove, or cover all peeling, chipping, flaking, or
abraded paint; and
         (E)   repair all cracked or loose plaster, wood, or other defective
surface conditions.
      (10)   Exterior windows and skylights. An owner shall maintain the glass
surfaces of exterior windows and skylights so that they are weather tight and
in operating condition.
      (11)   Exterior doors. An owner shall maintain exterior doors so that
they are weather tight and in operating condition.
      (12)   Security devices. An owner shall maintain any bars, grilles,
grates, and security devices in operating condition.
      (13)   Ventilation. An owner shall maintain all natural and mechanical
ventilation in habitable rooms in operating condition.
      (14)   Balconies, landings, porches, decks, and walkways. An owner shall
maintain:
         (A)   all balconies, landings, porches, decks, and walkways in
operating condition and securely fastened;
         (B)   support posts, columns, and canopies in operating condition,
securely fastened and anchored.
      (15)   Handrails and guardrails. An owner shall maintain all handrails
and guardrails:
         (A)   in operating condition and securely fastened and anchored; and
         (B)   so that they are capable of safely supporting imposed dead and
live loads.
      (16)   Steps and stairways. An owner shall:
         (A)   maintain steps and stairways in operating condition, securely
fastened and anchored, and free from trip hazards;
         (B)   maintain steps and stairways so that they are capable of safely
supporting imposed dead and live loads; and
         (C)   seal any cracks or breaches in lightweight concrete steps,
balconies, and walkways.
      (17)   Fencing, retaining walls, and barriers. An owner shall:
         (A)   maintain all fences, retaining walls, decorative walls, and
barriers in operating condition, and in accordance with the Dallas Development
Code, as amended. This requirement applies to a masonry wall only if the
masonry wall encloses:
            (i)   a multitenant property; or
            (ii)   a single-family or duplex property where the wall is not
shared with another property;
         (B)   repair or replace rotted, missing, fire-damaged, or broken
wooden slots and support posts; and
         (C)   repair or replace broken, missing, or bent metal posts and torn,
cut, bent, or ripped metal fencing materials.
   (e)   Utility and appliance standards.
      (1)   Air conditioning.
         (A)   An owner shall:
            (i)   provide, and maintain, in operating condition, refrigerated
air equipment capable of maintaining a room temperature of at least 15 degrees
cooler than the outside temperature, but in no event higher than 85° F. in each
habitable room;
            (ii)   maintain all fixed air conditioning systems, including air
conditioning unit covers, panels, conduits, and disconnects, in operating
condition, properly attached; and
            (iii)   install window-mounted air conditioning units, if provided,
in compliance with the construction codes.
         (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this paragraph that at
least one habitable room is 85° F. at a point three feet above the floor and
two feet from exterior walls if the outside temperature is over 110° F.
      (2)   Heating.
         (A)   An owner shall:
            (i)   provide, and maintain, in operating condition, heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of at least 15 degrees
warmer than the outside temperature, but in no event lower than 68° F. in each
habitable room; and
            (ii)   if provided, maintain, in operating condition, heating
facilities in buildings or structures other than dwelling units.
         (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this paragraph that at
least one habitable room is 68° F. at a point three feet above the floor and
two feet from exterior walls if the outside temperature is under 40° F.
      (3)   Appliances. If appliances are provided in a rental dwelling unit,
the owner shall maintain those appliances, including portable heating units,
portable air conditioning units, cook stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers,
garbage disposals, ventilation hoods, washing machines, and clothes dryers, and
appliance connections, in operating condition.
   (f)   Plumbing standards.
      (1)   Plumbing systems. An owner shall maintain:
         (A)   all plumbing pipes, fittings, and valves necessary to supply and
conduct natural fuel gases, sanitary drainage, storm drainage, or potable water
in operating condition; and
         (B)   all plumbing fixtures free of cross-connections and conditions
that permit backflow into the potable water supply.
      (2)   Fuel gas distribution systems. An owner shall maintain distribution
systems that carry fuel gas or liquefied petroleum gas in leak-free condition
in accordance with the construction codes. If such a distribution system has
been compromised, an owner shall have the system pressure-tested and repaired
in accordance with the Dallas Fuel Gas Code, Chapter 60 of the Dallas City
Code, as amended.
      (3)   Plumbing fixtures. An owner shall:
         (A)   provide each dwelling unit with:
            (i)   a kitchen equipped with a kitchen sink; and
            (ii)   a minimum of one toilet; a lavatory sink; and either a
bathtub or shower, or a combination of bathtub and shower;
         (B)   keep all plumbing fixtures connected to an approved potable
water supply system;
         (C)   connect and maintain all plumbing fixtures in operating
condition;
         (D)   equip toilets and urinals with cold potable water under pressure
necessary for safe and sanitary operation;
         (E)   keep all plumbing fixtures connected to a public sewer system or
to an approved private sewage disposal system;
         (F)   maintain all piping distribution systems in operating condition,
and eliminate all unsafe, unsanitary, and inoperable conditions in such
distribution systems; and
         (G)   cap each sewer clean-out opening with an approved plug, except
when the sewer line is being serviced.
      (4)   Water heating equipment. An owner shall:
         (A)   maintain all water heating equipment, including existing fuel-
fired water heaters, in operating condition;
         (B)   maintain all water heating equipment with a pressure relief
valve with an approved drain line;
         (C)   provide and maintain, in operating condition, water heating
equipment that supplies hot water at a minimum temperature of 110° F., measured
at the water outlet, to every required plumbing fixture;
         (D)   vent all fuel-fired water heating equipment as required by the
construction codes; and
         (E)   maintain boilers and central heating plants in operating
condition.
   (g)   Electrical standards. An owner shall:
      (1)   maintain all electrical equipment and materials in operating
condition;
      (2)   maintain electrical circuits and outlets sufficient to safely carry
a load imposed by normal use of appliances, equipment, and fixtures, and
maintain them in operating condition;
      (3)   maintain in each habitable room, bathroom, hallway, and stairway of
a dwelling unit at least one electric lighting outlet, and the electric
lighting outlet must be controlled by a wall switch, unless a wall switch is
not required by the construction codes;
      (4)   maintain all electric light fixtures located adjacent to exterior
doors of all buildings or structures in operating condition; and
      (5)   use extension cords and flexible cords in accordance with the
construction codes, and not as substitutes for permanent wiring.
   (h)   Lighting standards for multitenant properties.
      (1)   In general.
         (A)   An owner shall not wire lighting in common areas into individual
dwelling units.
         (B)   An owner shall maintain overall illumination of four footcandles
for exterior lighting on the premises, measured in accordance with the Housing
Standards Manual.
      (2)   Exterior lighting.
         (A)   An owner shall maintain illumination from dusk until dawn:
            (i)   along pedestrian pathways; in plazas, courtyards, building
entrances, parking areas, including carports and driveway areas; and other
outdoor spaces commonly used.
            (ii)   at stairwells, landings, and areas under the lower landing.
            (iii)   along breezeways, and transitional lighting must be
maintained at all entries to a breezeway.
            (iv)   at cluster or gang mailboxes.
          (B)   An owner shall maintain exterior lighting so that it reduces
conflicts or obstructions between building design and landscape treatments and
provides appropriate crime prevention.
   (i)   Health standards.
      (1)   Infestations.
         (A)   Where evidence of an infestation exists, the owner of a
building, structure, or property, including a vacant or occupied one- or two-
family dwelling, or multifamily dwelling, shall eliminate the infestation using
a person licensed under the Texas Structural Pest Control Act, as amended, and
repair any condition that contributes to an infestation.
         (B)   If the building, structure, or property is a rental property,
the owner shall provide notice to the tenants at least 48 hours before taking
steps to eliminate an infestation.
            (i)   Notice must be in writing and must include the method being
used to eliminate the infestation.
            (ii)   A tenant may in writing waive the 48-hour requirement.
      (2)   Common toilet and shower facilities. An owner shall maintain in
operating condition toilet and shower facilities in common area multifamily
uses.
      (3)   Swimming pools, spas, ponds, and fountains.
         (i)   Water in swimming pools, spas, ponds, and fountains must be
maintained to prevent the breeding or harborage of insects.
         (ii)   Swimming pools, spas, ponds, and fountains must be maintained
in operating condition.
         (iii)   Fences or other barriers enclosing swimming pools, spas,
ponds, and fountains must be maintained in operating condition.
         (iv)   Pool yard enclosures, as defined in Chapter 757 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code, as amended, shall be maintained in operating condition
and must comply with the standards in Chapter 757 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended.
      (4)   Sewage overflow. An owner shall sanitize all areas contaminated by
sewage overflow immediately after servicing is completed.
      (5)   Vacant dwelling units.
         (A)   An owner shall maintain the interiors of all vacant dwelling
units free of solid waste.
         (B)   The owner of a vacant dwelling unit must store any swimming pool
chemicals, cleaning chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, rodenticides,
fertilizers, paints, solvents, gasoline, gasoline-powered equipment, or
combustible materials of any kind in accordance with the construction codes and
the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
   (j)   Security standards. An owner of a multifamily dwelling, other than one
exempt from registration under this chapter, shall provide and maintain
security devices in each dwelling unit as required by Sections 92.153, 92.154,
and 92.155 of the Texas Property Code, as amended.
   (k)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section
that the premises is the site of new construction and reasonable and continuous
progress is being made to complete the construction.
   (l)   An owner shall provide a tenant with alternative housing that meets
the minimum standards required by this section when:
      (1)   after being issued a notice or citation for violation of Subsection
(e)(2) of this section, the owner fails to repair heating equipment within 72
hours after receiving such notice or citation and the overnight low
temperature, as measured by the National Weather Service at Dallas Love Field,
is below 40° F. for three consecutive days after receiving such notice or
citation; or
      (2)   after being issued a notice or citation for violation of Subsection
(e)(1) of this section, the owner fails to repair refrigerated air equipment
within 72 hours after receiving such notice or citation and the daytime high
temperature, as measured by the National Weather Service at Dallas Love Field,
is 95° F. or above for three consecutive days after receiving such notice or
citation.
   (m)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (e)(1) and (e)(2) of
this section and to the alternative housing requirements of Subsection (i) of
this section that:
      (1)   failure to maintain heating and refrigerated air equipment in
compliance with those subsections was the direct result of an act of nature or
other cause beyond the reasonable control of the owner; or
      (2)   the owner is making diligent efforts to repair the heating and
refrigerated air equipment in compliance with those subsections; if the owner
demonstrates to the director that diligent efforts to repair are being made,
the director will not issue a notice or citation for a violation of Subsection
(e)(1) or (e)(2) of this section.
   (n)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (e)(2) of this section
and to the alternative housing requirements of Subsection (i)(1) of this
section that a written contract is in effect requiring the tenant to provide
and maintain heating equipment and the owner has provided utility connections
for heating equipment in compliance with the Dallas Mechanical Code, as
amended, in each room of the structure intended for human occupancy.
   (o)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (e)(1) of this section
and to the alternative housing requirement of Subsection (i)(2) of this section
that the structure is not a rental property. (Ord. Nos. 15198; 15372; 15919;
16473; 19234; 20578; 24481; 25522; 30236; 33224)
SEC. 27-12.   RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANT.
   An occupant shall:
      (1)   maintain the interior and exterior portions of the person's
dwelling unit free from accumulations of solid waste and other conditions that
would encourage an infestation;
      (2)   remove any animal from a structure if the presence of the animal is
a health hazard to an occupant;
      (3)   connect plumbing fixtures and heating equipment that the occupant
supplies in accordance with the construction codes.
      (4)   provide solid waste receptacles or containers when required by
Chapter 18 of this code; and
      (5)   not alter a structure or its facilities so as to create a
nonconformity with Section
27-11 or this section. (Ord. Nos. 15198; 15372; 19234; 30236)
ARTICLE IV.
VACATION, REDUCTION OF OCCUPANCY LOAD, AND SECURING OF STRUCTURES AND
RELOCATION OF OCCUPANTS.
   (Ord. Nos. 20470, 24086, and 26455, title)
SEC. 27-13.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 26455)
SEC. 27-14.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 26455)
SEC. 27-14.1.   TREATMENT FOR INSECTS AND RODENTS.
   When a structure is ordered demolished by a municipal court judge under
Article IV-a of this chapter, if the owner fails to comply with the Dallas
Building Code in obtaining certification from a person licensed under the Texas
Structural Pest Control Act that:
      (1)   the structure is free of insects and rodents; or
      (2)   the structure has been treated within the preceding 30 days to
eliminate insect and rodent infestation;
the city may obtain the certification and charge the cost as part of the
expense of demolition constituting a lien against the real property as provided
in Section
27-16.8(e). (Ord. Nos. 15202; 19234; 24086; 26455)
SEC. 27-14.2.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 24086)
SEC. 27-14.3.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 24086)
SEC. 27-15.   OCCUPANCY LIMITS.
   An owner shall not allow a structure or dwelling unit to exceed the
occupancy limits in Texas Property Code Section 92.010, as amended. (Ord. Nos.
15198; 16473; 19234; 20470; 24086; 26455; 30236)
SEC. 27-15.1.   PLACARDING OF A STRUCTURE BY THE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   Upon issuance of a final court order requiring vacation of a structure
or dwelling unit, the director may place a red placard on or near the front
door of a structure or dwelling unit.
   (b)   The red placard must state that:
      (1)   the structure or dwelling unit was ordered to be vacated;
      (2)   a person commits an offense if he, without authority from the
director:
         (A)   removes or destroys the red placard;
         (B)   occupies the structure or dwelling unit; or
         (C)   as owner of the structure, authorizes a person to occupy the
structure or dwelling unit; and
      (3)   the maximum fine for violation of the ordinance.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   without authority from the director, removes or destroys a red
placard placed by the director;
      (2)   occupies a structure or dwelling unit on which the director has
placed a red placard; or
      (3)   authorizes a person to occupy a structure or dwelling unit on which
the director has placed a red placard. (Ord. Nos. 24086; 26455; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.   SECURING OF A STRUCTURE BY THE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The requirements of this section are in addition to any other
requirements of this chapter governing securing of a structure. Any hearing
before the municipal court pursuant to this section concerning the securing of
a structure must comply with all notice and procedural requirements contained
in
Article IV-a of this chapter for hearings before the municipal court.
   (b)   The director shall secure any structure that the director determines:
      (1)   violates a minimum standard established in
Article III of this chapter; and
      (2)   is unoccupied or is occupied only by a person who does not have a
right of possession to the structure.
   (c)   Before the 11th day after the date the director secures the structure,
the director shall give notice to the owner by:
      (1)   personally serving the owner with written notice;
      (2)   depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the
owner at the owner's post office address;
      (3)   publishing the notice at least twice within a 10-day period in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the structure is
located, if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office
address is unknown; or
      (4)   posting the notice on or near the front door of the structure, if
personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is
unknown.
   (d)   The notice issued under Subsection (c) must contain:
      (1)   an identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the structure and the property on which it is located;
      (2)   a description of the violation of the minimum standards that is
present at the structure;
      (3)   a statement that the director will secure or has secured, as the
case may be, the structure; and
      (4)   an explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing
about any matter relating to the director's securing of the structure.
   (e)   A public hearing shall be held before the municipal court if, within
30 days after the date the director secures the structure, the owner files with
the municipal court a written request for the hearing. The hearing must be held
within 20 days after the date the request is filed. Notice of the hearing must
be given to each owner of the affected property in accordance with the notice
requirements of Section
27-16.5. At the hearing, the director shall present evidence of the need to
secure the structure, and the owner may testify or present witnesses or written
information about any matter relating to the director's securing of the
structure.
   (f)   The municipal court shall uphold the director's action in securing a
structure if it finds the structure or a portion of the structure was an urban
nuisance.
   (g)   An unoccupied structure that is closed pursuant to an order of the
director, the municipal court, or the fire marshal, or that is closed by the
owner of the structure without an official order, must be secured in compliance
with the Dallas Fire Code, as amended.
   (h)   A structure intended for residential use or occupancy that, pursuant
to an order of the director, the municipal court, or the fire marshal, is
closed by the owner through sealing the doors or windows with boards, or
equivalent materials, may be referred by the director to the city attorney for
appropriate action under
Article IV-a of this chapter, if the structure:
      (1)   remains boarded up for 180 days or more without being occupied by
the owner or a lawful tenant; and
      (2)   has at least one visible violation of this chapter.
   (i)   The city's cost of securing a structure under this section constitutes
a lien against the real property on which the structure stands, as provided in
Section
27-16.8(e). (Ord. Nos. 15198; 16473; 19234; 20470; 20679; 21025; 24086; 26455;
30236)
SEC. 27-16.1.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 26455)
SEC. 27-16.2.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 26455)
ARTICLE IV-a.
MUNICIPAL COURT JURISDICTION OVER URBAN NUISANCES.
SEC. 27-16.3.   MUNICIPAL COURT JURISDICTION, POWERS, AND DUTIES RELATING TO
URBAN NUISANCES.
   (a)   The municipal court of record has the power and duty to hold a public
hearing to determine whether a structure complies with the minimum standards
set out in this chapter.
   (b)   The municipal court of record has the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To require the reduction in occupancy load of a structure that
exceeds the limits set out in this chapter or the vacation of a structure found
to be an urban nuisance.
      (2)   To require the repair of a structure found to be an urban nuisance.
      (3)   To require the demolition of a structure found to be an urban
nuisance.
      (4)   To require the removal of personalty from a structure ordered
vacated or demolished. Removal may be accomplished by use of city forces or a
private transfer company if the owner of the personalty is not known, or the
whereabouts of the owner cannot be ascertained, or the owner fails to remove
the personalty. Costs of any removal and storage are the responsibility of the
owner of the personalty.
       (5)   To require that an open and vacant structure or open and vacant
portion of a structure be secured.
      (6)   To require or cause the correction of a dangerous condition on the
land. Correction of a dangerous condition may be accomplished by city forces or
a private contractor. Costs of correction are the responsibility of the owner.
      (7)   To assess a civil penalty, not to exceed $1,000 a day per violation
or, if the property is the owner's lawful homestead, $10 a day per violation,
against a property or property owner for each day or part of a day that the
owner fails to repair or demolish a structure in compliance with a court order
issued under this article.
      (8)   To require vacation of the occupants of a structure found to be an
urban nuisance or found to be overcrowded. (Ord. Nos. 24457; 26455; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.4.   INITIATION OF PROCEEDING; PETITION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   A petition filed with the municipal court by the city attorney
initiates a civil proceeding under this article. The proceeding must be kept
and organized separately from the criminal dockets of the municipal court.
   (b)   The petition must include:
      (1)   an identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the structure and the property on which it is located; and
      (2)   a description of the alleged violation or violations of minimum
standards that are present on the property.
   (c)   The municipal court shall set the matter for a hearing not less than
30 days nor more than 60 days after the filing of the petition. (Ord. Nos.
24457; 26455; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.5.   NOTICE OF HEARING BEFORE THE MUNICIPAL COURT.
   (a)   The city attorney or the director shall give notice of a municipal
court hearing on the repair, demolition, vacation, or securing of a structure,
or the relocation of the occupants of a structure, to any owner, mortgagee, or
lienholder of the structure. A diligent effort must be made to discover each
owner, mortgagee, or lienholder of the structure and to give such persons
notice of the hearing.
   (b)   Notice of the hearing must include:
      (1)   the date, time, and place of the hearing;
      (2)   an identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the structure and the property on which it is located;
      (3)   a description of the alleged violation or violations of minimum
standards that are present on the property; and
      (4)   a statement that the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder must submit at
the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with
this chapter and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
   (c)   On or before the 10th day before the hearing date, notice of the
hearing must be:
      (1)   mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record
owners of the affected property, and each holder of a recorded lien against the
property, as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of the
county in which the property is located if the address of the lienholder can be
ascertained from the deed of trust establishing the lien or any other
applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk;
      (2)   posted, to all unknown owners, on the front door of each
improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as
practicable; and
      (3)   published on one occasion in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city.
   (d)   The city attorney or the director may file in the official public
records of real property in the county in which the property is located a
notice of hearing that contains:
      (1)   the name and address of the property owner, if that information can
be determined;
      (2)   a legal description of the property; and
      (3)   a description of the hearing.
   (e)   A notice issued under this section or Section
27-16.8, or an order entered by the municipal court under this article, that is
filed in accordance with Subsection (d) is binding on any subsequent grantee,
lienholder, or other transferee of an interest in the property who acquires
such interest after the filing of the notice or order and constitutes notice of
the matter or order to any subsequent grantee, lienholder, or other transferee.
(Ord. Nos. 24457; 26455)
SEC. 27-16.6.   REQUEST FOR CONTINUANCE OF HEARING.
   A continuance of a hearing requested and set under this article may only be
considered and granted in open court by the presiding judge of the court on the
date and time of the originally scheduled hearing. A continuance must be
requested in writing and may only be granted for good cause shown. The court
may continue the hearing no more than 60 days and must notify the parties
appearing in open court of the new date and time of the hearing. No other
notice of the continued hearing date and time is required to be filed, sent,
published, or posted. (Ord. Nos. 24457; 26455)
SEC. 27-16.7.   HEARING PROCEDURES BEFORE THE MUNICIPAL COURT; COURT ORDERS.
   (a)   At the civil hearing in municipal court:
      (1)   the city attorney shall present evidence of notice of the hearing,
the violation or violations of minimum standards that are present on the
property, and other relevant issues;
      (2)   an owner, lienholder, mortgagee, or other person shown to have an
interest in the property may present evidence of the scope of work and time
required to comply with minimum standards under this chapter, present evidence
on other relevant issues, and cross-examine witnesses; and
      (3)   the city attorney may cross-examine or rebut any evidence offered
by an opposing party or other witness.
   (b)   At the close of evidence at the hearing, the municipal court judge may
do one or more of the following:
      (1)   Find by a preponderance of the evidence that the structure is an
urban nuisance, specifically describing each minimum standard found to be
violated, and order one or more of the following:
         (A)   demolition of the structure by the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee within 30 days, unless an extension is granted under Subsection (c);
         (B)   repair of the structure by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee
as needed to correct every violation of minimum standards found by the court to
exist at the structure, the repair to be accomplished within 30 days, unless an
extension is granted under Subsection (c);
         (C)   vacation of the structure by the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee, within a specified period of time; or
         (D)   the assessment of a civil penalty against the owner for each day
or part of a day that the owner fails to repair or demolish the structure in
compliance with a court order issued under this subsection.
      (2)   Find that the structure is overcrowded under Section
27-15 of this chapter and order a reduction of occupancy load by the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee.
      (3)   Find that the structure is open and vacant and order securing of
the structure from unauthorized entry in compliance with the Dallas Fire Code
within 30 days by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee.
      (4)   Order relocation of the occupants of a structure affected by a
court order, within a specified period of time, by the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee.
      (5)   Determine whether any occupants of a structure affected by a board
order are ineligible for relocation assistance under Section
27-16.3(c) of this chapter.
   (c)   Time extensions for complying with an order to repair or demolish a
structure.
      (1)   The court may allow more than 30 days to comply with an order to
repair or demolish a structure under Subsection (b)(1), if the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee establishes at the hearing that the work cannot
reasonably be performed within 30 days. The court shall establish a specific
time schedule for the commencement and performance of the work and require the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property from unauthorized entry
while the work is being performed.
      (2)   The court may not allow more than 90 days to comply with an order
issued under Subsection (b)(1) unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee:
         (A)   submits at the hearing a detailed plan and time schedule for the
work; and
         (B)   establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be
completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
      (3)   If the court allows more than 90 days to complete any part of the
work required to repair or demolish the structure under Subsection (b)(1), it
shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress
reports to the court demonstrating compliance with the time schedules
established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require
that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the court to demonstrate
compliance with the time schedules.
      (4)   If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including
structures and improvements on property, within the city boundaries that
exceeds $100,000 in total value, the court may require the owner, lienholder,
or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the
cost of repairing or demolishing a structure under Subsection (c)(3). In lieu
of a bond, the court may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide
a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third
party approved by the city. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or
third party guaranty provided, not later than the 30th day after the date the
court issues the order. The court shall establish rules and procedures, to be
approved by the city attorney, governing when a bond, letter of credit, or
third party guaranty will be required under this paragraph.
   (d)   Demolition, vacation, and securing of a structure, and the relocation
of the occupants of a structure, may be accomplished by the city if not timely
accomplished by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee. Repair of a structure may
be accomplished by the city if not timely accomplished by the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee, but only to the extent necessary to bring the
structure into compliance with minimum standards and only if the structure is a
residential structure with not more than 10 dwelling units. If, at the close of
evidence at the hearing, the court orders a structure to be repaired, vacated,
secured, or demolished, or orders relocation of the occupants of a structure,
the court shall in its order also authorize the city of Dallas, through its
agents or contractors, to enter the property and repair, vacate, secure, or
demolish the structure on the property, or relocate the occupants of the
structure, whichever applies, if the ordered action is not accomplished by the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee by the deadline given by the court pursuant to
Subsection (b) or (c). Performance of work by the city under this subsection
does not limit the ability of the city to collect on a bond or other financial
guaranty that may be required from the property owner, lienholder, or mortgagee
under Subsection (c)(4) of this section.
   (e)   An order entered by the court must also include a statement that any
order entered by the municipal court, when filed in the official public real
property records of the county in which the property is located, binds any
subsequent grantee, lienholder, or other transferee of an interest in the
property who acquires the interest after the filing of the order.
   (f)   After the hearing, the city attorney or the director shall promptly
mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally deliver with
proof of delivery, a copy of the order to each owner, lienholder, and mortgagee
of the structure and shall file a copy of the order in the official public real
property records of the county in which the property is located. Best efforts
must be made to determine the identity and address of any owner, mortgagee, or
lienholder and to give such persons notice of the order. If an order to repair,
demolish, vacate, reduce in occupancy load, or secure a structure, or to
relocate the occupants of a structure, is timely effected, the director shall,
upon written request and payment of the cost by the owner, file a notice of
compliance in the deed records of the county in which the property is located.
Every notice given under this subsection must include an identification, which
is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and property on
which it is located, and a description of the violation of minimum standards
that is present at the property.
   (g)   Within 10 days after the date the order is issued, the city attorney
or the director shall:
      (1)   file a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and
      (2)   publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Dallas
an abbreviated copy of the order containing:
         (A)   the street address or legal description of the property;
         (B)   the date of the hearing;
         (C)   a brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
         (D)   instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be
obtained. (Ord. Nos. 24457; 26455)
SEC. 27-16.8.   NONCOMPLIANCE WITH COURT ORDERS; CIVIL PENALTIES; LIENS.
   (a)   If the city of Dallas determines that the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee of a structure has not timely complied with a municipal court order
issued under Section
27-16.7 and the order included a provision authorizing the city to perform work
upon failure of the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to comply with the order,
the city may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, repair, demolish,
vacate, or secure the structure, or relocate the occupants of the structure,
whichever is applicable, in accordance with the court order. Before the city
begins performance of the work, the city attorney or the director shall issue a
notice including:
      (1)   an identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the structure and the property on which it is located;
      (2)   an identification of the court order;
      (3)   a description of each violation of minimum standards found by the
court to be present on the property when the court order was issued;
      (4)   a description of any work ordered by the court to correct each
violation on the property;
      (5)   a statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has not timely
complied with the court order and a description of the provisions of the court
order that still require compliance;
      (6)   a statement of the city’s intent to cause the repair, demolition,
vacation, or securing of the structure, or the relocation of the occupants of
the structure, whichever is applicable; and
      (7)   the date and time the city will begin performance of the work in
accordance with the court order.
   (b)   At least 10 days before the city of Dallas begins the performance of
work under this section, the notice required under Subsection (a) must be:
      (1)   mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each owner,
lienholder, and mortgagee of the structure;
      (2)   posted on the front door of the structure or as close to the front
door as practicable; and
      (3)   published on one occasion in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city.
   (c)   Any costs incurred by the city in performing work under this article
may be enforced in accordance with Subsection (e) of this section and through
any other remedies provided by city ordinance or state law.
   (d)   Assessment of civil penalties.
      (1)   If the city attorney or the director determines that the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee of a structure has not timely complied with a
municipal court order issued under Section
27-16.7, the city attorney may file an action in municipal court for the
assessment of a civil penalty against the property and property owner. The city
attorney or the director shall promptly give notice to each owner, lienholder,
and mortgagee of the hearing to assess a civil penalty. The notice must
include:
         (A)   an identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the structure and the property on which it is located;
         (B)   an identification of the court order affecting the property;
         (C)   a description of each violation of minimum standards found by
the court to be present on the property when the court order was issued;
         (D)   a description of any work ordered by the court to correct each
violation on the property;
         (E)   a statement that the city attorney or the director has
determined that an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has not timely complied with
the court order and a description of the provisions of the court order that
still require compliance; and
         (F)   a statement that the court will conduct a hearing to consider
assessment of a civil penalty against the property and property owner and the
date, time, and place of the hearing.
      (2)   The notice required under Subsection (d)(1) for a municipal court
hearing to consider the assessment of a civil penalty against the property and
property owner subject to a court order must be given in compliance with the
notice requirements set forth in Section
27-16.5 for other hearings under this article.
      (3)   A hearing to consider the assessment of a civil penalty on property
subject to a court order must be conducted in compliance with the requirements
and procedures set forth in this article for other hearings before the
municipal court, except that, in addition to any other evidence presented, an
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee may present evidence of any work performed or
completed on the property to comply with the court order.
      (4)   The court, after hearing evidence from each interested person
present, may assess a civil penalty against the owner in a specific amount in
accordance with Section
27-16.3(b)(7) of this article.
      (5)   Notice of a court order issued under this subsection must comply
with the requirements and procedures of Section
27-16.7(f) and (g) and Section
27-16.11 for notice of other board orders.
      (6)   A civil penalty assessed under this subsection may be enforced in
accordance with Subsection (e) of this section.
      (7)   A civil penalty assessment hearing may be combined with any other
hearing before the municipal court concerning the same property.
   (e)   Liens.
      (1)   The expense of the repair, demolition, vacation, or securing of a
structure or the relocation of the occupants of a structure, when performed
under contract with the city or by city forces, and any civil penalty assessed
against the owner of the structure, constitute a nontransferable lien against
the real property on which the structure stands or stood and runs with the
land, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution. The
city’s lien attaches when notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the
office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located. The
notice must contain the name and address of the owner, if reasonably
determinable, a legal description of the real property, the amount of expenses
incurred by the city, and the balance due.
      (2)   The city’s lien for the expenses is a privileged lien subordinate
only to tax liens, if each mortgagee and lienholder is given notice and an
opportunity to repair, demolish, vacate, or secure the structure, or relocate
the occupants of the structure, whichever applies. Otherwise, the city’s lien
for expenses, or for any civil penalties imposed, is superior to all other
previously recorded judgment liens except for any previously recorded bona fide
mortgage lien attached to the real property, if the mortgage lien was filed for
record in the county clerk’s office of the county in which the real property is
located before the date the civil penalty was assessed or the action for which
the expenses were incurred was begun by the city.
      (3)   A lien acquired by the city under this section for repair expenses
may not be foreclosed if the structure upon which the repairs were made is
occupied as a residential homestead by a person 65 years of age or older.
      (4)   The city may use lawful means to collect expenses and civil
penalties assessed under this article from an owner or a property. Any civil
penalty or other assessment imposed under this article accrues interest at the
rate of 10 percent a year from the date of the assessment until paid in full.
The city may petition a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil suit for a
final judgment in accordance with the assessed civil penalty. To enforce the
civil penalty, the city must file with the district clerk of a county in which
the city is located a certified copy of the municipal court order assessing the
civil penalty, stating the amount and duration of the penalty. The assessment
of a civil penalty under this article is final and binding and constitutes
prima facie evidence of the penalty. No other proof is required for the
district court to enter final judgment on the penalty. (Ord. Nos. 24457; 26455;
30236)
SEC. 27-16.9.   MODIFICATION OF COURT ORDERS.
   (a)   Within 15 days after the municipal court enters an order under this
article, the city of Dallas or an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of a
structure that is the subject of the order may request that the court modify
its order. The request must be in writing and filed with the court.
   (b)   The court shall schedule a hearing on the motion not less than five
days or more than 10 days after the request for modification is filed. The
movant must promptly deliver a copy of the request and notice of the hearing
date and time, in writing, to the city attorney and each owner, lienholder, and
mortgagee by either personal service or certified mail, return receipt
requested.
   (c)   If circumstances have changed and the court finds good cause, the
court may modify the order. The city attorney or the director shall notify the
owner, lienholder, and mortgagee of the structure of the modified order in
accordance with Sections
27-16.7(f) and (g). (Ord. Nos. 24457; 26455)
SEC. 27-16.10.   APPEAL OF COURT ORDERS.
   Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record who is jointly or severally
aggrieved by a municipal court order issued under this article may appeal by
filing in state district court a verified petition setting forth that the
municipal court’s decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the
grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed by an owner, lienholder,
or mortgagee of record within 30 calendar days after the respective dates a
copy of the municipal court order is mailed to each in compliance with Section
27-16.7(f) of this chapter; otherwise, the order will become final as to each
person upon expiration of each person’s respective 30-calendar-day period. An
appeal in state district court is limited to a hearing under the substantial
evidence rule. (Ord. Nos. 24457; 26455)
SEC. 27-16.11.   MISCELLANEOUS NOTICE PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Any notice required by this article to be given to the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee of any structure must also be given to any occupant of
the structure, if the subject of the notice involves the demolition, vacation,
or reduction of occupancy load of the structure or the relocation or
ineligibility for relocation expenses of the occupants. Notice required under
this subsection must be given to the occupants either:
      (1)   in the same manner required by this article for notice to the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the structure; or
      (2)   by personal service, using the time and procedural requirements set
forth in this article for notice to the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the
structure.
   (b)   For purposes of this article, a requirement to use “best efforts” or
“a diligent effort” is satisfied by a search of the following records:
      (1)   county real property records of the county in which the structure
is located;
      (2)   appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the
structure is located;
      (3)   records of the secretary of state for the State of Texas;
      (4)   assumed name records of the county in which the structure is
located;
      (5)   tax records of the city of Dallas; and
      (6)   utility records of the city of Dallas.
   (c)   If any notice, order, or other document is mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, as required by this article, and is returned by the
United States Postal Service as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the
notice, order, or other document is not affected, and the notice, order, or
other document will be deemed as delivered.
   (d)   If the city attorney requests a court to issue an order requiring
demolition of a residential structure with no more than 3,000 square feet of
floor area on a property subject to a predesignation moratorium or a structure
in a historic overlay district, the city attorney shall comply with the
requirements of Section
51A-4.501(i). (Ord. Nos. 24457; 26455; 27922)
ARTICLE IV-b.
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE FOR PREMISES, PROPERTY, AND CERTAIN OTHER
VIOLATIONS.
SEC. 27-16.12.   ALTERNATIVE ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE.
   Every violation of an ordinance described by Section 54.032 of the Texas
Local Government Code or adopted under Subchapter E, Chapter 683 of the Texas
Transportation Code or under Section 214.001(a)(1) of the Texas Local
Government Code may be enforced as an administrative offense using the
alternative administrative adjudication procedure set forth in this article, as
authorized by Section 54.044 of the Texas Local Government Code. The adoption
or use of this alternative administrative adjudication procedure does not
preclude the city from enforcing a violation of an ordinance described in this
section through criminal penalties and procedures. (Ord. Nos. 25927; 29403)
SEC. 27-16.13.   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (a)   An administrative citation issued under this article must:
      (1)   notify the person charged with violating the ordinance that the
person has the right to a hearing;
      (2)   provide information as to the time and place to appear before the
hearing officer;
      (3)   include the nature, date, and location of the violation;
      (4)   notify the person charged with violating the ordinance of the
amount of the administrative penalty for which the person may be liable and
provide instructions and the due date for paying the administrative penalty;
      (5)   notify the person charged that any request to have the inspector
who issued the citation present at the administrative hearing must be in
writing and must be received by the hearing officer at least five calendar days
before the scheduled hearing date and that the failure to timely request the
presence of the inspector constitutes a waiver of the person's right to require
the inspector to be present at the hearing;
      (6)   notify the person charged that failure to timely appear at the time
and place of the hearing as set forth in the citation or, if the hearing is
continued or postponed, at any subsequent hearing, is considered an admission
of liability for the violation charged; and
      (7)   contain a return of service signed by the inspector indicating how
the administrative citation was served on the person charged.
   (b)   An administrative citation under this article serves as the summons
and charging instrument for purposes of this article.
   (c)   A copy of the administrative citation must be kept as a record in the
ordinary course of business of the city by the municipal court clerk.
   (d)   An administrative citation kept by the municipal court clerk is
rebuttable proof of the facts it states. (Ord. Nos. 25927; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.14.   SERVICE OF AN ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (a)   An attempt must be made to personally serve an administrative citation
by handing it to the person charged if the person is present at the time of
service or by leaving the citation at the person's usual place of residence
with any person residing at such residence who is 16 years of age or older and
informing that person of the citation's contents.
   (b)   If an attempt to personally serve the citation fails, the
administrative citation must then be served upon the person charged by posting
the citation on either:
      (1)   the front door or front gate of the premises or property; or
      (2)   a placard staked to the yard of the premises or property in a
location visible from a public street or alley.
   (c)   If service upon the person charged is by posting the citation on the
premises or property, a copy of the citation must also be sent to the last
known address of the person charged by regular United States mail. If the
person charged is the owner of the premises or property, then the last known
address of the person is that address kept by the appraisal district of the
county in which is located the premises or property that is the subject of the
citation, except that if the owner is a corporation or other legal entity, a
copy of the citation may be mailed to the registered agent's address on file
with the Texas Secretary of State. If the person charged is the person in
control of the premises or property, then the last known address of the person
is the address of the premises or property. (Ord. Nos. 25927; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.15.   ANSWERING AN ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (a)   A person who has been charged with a violation of this chapter through
an administrative citation shall answer to the charge by appearing in person or
through counsel before the hearing officer no later than the 31st calendar day
after the date the citation was issued. If the 31st calendar day falls on a day
when the court is closed, then the person must appear (in person or through
counsel) by the next day that the court is open.
   (b)   An answer to the administrative citation may be made in either of the
following ways:
      (1)   By returning the citation, on or before the 31st calendar day from
the date the citation was issued, with the applicable administrative penalties,
fees, and court costs, which action constitutes an admission of liability.
      (2)   By personally appearing, with or without counsel, before the
hearing officer on or before the 31st calendar day from the date the citation
was issued and on any subsequent hearing date. The person charged in the
administrative citation must be present at the hearing and cannot be
represented by anyone other than an attorney who has a license to practice law
in Texas, which is in good standing. If the person charged is a corporation or
a business entity, the corporation or business entity must be represented by an
attorney who has a license to practice law in Texas, which is in good standing.
(Ord. Nos. 25927; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.16.   FAILURE TO APPEAR AT AN ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (a)   A person who fails to answer an administrative citation as required by
Section
27-16.15 of this chapter is considered to have admitted liability for the
violation charged. Upon proof of service by the city, the hearing officer shall
issue, in writing, an administrative order of liability and assess against the
person charged with the violation an appropriate amount of administrative
penalties, fees, and court costs.
   (b)   The hearing officer shall assess an additional $36 administrative
penalty for each violation (other than a violation of Section
49-21.1 of this code) for which a person is found liable, which amount will be
placed in the Dallas Tomorrow Fund or the Dallas Animal Welfare Fund, as
applicable. In no case may the total amount of administrative penalties
assessed against a person for a violation exceed the maximum penalty
established by city ordinance for the particular violation, and in no case may
the total amount of administrative penalties, including the $36 administrative
penalty, assessed against a person for a violation be less than the minimum
penalty established by city ordinance for the particular violation.
   (c)   Within seven calendar days after the hearing officer files the
administrative order of liability with the municipal court clerk, the municipal
court clerk shall send a copy of the order to the person charged with the
violation. The copy of the order must be sent by regular United States mail to
the person's last known address as defined in Section
27-16.14(c). The administrative order must include a statement:
      (1)   of the amount of the administrative penalties, fees, and court
costs;
      (2)   of the right to appeal to municipal court before the 31st calendar
day after the date the hearing officer's order is filed with the municipal
court clerk;
      (3)   that, unless the hearing officer's order is suspended through a
properly filed appeal, the administrative penalties, fees, and court costs must
be paid within 31 calendar days after the date the hearing officer's order is
filed;
      (4)   that, if the administrative penalties, fees, and court costs are
not timely paid, the penalties, fees, and costs may be referred to a collection
agency and the cost to the city for the collection services will be assessed as
costs, at the rate agreed to between the city and the collection agency, and
added to the judgment; and
      (5)   that the city may enforce the hearing officer's administrative
order by:
         (A)   filing a civil suit for collection of the administrative
penalties, fees, and court costs;
         (B)   obtaining an injunction to prohibit specific conduct that
violates the order or to require specific conduct necessary for compliance with
the order; or
         (C)   both (A) and (B). (Ord. Nos. 25927; 29403; 29618; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.17.   HEARING OFFICERS; QUALIFICATIONS, POWERS, DUTIES, AND
FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   Hearing officers shall be recommended by the administrative judge and
appointed by the city council, and shall serve until a successor is recommended
by the administrative judge and appointed by the city council. Hearing officers
shall administratively adjudicate violations of ordinances described by Section
54.032 of the Texas Local Government Code or adopted under Subchapter E,
Chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation Code or under Section 214.001(a)(1) of
the Texas Local Government Code. The city council shall appoint one hearing
officer and may appoint a maximum of five associate hearing officers, who shall
meet the same qualifications and have the same powers, duties, and functions of
the hearing officer.
   (b)   A hearing officer must meet all of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Be a resident of the city of Dallas at the time of employment as a
hearing officer and maintain residency in the city throughout such employment.
      (2)   Be a citizen of the United States.
      (3)   Be a licensed attorney in good standing.
      (4)   Have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in the
State of Texas.
   (c)   A hearing officer shall have the following powers, duties, and
functions:
      (1)   To administer oaths.
      (2)   To accept admissions to, and to hear and determine contests of,
premises and property violations under this article.
      (3)   To issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the
production of documents, which orders may be enforced by a municipal court.
      (4)   To assess administrative penalties, fees, and court costs in
accordance with this article.
      (5)   To question witnesses and examine evidence offered.
      (6)   To suspend the payment of administrative penalties for a specific
period of time.
      (7)   To make a finding as to the financial inability of a person found
liable of a violation to comply with an administrative order and to refer that
person to potential sources of funding to assist the person in complying with
the administrative order.
      (8)   To make a finding as to the financial inability of a person found
liable of a violation to pay for the transcription of any recording of an
administrative hearing and/or to post an appeal bond. (Ord. Nos. 25927; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.18.   HEARING FOR DISPOSITION OF AN ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION;
CITATION AS REBUTTABLE PROOF OF OFFENSE.
   (a)   Every hearing for the adjudication of an administrative citation under
this article must be held before a hearing officer. A hearing cannot be held
without the presence of the person charged or the person's attorney.
   (b)   At a hearing under this article, the administrative citation is
rebuttable proof of the facts that it states. Evidence of compliance with the
ordinance after the administrative citation was issued can be taken into
consideration by the hearing officer when assessing a reasonable administrative
penalty, but the evidence is not considered rebuttal evidence nor does it
refute or contradict the allegations made in the citation.
   (c)   The formal rules of evidence do not apply to the hearing, and any
relevant evidence will be deemed admitted if the hearing officer finds it
competent and reliable. The hearing officer shall make a decision based upon a
preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing, after giving due weight
to all rebuttable proof established by this article or other applicable law.
   (d)   Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to
introduce exhibits, to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant
to the issues, and to rebut evidence; except that, if the person charged fails
to make a timely, written request to have the inspector who issued the citation
present at the hearing, the person charged will be deemed to have waived the
right to call and examine that inspector.
   (e)   The hearing officer may examine any witness and may consider any
evidence offered by a witness or person charged with a violation, giving due
weight to all testimony and evidence offered.
   (f)   If requested by the hearing officer or any party to the hearing prior
to commencement of the hearing, the administrative hearing will be recorded
electronically. Failure to timely request that the administrative hearing be
electronically recorded constitutes a waiver of the right to have a record of
the hearing. The person charged may, at his expense, have a court reporter
present in the hearing room during the proceedings.
   (g)   After hearing all the evidence, the hearing officer shall immediately
issue an order in writing, either:
      (1)   finding the person charged liable for the violation, assessing the
applicable administrative penalties, fees, and court costs, and notifying the
person of the right of appeal to municipal court; or
      (2)   finding the person charged not liable for the violation.
   (h)   The hearing officer shall assess an additional $36 administrative
penalty for each violation (other than a violation of Section
49-21.1 of this code) for which a person is found liable, which amount will be
placed in the Dallas Tomorrow Fund or the Dallas Animal Welfare Fund, as
applicable. In no case may the total amount of administrative penalties,
including the $36 administrative penalty, assessed against a person for a
violation be more than the maximum penalty or less than the minimum penalty
established by city ordinance for the particular violation.
   (i)   A person who has been found liable for a violation may, after the
hearing officer has issued an administrative order but prior to the conclusion
of the hearing, assert financial inability to bring the property or premises
into compliance with the order. At that time, the hearing officer shall suspend
enforcement of the administrative order for a specific time not to exceed 30
days and set the matter for an indigency hearing pursuant to Section
27-16.19(e), if, in the interests of justice, the attorney for the city
believes that a further extension should be granted, the attorney for the city
can make a motion to extend the suspension period for a specific time and
present the motion to the hearing officer for a ruling.
   (j)   An administrative order of the hearing officer must be filed with the
municipal court clerk. (Ord. Nos. 25927; 29403; 29618; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.19.   FINANCIAL INABILITY TO COMPLY WITH AN ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER,
PAY FOR TRANSCRIPTION OF A RECORD, OR POST AN APPEAL BOND.
   (a)   A person found by the hearing officer to be financially unable to
comply with an administrative order must be:
      (1)   a resident of the property or premises that is the subject of the
administrative order; and
      (2)   the sole owner of the property or premises, except that the person
may be a co-owner of the property or premises if all other co-owners cannot be
located or are financially unable to comply with the administrative order.
   (b)   A person claiming a financial inability to comply with the
administrative order must make that claim prior to the conclusion of the
administrative hearing before the hearing officer.
   (c)   A person claiming a financial inability to pay for a transcription of
the record and/or to post an appeal bond must make that claim in writing to the
hearing officer on or before the seventh calendar day following the
administrative hearing.
   (d)   A person claiming a financial inability to comply with an
administrative order, to pay for a transcription of the record, and/or to post
an appeal bond must have an income that does not exceed 50 percent of the
Dallas Area Median Family Income (AMFI) as determined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   (e)   After receiving a claim that a person found liable for a violation
under this article is financially unable to comply with an administrative
order, to pay for a transcription of the record, and/or to post an appeal bond,
the hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing and notify all parties of
the hearing date by regular United States mail. The hearing officer shall order
the person found liable for a violation to bring to the hearing documentary
evidence to support the person's claim of financial inability. The hearing
officer's determination of whether the person found liable for a violation is
financially unable to comply with the administrative order, to pay for a
transcription of the record, and/or to post an appeal bond must be based on all
information provided to the hearing officer by the person found liable or by
the city attorney in opposition to the claim of financial inability. If the
hearing officer determines that the person found liable for a violation does
not have the financial ability to bring the property or premises into
compliance with the administrative order, to pay for a transcription of the
record, and/or to post an appeal bond, then the hearing officer shall enter
that finding in writing.
   (f)   If the hearing officer finds that a person is financially unable to
bring the property or premises into compliance with the administrative order,
the hearing officer shall not suspend the finding of liability, but shall
suspend the enforcement of the administrative order for a specified period of
time, not to exceed 120 days, to allow the person to apply with a Citizen
Advocate Program to help bring his or her property into compliance with the
administrative order. At the end of the suspension period, if the property or
premises is in compliance with the administrative order, the administrative
penalty will be waived. If, at the end of the suspension period, the property
or premises is still in violation of the administrative order, the
administrative penalties, fees, and court costs originally assessed will become
due. If, in the interests of justice, the attorney for the city believes that
the suspension should be extended, the attorney for the city can make a motion
to extend the suspension period for a specific time and present the motion to
the hearing officer for a ruling.
   (g)   A Citizen Advocate Program will be created to assist individuals who
are found by the hearing officer to be financially unable to comply with an
administrative order or who need special assistance regarding an administrative
citation.
   (h)   If the hearing officer finds that the person found liable for a
violation is financially unable to pay the costs of the transcription of the
record and/or to post an appeal bond, these costs will be waived by the city.
(Ord. Nos. 25927; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.20.   APPEAL TO MUNICIPAL COURT.
   (a)   Either party to an action ruled upon by the hearing officer under this
article may appeal that determination by filing a petition in municipal court
within 31 calendar days after the date the hearing officer's administrative
order is filed with the municipal court clerk. An appeal does not stay the
enforcement of the order of the hearing officer unless, before the appeal
petition is filed, a bond is filed with the municipal court for twice the
amount of the administrative penalties, fees, and court costs ordered by the
hearing officer. The city is not required to file a bond in order to appeal. An
appellant to municipal court may request a waiver of the bond amount on the
basis of financial inability to pay, in which case the hearing officer may hold
a hearing pursuant to Section
27-16.19 to determine whether the appellant is indigent and whether the bond
amount may be waived. If the hearing officer's administrative order is reversed
on appeal, the appeal bond will be returned to the appellant.
   (b)   If a person found liable for a violation does not timely appeal the
hearing officer's administrative order, the order will become a final judgment.
If the administrative penalties, fees, and court costs assessed in the final
judgment are not paid within 31 calendar days after the date the hearing
officer's order is filed with the municipal court clerk, the administrative
penalties, fees, and court costs may be referred to a collection agency and the
cost to the city for the collection services will be assessed as costs, at the
rate agreed to between the city and the collection agency, and added to the
judgment. The city may enforce the hearing officer's administrative order by
filing a civil suit for collection of the administrative penalties, fees, and
court costs and/or by obtaining an injunction to prohibit specific conduct that
violates the administrative order or to require specific conduct necessary for
compliance with the administrative order.
   (c)   Any recording of an administrative hearing must be kept and stored for
not less than 45 calendar days beginning the day after the last day of the
administrative hearing. Any administrative hearing that is appealed must be
transcribed from the recording by a court reporter or other person authorized
to transcribe court of record proceedings. The court reporter or other person
transcribing the recorded administrative hearing is not required to have been
present at the administrative hearing.
   (d)   The person found liable for the violation shall pay for any
transcription of the recorded administrative hearing unless the hearing officer
finds, pursuant to Section
27-16.19, that the person is unable to pay or give security for the
transcription.
   (e)   Before the recorded proceedings are transcribed, the person found
liable for the violation shall, unless found by the hearing officer to be
unable to pay for the transcription, post a cash deposit with the municipal
clerk for the estimated cost of the transcription. The cash deposit will be
based on the length of the proceedings, and the costs of the court reporter,
typing, and other incidental services. If the cash deposit exceeds the actual
cost of the transcription, the municipal court clerk shall refund the
difference to the person charged. If the cash deposit is insufficient to cover
the actual cost of the transcription, the person charged must pay the
additional amount before being given the transcription. If a case is reversed
on appeal, the municipal court clerk shall refund to the person charged any
amounts paid for a transcription.
   (f)   Upon receipt of an appeal petition, the municipal court clerk or
deputy clerk shall cause a record of the case to be prepared from the
transcript and the statement of facts, which must conform to the provisions
relating to the preparation of a statement of facts in the Texas Rules of
Appellate Procedure. The appellant shall pay for the statement of facts. If the
person found liable for a violation failed to timely request that the
administrative hearing be electronically recorded, then that person has waived
the right to appeal the administrative order. If the person found liable for a
violation timely requested that the administrative hearing be electronically
recorded and, through no fault of the person, the recording of the hearing is
either unavailable or cannot be transcribed, then the municipal judge shall
reverse the hearing officer's order and remand the matter to the hearing
officer for a new administrative hearing.
   (g)   Upon receiving the record of the administrative hearing, the municipal
judge shall review the record and may grant relief from the administrative
order only if the record reflects that the appellant's substantial rights have
been prejudiced because the administrative order is:
      (1)   in violation of a constitutional or statutory provision;
      (2)   in excess of the hearing officer's statutory authority;
      (3)   made through unlawful procedure;
      (4)   affected by another error of law;
      (5)   not reasonably supported by substantial evidence considering the
reliable and probative evidence in the record as a whole; or
      (6)   arbitrary or capricious or characterized by an abuse of discretion
or a clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
   (h)   The municipal judge shall rule on the appeal within 21 calendar days
after receiving the record of the administrative hearing. The municipal judge
shall affirm the administrative order of the hearing officer unless the record
reflects that the order violates one of the standards in Subsection (g) of this
section. If the record reflects that the hearing officer's order violated one
of the standards in Subsection (g), the municipal judge may either:
      (1)   reverse the hearing officer's order and find the appellant not
liable;
      (2)   reverse the hearing officer's order and remand the matter to the
hearing officer for a new hearing; or
      (3)   affirm the order, but reduce the amount of the administrative
penalties assessed to no lower than the minimum penalty established by
ordinance for the particular violation, including the additional $36
administrative penalty.
   (i)   The municipal judge's ruling on the appeal must be issued in writing
and filed with the municipal court clerk. A copy of the ruling must be sent to
the appellant by regular United States mail at the last known address of the
appellant as provided to the municipal court for the appeal.
   (j)   The municipal judge's ruling is a final judgment. If an appeal bond
was posted, any administrative penalties, fees, or court costs assessed by the
municipal judge or by the hearing officer, if affirmed by the municipal judge,
will be deducted from the appeal bond. If no appeal bond was posted, any
administrative penalties, fees, or court costs assessed by the municipal judge
or by the hearing officer, if affirmed by the municipal judge, must be paid
within 30 calendar days after the municipal judge's ruling is filed with the
municipal court clerk. If not timely paid, such penalties, fees, and court
costs may be referred to a collection agency and the cost to the city for the
collection services will be assessed as costs, at the rate agreed to between
the city and the collection agency, and added to the judgment. The city may
enforce the municipal judge's ruling by filing a civil suit for collection of
the administrative penalties, fees, and court costs and/or by obtaining an
injunction to prohibit specific conduct that violates the ruling or to require
specific conduct necessary for compliance with the ruling. (Ord. Nos. 25927;
30236)
SEC. 27-16.21.   DISPOSITION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES, FEES, AND COURT
COSTS.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b), administrative penalties, fees,
and court costs assessed under this article must be paid into the city’s
general fund for the use and benefit of the city.
   (b)   From the administrative penalties assessed under this article, $36 for
each violation (other than a violation of Section
49-21.1 of this code) for which a person is found liable must be deposited into
the Dallas Tomorrow Fund established in Section
27-16.22 of this article or the Dallas Animal Welfare Fund established under
Section
7-8.4 of
Chapter 7 of this code, as applicable. (Ord. Nos. 25927; 29403; 29618)
SEC. 27-16.22.   DALLAS TOMORROW FUND.
   (a)   The Dallas Tomorrow Fund is composed of:
      (1)   all Dallas Tomorrow Fund penalties collected under Section
27-16.21(b) of this article;
      (2)   30 percent of all civil penalties collected by the city for civil
lawsuits filed in the municipal court under Subchapter B, Chapter 54 of the
Texas Local Government Code, as amended, or under Chapter 214 of the Texas
Local Government Code, as amended; and
      (3)   any funds donated by an individual or entity, any of which
donations may be refused by a majority vote of the city council.
   (b)   The Dallas Tomorrow Fund must be used for the sole purpose of
rehabilitating and repairing properties and premises in the city for persons
who are found by the Dallas Tomorrow Fund administrator to be financially
unable to comply with a notice of violation issued by the director under this
chapter. (Ord. Nos. 25927; 30236)
SEC. 27-16.23.   ADMINISTRATION OF THE DALLAS TOMORROW FUND.
   (a)   The city manager shall appoint an administrator of the Dallas Tomorrow
Fund. The administrator shall adopt policies and procedures consistent with
this article for the administration of the fund.
   (b)   To be eligible to receive funds from the Dallas Tomorrow Fund, a
person must:
      (1)   have received a notice of violation of this chapter from the
director;
      (2)   have been found by the administrator of the Dallas Tomorrow Fund to
be financially unable to comply with the notice of violation;
      (3)   file a request with the Dallas Tomorrow Fund administrator for the
purpose of rehabilitating and/or repairing the person's property or premises
until it complies with the notice of violation; and
      (4)   not have received funds from the Dallas Tomorrow Fund within the
preceding 60 months.
   (c)   A person who makes a request to the Dallas Tomorrow Fund administrator
is voluntarily requesting that the administrator use the fund to rehabilitate
and/or repair the person's property or premises for the sole purpose of
bringing the property or premises into compliance with the notice of violation.
   (d)   The administrator is responsible for ensuring that the property or
premises is inspected and that a detailed, written project plan is prepared
that includes the work proposed, the amount of time the work will take, and the
cost of the work. The project plan must include only the work necessary to
bring the property or premises into compliance with the notice of violation.
   (e)   A person who files a request with the Dallas Tomorrow Fund
administrator does so voluntarily. Before the work on the property or premises
begins, the person who filed the request must confirm in writing that he or
she:
      (1)   inspected the project plan;
      (2)   approved the project plan; and
      (3)   has understood that he or she has the right to withdraw the request
at any time by providing written notice to the Dallas Tomorrow Fund
administrator.
   (f)   If the person continues with the request, the person must indemnify
the city against any liability resulting from the project, any damages that may
occur related to the project, and any damages resulting from any early
termination of the project.
   (g)   The administrator shall comply with state law in procuring a
contractor to rehabilitate and/or repair the property or premises in accordance
with the project plan.
   (h)   The contractor selected by the Dallas Tomorrow Fund administrator has
the right to terminate the project at any time pursuant to their contractual
agreement and pursuant to policies and procedures adopted by the administrator.
Any termination notice must be in writing. The city has no obligation, and is
not liable, for any subsequent rehabilitation and/or repair of the property or
premises as a result of the termination.
   (i)   If the project is terminated prior to completion for any reason, the
administrator may disburse money from the Dallas Tomorrow Fund to pay the
contractor for work completed by the contractor.
   (j)   Once the administrator certifies that the project is completed, the
administrator shall notify the code officer who wrote the notice of violation
and the officer's district manager in writing. The project must then be
inspected by the city for the sole purpose of determining whether the property
or premises complies with the notice of violation. If the city inspector
determines that the property or premises does not comply with the notice of
violation, then the city inspector shall send written notice to the
administrator that the project is not completed and describe the work that is
required before the project will be considered completed. At that point, the
administrator shall ensure that the selected contractor will continue the
project until once again certifying that the project is completed, at which
time the project will again be inspected by the city for the sole purpose of
determining whether the property or premises complies with the notice of
violation.
   (k)   The administrator may only initiate project plans for projects costing
$20,000 or less. No project plan may be initiated by the administrator unless
the project cost is less than or equal to the amount in the Dallas Tomorrow
Fund at any one time. The administrator shall produce a biannual report of
available funds and appropriated funds in the Dallas Tomorrow Fund. If the fund
is temporarily out of money, the administrator may not initiate a project plan
until such time as there are additional funds equal to or exceeding the amount
of the project's cost. If during work on the project, additional funds are
needed in order to ensure that the property or premises complies with the
notice of violation, the administrator may approve additional funds, not to
exceed 25 percent of the maximum project amount allowed by this subsection, for
work that was necessary to bring the property or premises into compliance with
the notice of violation, but that was not anticipated in the original project
plan. Substantial changes to the project plan must be approved in writing by
the person who filed the request with the Dallas Tomorrow Fund administrator.
(Ord. Nos. 25927; 29618; 30236)
ARTICLE V.
PUBLIC SAFETY NUISANCE.
SEC. 27-17.   PUBLIC SAFETY NUISANCE.
   (a)   An unsafe property is a public safety nuisance and subject to
abatement in accordance with Section
31-10. For purposes of this section, UNSAFE PROPERTY means any property that:
      (1)   either:
         (A)   has received a citation in the previous 12 months for violating
Sections
27-11(c)(6), (d)(12), (d)(17), (h), or (j); or
         (B)   qualifies as a habitual criminal property or a habitual nuisance
property as defined in
Article VIII; and
      (2)   is located in an area identified by the office of emergency
management and crisis response as being elevated risk by the risk terrain
model. RISK TERRAIN MODEL means the risk assessment technique and diagnostic
method for identifying the spatial attractors of criminal behavior and
environmental factors that are conducive to crime.
   (b)   Unsafe properties must implement CPTED principles. CPTED means crime
prevention through environmental design and is a multi-disciplinary approach to
reducing criminal behavior through environmental design by integrating the
following concepts, among others, on property: natural surveillance that
eliminates hiding places for people to engage in crime unnoticed; clear
delineation of private space from public space; and controlled access onto
private property. (Ord. Nos. 32344; 32864)
SECS. 27-18 THRU 27-23. (Repealed by Ord. 25522)
ARTICLE VI.
MASTER METERED UTILITIES.
SEC. 27-24.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   (1)   MASTER METERED APARTMENT BUILDING means a building or group of
buildings on a single premise containing three or more dwelling units that are
leased to occupants who are provided one or more utility services for which
they do not pay the utility company directly.
   (2)   PROPERTY MANAGER means the person, firm, or corporation that collects
or receives rental payments, or has responsibility for paying utility bills for
a master metered apartment building.
   (3)   UTILITY COMPANY means the entity providing gas, electric, or water and
wastewater service to a master metered apartment building.
   (4)   UTILITY INTERRUPTION means the termination of utility service to a
master metered apartment building by a utility company for nonpayment of billed
service. (Ord. Nos. 16232; 18591; 19234; 30236)
SEC. 27-25.   RECORDS OF OWNERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT MAINTAINED BY UTILITY
COMPANIES.
   (a)   Before providing utility service to a new account at a master metered
apartment building, a utility company shall obtain the names and addresses of:
      (1)   the owner or owners of the building;
      (2)   the property manager responsible for paying the utility bills; and
      (3)   the first lienholder, if any.
   (b)   The utility company shall maintain a record of the information
obtained under Subsection (a) and shall make it available to the director upon
request.
   (c)   The applicant for utility service shall provide the information
required in Subsection (a) to the utility company. (Ord. Nos. 16232; 18591;
19234)
SEC. 27-26.   NOTICE TO TENANTS.
   (a)   The owner or property manager of a master metered apartment building
shall post and maintain a notice in accordance with Subsection (b) containing
the name, address, and telephone number of the person with authority and
responsibility for making payment to the utility companies for utility bills.
The owner or property manager shall correct the notice within 10 days of any
change in the information given in the notice.
   (b)   The notice must be posted in a conspicuous place in a common area of
the master metered apartment building so that it is accessible to tenants at
all times, easily readable, protected from the weather, and visible from the
common area. For the purpose of this section a common area includes, but is not
limited to, a common corridor or passageway, a laundry room, the area adjacent
to a grouped mail box location, or an area adjacent to the manager’s office.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section the notice may be placed on the inside
of a glass door or window in the manager’s office or a tenant’s apartment so
long as all requirements of Subsection (b) are met.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly removes or mutilates a
posted notice required under Subsection (a).
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (d) if the person was
authorized by the owner or property manager to replace the notice in order to
correct the information. (Ord. Nos. 16232; 18591; 19234)
SEC. 27-27.   NOTICE OF UTILITY INTERRUPTION.
   (a)   A utility company shall make a reasonable effort (including, but not
limited to messenger delivery) to provide notice of a pending utility
interruption to tenants of a master metered apartment building.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly:
      (1)   interferes with an employee of a utility company posting notices of
a utility interruption at dwelling units of a master metered apartment
building; or
      (2)   removes a notice of utility interruption posted at a dwelling unit
of a master metered apartment building.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(2) that the person
is the resident of the dwelling unit from which notice was removed.
   (d)   A utility company shall notify the city attorney of any utility
interruption to a master metered apartment dwelling unit resulting from a
violation of Section
27-28 of this article. Notice must be given, in writing, not more than three
days after utility service is interrupted.
   (e)   A person who is responsible for bills received for electric utility
service or gas utility service provided to an apartment, a leased or owner-
occupied condominium, or one or more buildings containing at least 10 dwellings
that receive electric utility service or gas utility service that is master
metered but not submetered, shall comply with the notice requirements in
Subchapter G of Chapter 92 of the Texas Property Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos.
16232; 18591; 19234; 25522; 30236)
SEC. 27-28.   NONPAYMENT OF UTILITY BILLS - ESSENTIAL UTILITY SERVICE.
   (a)   The owner or property manager of a master metered apartment building
commits an offense if he fails to pay a utility bill and the nonpayment results
in the interruption to any dwelling unit of a utility service essential to the
habitability of the dwelling unit and to the health of the occupants. Essential
utility services are gas, electric, and water and wastewater services.
   (b)   The owner or property manager of a master metered apartment building
who violates Subsection (a) is guilty of a separate offense for each dwelling
unit to which utility service is interrupted.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the tenant
occupying a dwelling unit to which utility service is interrupted is in arrears
in rent to the owner or property manager of the master metered apartment
building. (Ord. Nos. 18591; 19234; 25522)
ARTICLE VII.
REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF RENTAL PROPERTIES AND CONDOMINIUMS.
SEC. 27-29.   AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this article and may by written
order establish such rules, regulations, or procedures, not inconsistent with
this article, as the director determines are necessary to discharge any duty
under or to effect the policy of this article. (Ord. Nos. 22205; 22695; 24481;
25522; 30236)
SEC. 27-30.   REGISTRATION AND POSTING REQUIREMENTS; DEFENSES.
   (a)   The owner of a rental property located in the city commits an offense
if he operates the rental property or otherwise allows a dwelling unit in a
rental property to be occupied or leased without first submitting a rental
registration application or annual renewal application that fully complies with
Section
27-31 of this article.
   (b)   A condominium association commits an offense if it governs, operates,
manages, or oversees a condominium or its common elements without first
submitting a registration application or annual renewal application that fully
complies with Section
27-31 of this article.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he, as a landlord or property manager,
allows a dwelling unit in a rental property to be occupied or leased without
first submitting a rental registration application or annual renewal
application that fully complies with Section
27-31 of this article.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if he, as an owner, landlord, or property
manager of a multitenant property or condominium association, fails to post, in
a conspicuous place in a common area of the property or as otherwise approved
by the director, the certificate of inspection score issued by the director.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if he, as an owner, landlord, or property
manager of a multitenant property, fails to provide each tenant, upon request,
with a copy of the rules of the multitenant property.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if he, as an owner, landlord, or property
manager of a multitenant property, operates that property or otherwise allows a
dwelling unit in that property to be occupied or leased without employing a
full-time manager to oversee the day-to-day operations of the property, if the
property has 12 or more units.
   (g)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
      (1)   at the time of notice of violation, no dwelling units in the rental
property are leased or offered for lease and the owner of the rental property
has filed with the director an exemption affidavit on a form provided by the
director;
      (2)   at the time of notice of violation, the owner of the single
dwelling unit rental property had rented the property to tenants for a total of
no more than 30 consecutive days during the preceding 12 months;
      (3)   at the time of the notice of violation, the owner of a single
dwelling unit rental property had a homestead exemption for the property on
file with the county appraisal district in which the rental property is
located; or
      (4)   at the time of the notice of violation:
         (A)   the property was registered as a short-term rental in accordance
with
Chapter 42B; and
         (B)   applicable hotel occupancy taxes levied on the property under
Articles V and
VII of Chapter 44 had been collected and remitted in full. (Ord. Nos. 22205;
22695; 24481; 25522; 30236; 32058; 32473; 33224)
SEC. 27-31.   REGISTRATION; FEES; RENEWAL.
   (a)   Rental properties and condominium associations must provide a complete
registration to the director annually.
   (b)   A registration application for a multitenant property, single dwelling
unit rental property or condominium association that was not previously
required to register must be submitted before the owner leases the property or
before any condominium units are occupied.
   (c)   Registration expires one year after the registration date.
   (d)   The annual registration fee, which includes the initial inspection
fee, for a multitenant property is an amount equal to $13.00 times the total
number of dwelling units, whether occupied or unoccupied, in the multitenant
property.
   (e)   The annual registration fee for a single dwelling unit rental property
is:
      (1)   $53 between October 1, 2023 and September 30, 2024 per single
dwelling unit rental property.
      (2)   $64 between October 1, 2024 and September 30, 2025 per single
dwelling unit rental property.
      (3)   $74 on or after October 1, 2025 per single dwelling unit rental
property.
   (f)   No refund or prorating of a registration fee will be made.
   (g)   A registrant shall keep the information contained in its registration
application current and accurate. If there is any change in the application
information, the registrant shall promptly notify the director in writing of
the changes in information.
   (h)   A registration may be renewed by making application for a renewal in
accordance with this article on an electronic form provided by the director. In
the application for renewal the registrant shall certify that all information
in the then-current registration application is still accurate as of the date
of the renewal application or correct any information that is not accurate as
of the date of the renewal application. (Ord. Nos. 22205; 22695; 24481; 25522;
26455; 27458; 29306; 29753; 30236; 32058; 32556; 33224; 33232)
SEC. 27-32.   REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   An owner, landlord, or property manager of a condominium association, single
dwelling rental unit, or multitenant property must submit to the director a
registration application on an electronic form provided for that purpose by the
director. The application must contain the following true and correct
information:
      (1)   the name, mailing address, email address, and telephone number for:
         (A)   the owner of the rental property being registered or the name of
the condominium association being registered;
         (B)   the person or persons who can be contacted 24 hours a day, seven
days a week in the event of an emergency condition on the rental property. An
emergency condition includes any fire, natural disaster, collapse hazard, burst
pipe, lack of working utilities, serious police incident, or other condition
that requires an immediate response to avoid or minimize potential harm to the
rental property, neighboring property, the occupants of the property, or the
public.
         (C)   if the owner is not a natural person, then an agent, employee,
or officer of the owner or condominium association authorized to receive legal
notices and service of legal process on behalf of the owner or condominium
association, and, in the case of an entity required to be registered with the
State of Texas, the registered agent for service of process for the entity;
         (D)   the holder of any deed of trust or mortgage lien on the rental
property being registered;
         (E)   any insurance carriers providing casualty insurance to the owner
covering the rental property or condominium association being registered;
         (F)   any agent, employee, officer, landlord, property manager, and
other person in control of, managing, or operating the rental property or
condominium association on behalf of the owner or condominium association; and
      (2)   if the property being registered is part of a multitenant property
or condominium association:
         (A)   the name, all legal addresses comprising the property, and the
main telephone number, if any, of the property;
         (B)   the number of dwelling units, buildings, and swimming pools
located on the property and the total number of bedrooms located on the
property (a dwelling unit with no separate bedroom will be counted as one
bedroom); and
         (C)   the name, mailing address, telephone number, and email address
for any condominium association applicable to the property;
      (3)   if the owner of the rental property is not a natural person, the
form of the entity, including but not limited to, a corporation, general
partnership, limited partnership, trust, or limited liability company, and the
state or foreign jurisdiction of organization and registration, if other than
the State of Texas, as well as, the name and mailing address for each principal
officer, director, general partner, trustee, manager, member, or other person
charged with the operation, control, or management of the entity;
      (4)   a photocopy of the owner's current driver's license or other
government-issued personal identification card containing a photograph of the
owner, if the owner is a natural person; and
      (5)   any additional information the registrant desires to include or
that the director deems necessary to aid in the determination of whether the
registration application will be deemed complete. (Ord. Nos. 22205; 22695;
22906; 24481; 25522; 27695; 28019; 28423; 29879; 30236; 32058)
SEC. 27-33.   REVIEW AND ACCEPTANCE OF REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (a)   Upon receiving a registration application, the director shall review
the application for completeness.
   (b)   If the director finds that the registrant submitted a complete
application and paid the correct annual registration fee, the director shall
promptly notify the registrant that his or her application has been received
and found to be complete.
   (c)   If the director finds that the registrant has failed to submit a
complete application or pay the annual registration fee or that any of the
information on the application is materially incorrect or misleading, the
director shall promptly notify the registrant that the application is defective
or incomplete and the director shall list the defects or missing items. (Ord.
Nos. 22205; 22695; 24481; 25522; 27458; 30236)
SEC. 27-34.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 30236)
SEC. 27-35.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 30236)
SEC. 27-36.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 30236)
SEC. 27-37.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 30236)
SEC. 27-38.   REGISTRANT’S RECORDS.
   (a)   Each registrant shall maintain at a single location the business
records of the rental property or condominium association being registered. If
the registrant refuses to make those records available for inspection by the
director or a peace officer, the director or peace officer may seek a court
order to inspect the records.
   (b)   Records that must be maintained by the registrant include:
      (1)   the current certificate of occupancy issued for the rental
property, if required;
      (2)   deeds or other instruments evidencing ownership for the rental
property;
      (3)   a current rental registration application or renewal application;
      (4)   the pool logs, pool permits, and manager of pool operation
certificates for any swimming pool on the rental property, if required;
      (5)   leases or rental agreements applicable to the rental property;
      (6)   the crime prevention addendum for each tenant of the property, as
required under Section
27-43 of this article;
      (7)   records of attendance at four crime watch meetings in the last
calendar year, as required by Section
27-44 of this article, unless the property has not been operated as a rental
property during part of the last calendar year;
      (8)   a record of each tenant complaint, describing the complaint and how
the complaint was resolved, and which record can only be viewed by the current
tenant of the unit complained of and by the city, upon the city's request;
      (9)   a copy of the inspection report described in Section
27-32(b)(5) of this article; and
      (10)   any other records deemed necessary by the director for the
administration and enforcement of this article. (Ord. Nos. 22205; 22695; 24481;
25522; 29306; 30236; 32058)
SEC. 27-39.   REQUIRED EMERGENCY RESPONSE.
   (a)   An owner of a rental property and a condominium association shall
provide the director with the name, address, and telephone number of a person
or persons who can be contacted 24 hours a day, seven days a week in the event
of an emergency condition on the property. An emergency condition includes any
fire, natural disaster, collapse hazard, burst pipe, lack of working utilities,
serious police incident, or other condition that requires an immediate response
to prevent harm to the property, the occupants of the property, or the public.
   (b)   The owner of the rental property and a condominium association shall
notify the director within 10 days of any change in the emergency response
information.
   (c)   The owner of a rental property or condominium association, or an
authorized agent thereof, must arrive at the property within one hour after the
contact person named in the registration application is notified by the city or
emergency response personnel that an emergency condition has occurred on the
property. (Ord. Nos. 25522; 30236)
SEC. 27-40.   FAILURE TO PAY AD VALOREM TAXES.
   A registrant, excluding a condominium association, for a property subject to
registration under this article shall not allow the payment of ad valorem taxes
owed in connection with the property to become delinquent. (Ord. Nos. 22205;
22695; 24481; 25522; 30236)
SEC. 27-41.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 30236)
SEC. 27-42.   PROPERTY INSPECTION; INSPECTION AND REINSPECTION FEES; SELF-
CERTIFICATION PROCESS.
   (a)   The director shall conduct a graded inspection of each multitenant
property not more frequently than once a year. Graded inspections may be
conducted more frequently by the director, when determined to be in the
interest of the public health, safety, and welfare. The director, in accordance
with Subsection (d) of this section, shall also conduct any subsequent
inspections of any property failing the graded inspection. The director may
conduct nongraded comprehensive inspections on a multitenant property at any
time the director deems necessary. The director, in accordance with Subsection
(e) of this section, may allow a multitenant property owner to conduct a self-
certification inspection of the property.
      (1)   After completing a graded inspection, the director shall timely
issue the property owner or manager a certificate of inspection that includes
the inspection score.
      (2)   Multitenant properties that were constructed and issued a
certificate of occupancy within the preceding five years are not subject to a
graded inspection.
   (b)   The director may conduct inspections of single dwelling rental
properties at any time the director deems necessary when determined to be in
the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare. The director, in
accordance with Subsection (e) of this section, may allow a single dwelling
unit rental property owner to conduct a self-certification inspection of the
property.
   (c)   The inspections conducted pursuant to this section are in addition to
any inspections conducted under Section
27-5 of this chapter.
   (d)   The director may use a property condition assessment tool to determine
the frequency and the scope of graded inspections. If a property fails its
graded inspection, or if the graded inspection reveals a condition the director
determines to be a nuisance, the owner will be assessed fee for all subsequent
inspections of the property conducted for the purposes of determining whether
the owner has abated the nuisance or cured the deficiencies noted in the graded
inspection. Inspection fees will be assessed as follows:
      (1)   For a multitenant property, a re-inspection of the exterior and any
common area(s): $114 for each separate structure inspected.
      (2)   For a multitenant property, re-inspection of the interior: $96 for
each unit actually re-inspected.
      (3)   For re-inspection of a single dwelling unit rental property: $43
per single dwelling unit rental property.
      (4)   For a multitenant property, a re-inspection of swimming pool: $74
for each swimming pool re-inspected.
   (e)   The following process is required to qualify for the voluntary self-
certification process for rental properties deemed eligible by the director:
      (1)   Single dwelling unit and multitenant registrants, property owners,
or authorized agents:
         (A)   may choose a self-certification inspection at the time of
application and payment for rental registration;
         (B)   shall at the commencement of any tenancy, but prior to occupancy
by the tenant, conduct an interior and exterior inspection of each rental unit
and correct any deficiencies;
         (C)   shall have the tenant sign the director approved inspection form
upon the completion of every inspection;
         (D)   shall, if deemed eligible by the director, conduct annual
inspections of each rental unit;
         (E)   shall maintain director approved self-inspection forms for no
less than five years from the date any tenant vacates the property;
         (F)   shall provide inspection forms to the director within 72 hours
of a request from the director;
         (G)   shall provide a copy of all inspection forms and results
required in this subsection to the tenant no later than 10 calendar days after
the inspection is completed; and
         (H)   shall provide tenants with information concerning tenants'
rights and responsibilities on a form approved by the director prior to the
commencement of any tenancy.
      (2)   The director may conduct random audits of rental registrations to
determine compliance with the self-certification inspection provisions. If the
director determines the owner is not compliant with the self-certification
inspections, all rental units that were subject to the self-certification is
subject to inspection by the director using the approved form.
   (f)   For failure to have or display, at any time, required documentation,
including, but not limited to, permits, notices, licenses, records, or
certificates of occupancy, the fee is $146 multiplied by the total number of
units in multitenant property.
   (g)   The director shall provide the lists of the current graded inspection
scores and approved self-certified inspections for all registered rental
multitenant properties on the city's website. (Ord. Nos. 22205; 22695; 24481;
25522; 26598; 27185; 27695; 29879; 30236; 31332; 32058; 32556; 33224)
SEC. 27-42.1.   REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   Where a multitenant property is used or maintained in a manner that poses a
substantial danger of injury or an adverse health impact to any person or
property and is in violation of this ordinance, the Dallas Development Code,
other city ordinances, rules or regulations, or any local, state, or federal
laws or regulations, the director may ask the building official to revoke the
multitenant property's certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 30236)
SEC. 27-43.   CRIME PREVENTION ADDENDUM REQUIRED.
   (a)   The owner of a multitenant property shall require that every lease or
rental agreement, or renewal of a lease or rental agreement, executed after
September 1, 2004 include a crime prevention addendum complying with this
section.
   (b)   The owner of a single dwelling unit rental property shall require that
every lease or rental agreement, or renewal of a lease or rental agreement,
executed after January 1, 2017, include a crime prevention addendum complying
with this section.
   (c)   The crime prevention addendum must include the following information:
      (1)   The name, date of birth, driver's license number (or, if the person
does not have a driver's license, the number on any other government-issued
personal identification card containing a photograph of the person), and
signature of the tenant named in the lease or rental agreement and, if the
tenant will not be occupying the rental property, the name, date of birth,
driver's license number (or, if the person does not have a driver's license,
the number on any other government-issued personal identification card
containing a photograph of the person), and signature of the tenant or tenants
who will be occupying the property. The signatures required on the crime
prevention addendum must be separate and apart from the signatures used to
execute other provisions of the lease or rental agreement.
      (2)   A statement advising the tenant or tenants that the owner of the
rental property will initiate eviction proceedings if the tenant, or any guest
or co-occupant of the tenant, engages in any abatable criminal activity on the
premises of the rental property, as described in Subsection (d) of this
section.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, an abatable criminal activity includes
robbery or aggravated robbery; aggravated assault; murder; prostitution;
criminal gang activity; discharge of firearms; gambling; illegal manufacture,
sale, or use of drugs; illegal manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages; and
other crimes listed in Chapter 125 of the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies
Code, as amended.
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section
that the owner of the multitenant property used a Texas Apartment Association
lease contract for the lease or lease renewal. (Ord. Nos. 25522; 25774; 30236)
SEC. 27-44.   ATTENDANCE AT CRIME WATCH SAFETY MEETINGS.
   (a)   The owner of a multitenant property shall attend at least four crime
watch meetings each calendar year. The meetings attended must be held by crime
watch organizations consisting of business owners, single-family residential
property owners, or managers, employees, or tenants of multifamily dwellings,
or any combination of those groups, gathered for the purpose of improving the
quality of life in and around the properties, promoting crime prevention,
reducing criminal opportunity, and encouraging cooperation with the Dallas
Police Department. A crime watch attendance certificate, provided by a crime
watch chair, verifying that the crime watch meeting was attended by the owner
of the multitenant property, or by the person designated to attend meetings for
the property, must be maintained with the property's records and submitted to
the director upon request.
   (b)   If unable to personally attend every crime watch meeting required by
this section, the owner of a multitenant property may designate another person
to attend the meetings. A person may not be designated to attend crime watch
meetings for more than five separate multitenant properties. (Ord. Nos. 24481;
25522; 27458; 29306; 30236; 32058)
SEC. 27-44.1.   PRESUMPTIONS.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided in this article, 30 business days is deemed
prompt and sufficient notice by the city.
   (b)   Any notice to be provided by the city pursuant to this article shall
be deemed effective when personally delivered to the intended addressee or
mailed by first class U.S. mail, certified mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to the intended addressee at the last applicable address provided in
the registration of the rental property in question. Mailed notice shall be
deemed received and effective three days after the date of mailing whether the
notice was actually received or not or whether the notice was returned
unclaimed or undeliverable.
   (c)   Notices delivered to one tenant of a dwelling unit in a rental
property shall be deemed effective as to all tenants and occupants of that
dwelling unit.
   (d)   Notice delivered to one owner of a rental property shall be deemed
effective as to all owners of a rental property.
   (e)   Notice to an owner of a rental property shall be deemed effective if
made to an agent, employee, officer, landlord, or property manager authorized
to act on behalf of the owner or identified in the registration for the rental
property. For purposes of this article, an owner may act by and through an
agent, employee, officer, landlord, or property manager authorized to act on
behalf of the owner or identified in the registration for a rental property for
that purpose.
   (f)   Notice to a condominium association with respect to common areas or
exteriors of a condominium shall be effective as to all owners with an interest
in that common area or those exteriors. If there is not a condominium
association existing and in good standing with authority over common areas or
exteriors of a condominium, notice to an owner of a common interest in the
common areas or exterior shall be effective as to all other owners with a
common interest in the common area or exterior.
   (g)   In lieu of originals, true and correct copies of any instruments or
documents required of an owner or registrant shall be sufficient.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, affidavits submitted to the city must bear the
original signatures of the affiant and the authority who administered the oath.
   (h)   Any affidavits required in connection with this article must be made
by a natural individual having personal knowledge of the matters certified and
duly signed and sworn to under oath before an authority authorized to
administer oaths. (Ord. 30236)
ARTICLE VIII.
HABITUAL CRIMINAL AND NUISANCE PROPERTIES.
SEC. 27-45.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   Consistent with the findings of fact in Section
27-1 of this chapter, the purpose of this article is to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the people of the city of Dallas by obtaining an owner's
compliance with minimum property conditions and lawful operations, which
compliance is likely to reduce certain criminal activity on property where that
criminal activity is so prevalent as to render the property a habitual criminal
property or a habitual nuisance property. Reducing the crime rate in the city
of Dallas is essential to making properties safe, sanitary, and fit for human
habitation and for improving quality of life for occupants of surrounding
properties.
   (b)   This article does not create a private cause of action or expand
existing tort liability against a property owner. This article is not a
prerequisite to any suit and does not in any way impair the city's ability to
file a lawsuit under Chapter 125 of the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code,
as amended, or under any other law. (Ord. Nos. 30714; 32057)
SEC. 27-46.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   ABATABLE CRIMINAL ACTIVITY means those activities listed in Chapter
125 of the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, as amended. The term does
not include crimes of family violence.
      (2)   CHIEF OF POLICE OR CHIEF means the chief of the police department
of the city or the chief's designee.
      (3)   CODE VIOLATIONS mean violations of the following provisions of the
Dallas City Code:
         (A)   Section 107.6, "Overcrowding," of
Chapter 16, "Dallas Fire Code."
         (B)   Section
7A-18, "Duty to Maintain Premises Free from Litter."
         (C)   Section
18-13, "Growth to Certain Height Prohibited; Offenses."
         (D)   Subsections (c) through (j) of Section
27-11, "Minimum Property Standards; Responsibilities of Owner," of
Chapter 27, "Minimum Property Standards."
         (E)   Section
30-1, "Loud and Disturbing Noises and Vibrations," of
Chapter 30, "Noise."
         (F)   Section
30-4, "Loudspeakers and Amplifiers," of
Chapter 30, "Noise."
         (G)   Chapter 38A, "Promoters."
         (H)   Sections
43-126.9,
43-126.10, and
43-126.11 of Division 3, "Valet Parking Services," of
Article VI, "License for the Use of Public Right-of-Way," of
Chapter 43, "Streets and Sidewalks."
         (I)   Section
51A-6.102, "Noise Regulations," of
Article VI, "Environmental Performance Standards," of
Chapter 51A, "Dallas Development Code."
         (J)   Conditions in planned development or specific use permit
ordinances regulating outdoor live music, outdoor patios, the operation of
outdoor speakers and amplification, and hours of operation of a use.
      (4)   CPTED means crime prevention through environmental design and is a
multi-disciplinary approach to reducing criminal behavior through environmental
design by integrating the following concepts, among others, on property:
natural surveillance that eliminates hiding places for people to engage in
crime unnoticed; clear delineation of private space from public space; and
controlled access onto private property.
      (5)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department of code compliance.
      (6)   HABITUAL CRIMINAL PROPERTY means a property that is described in
Section
27-48(a).
      (7)   HABITUAL NUISANCE PROPERTY means a property that is described in
Section
27-48(b).
      (8)   OWNER means a person or entity who has ownership or title of real
property, including, but not limited to:
         (i)   the holder of fee simple title;
         (ii)   the holder of a life estate;
         (iii)   the holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five
years or more;
         (iv)   the buyer in a contract for deed;
         (v)   a mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of real
property; and
         (vi)   the named grantee in the last recorded deed. (Ord. Nos. 30714;
32057; 32239; 32329)
SEC. 27-47.   AUTHORITY OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE AND DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The chief of police shall implement and enforce this article as it
pertains to abatable criminal properties and may by written order establish
such rules, regulations, or procedures, not inconsistent with this article, as
the chief of police determines are necessary to discharge any duty under or to
effect the purpose of this article as it pertains to abatable criminal
properties.
   (b)   The director, in collaboration with the chief of the fire department,
shall implement and enforce this article as it pertains to abatable nuisance
properties and may by written order establish such rules, regulations, or
procedures, not inconsistent with this article, as the director determines are
necessary to discharge any duty under or to effect the purpose of this article
as it pertains to abatable nuisance properties. (Ord. Nos. 30714; 32057)
SEC. 27-48.   PRESUMPTIONS.
   (a)   A property is presumed a habitual criminal property if the property is
the site:
      (1)   of five or more abatable criminal activities within 365 days
resulting in either a report of a law enforcement agency documenting an
investigation of an abatable criminal activity on the property or enforcement
action against any person associated with the abatable criminal activity on the
property; and
      (2)   at which persons have historically committed abatable criminal
activities, according to recent crime data.
   (b)   A property is presumed a habitual nuisance property if the property is
the site of three or more citations for code violations within 365 days.
   (c)   An owner of a habitual criminal or nuisance property is presumed to
have knowingly tolerated the abatable criminal activity or code violations at
the owner's property by failing to take reasonable steps, including those
outlined in Section
27-49(b)(1) of this chapter, as amended, to abate the abatable criminal
activity or code violations.
   (d)   The presumptions in this section are rebuttable at the accord meeting
pursuant to Section
27-49 of this chapter, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 30714; 32057)
SEC. 27-49.   ACCORD MEETING.
   (a)   If the chief of police or director determines that the presumptions in
Section
27-48 are satisfied, the chief or director shall notify the owner of the
property, in writing, of the chief's or director's preliminary determination
and shall provide the owner with notice to attend an accord meeting. The notice
must include a copy of this article.
   (b)   At the accord meeting, the following applies:
      (1)   The presumed owner may present evidence that the person is not the
owner or that the owner has taken reasonable steps to abate the abatable
criminal activity or code violations, including, without limitation, that the:
         (i)   owner has implemented CPTED principles at the property;
         (ii)   owner has implemented monitoring and surveillance systems at
the property;
         (iii)   owner is in compliance with all regulations governing the
owner's business;
         (iv)   owner is enforcing lease clauses related to reducing abatable
criminal activity or code violations, such as tenant screening, enforcement of
property rules, and regular tenant verification;
         (v)   owner is communicating abatable criminal activity to the chief
and cooperating with the chief, as requested;
         (vi)   owner is demonstrating to the director that the owner is taking
proactive steps to abate code violations on the property; and
         (vii)   property is in compliance with the standards set out in this
code.
      (2)   The city attorney may attend the meeting as the chief's or
director's legal counsel and the owner may bring his or her legal counsel.
   (c)   The chief or director shall make all reasonable efforts to schedule
the accord meeting during a time when the owner is available but not later than
30 days from the date the accord meeting notice is deemed received or is
actually received by the owner, whichever date is sooner.
   (d)   Not later than 30 days after the date of the accord meeting, the chief
or director shall provide the owner with notice of the chief's or director's
final determination as to the presumptions under Section
27-48. Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon request of the owner during the
accord meeting, the chief or director may delay the notice of determination up
to 60 days after the accord meeting, during which time the owner may present
additional evidence under Section
27-49(b)(1). If the owner does not appear for the accord meeting, the chief's
or director's determination is final as of the date of the accord meeting
provided in the notice.
   (e)   An owner who is provided notice pursuant to this article commits an
offense if the owner fails to attend an accord meeting. (Ord. Nos. 30714;
32057)
SEC. 27-50.   ANNUAL REVIEW.
   Each year, not later than 30 days after the date the chief's or director's
determination as to the presumptions under Section
27-48 are final, the chief or director shall send a notice to the owner as to
whether the presumptions under Section
27-48 are still satisfied. The chief or director may, at any time, determine
that the presumptions under Section
27-48 are no longer satisfied and shall then notify the owner of the chief's
determination. (Ord. Nos. 30714; 32057)
SEC. 27-51.   APPEAL FROM CHIEF'S OR DIRECTOR'S DETERMINATION.
   (a)   The chief's or director's determinations under Sections 27-49 and 27-
50 are final unless the owner files a written appeal to the permit and license
appeal board. The appeal must be filed with the city secretary not later than
10 calendar days after the date the owner receives notice of the chief's or
director's final determination. A person who does not attend the accord meeting
is not entitled to an appeal under this section for one year after the accord
meeting date in the notice. Only the owner is entitled to an appeal under this
article.
   (b)   If a written request for an appeal hearing is filed under Subsection
(a) with the city secretary within the 10-day limit, the permit and license
appeal board shall hear the appeal. The city secretary shall set a date for the
hearing not later than 30 days after the date the appeal is filed.
   (c)   In deciding the appeal, the permit and license appeal board is limited
to the issues of whether the presumptions in Section
27-48 are satisfied.
   (d)   If a conflict exists between this article and
Article IX of Chapter 2, this article controls. (Ord. Nos. 30714; 32057)
SEC. 27-52.   PLACARDING; CONDITIONS; INSPECTIONS; NOTIFICATION TO PLAN
COMMISSION.
   For a property that has been finally determined to satisfy the presumptions
in Section
27-48 the following applies:
      (1)   Placarding. The chief or director may require the owner to place a
placard provided by the city on or near the front door or at any main entrance
to the structure or dwelling unit. For multitenant and commercial properties,
the chief or director may also require the owner to place a placard in a
conspicuous place in a common area of the property.
         (A)   The placard must be visible at all times and must state one of
the following:
   "THE DALLAS POLICE DEPARTMENT HAS DECLARED THIS SITE A HABITUAL CRIMINAL
PROPERTY UNDER ARTICLE VIII, CHAPTER 27, OF THE DALLAS CITY CODE. IF YOU HAVE
QUESTIONS, PLEASE CALL DPD AT [TELEPHONE NUMBER DETERMINED BY THE CHIEF]. IF
YOU SEE SOMETHING SUSPICIOUS OCCURRING AT THIS PROPERTY OR IN AN EMERGENCY,
DIAL 911."
   "THE DALLAS DEPARTMENT OF CODE COMPLIANCE HAS DECLARED THIS SITE A HABITUAL
NUISANCE PROPERTY UNDER ARTICLE VIII, CHAPTER 27, OF THE DALLAS CITY CODE. IF
YOU HAVE QUESTIONS, PLEASE CALL CODE COMPLIANCE AT [TELEPHONE NUMBER DETERMINED
BY THE DIRECTOR]. IF YOU WITNESS VIOLATIONS PERTAINING TO NOISE, OVERCROWDING,
OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC INTERFERENCE OCCURRING AT THIS PROPERTY, REPORT TO 311."
         (B)   A person commits an offense if the person:
            (1)   fails to place a required placard on the property and keep it
posted for the duration required by the chief director; or
            (2)   without authority from the chief or director, removes or
destroys the placard.
      (2)   Conditions. During the time a property is declared a habitual
criminal or nuisance property, the chief or director may place conditions on
the operation of the business at the property. The owner of the property and
the operator of the business are responsible for compliance with any conditions
put on the property. Some conditions the chief or director may put on the
property include but are not limited to:
         (A)   Minimum number of security guards at the property, including
parking lots, at all times or at certain times of operation.
         (B)   Patrol property and adjacent areas to monitor loitering,
vandalism, excessive noise, crowd control, and illegal acts.
         (C)   Protocols to ensure prompt and orderly crowd dispersal from the
property including on-site and off-site parking areas.
         (D)   Limit hours of entertainment activities including live music and
music disseminated by a disc jockey.
         (E)   Additional protocols, including identification scanners, to
ensure age restrictions of patrons is strictly enforced.
         (F)   Litter control protocols.
         (G)   Use of a mechanical counting device to ensure maximum occupancy
limits.
         (H)   Bar/club/restaurant training for all or certain establishment
employees.
      (3)   Inspections. The chief or director may inspect the property for
compliance with the conditions and activities in Section
27-49(b)(1) or any other condition or activity the chief or director
determines, in light of the chief's or director's training and experience, will
reduce abatable criminal activity or code violations at the property.
      (4)   Notification to city plan commission. If an establishment operates
under a specific use permit, the chief or director shall notify the city plan
commission that the property is a habitual criminal or nuisance property. (Ord.
Nos. 30714; 32057)
SEC. 27-53.   HABITUAL CRIMINAL PROPERTY FEES.
   For a property that has been finally determined to satisfy the presumptions
in Section
27-48, the owner shall pay a monthly fee to the city according to the table
below for each month that the presumptions in Section
27-48 are satisfied. In this section, residential and nonresidential refer to
those uses as defined in the Dallas Development Code, as amended. The fees are
not refundable in whole or in part.
RESIDENTIAL                   MONTHLY FEE
(by number of dwelling units)
RESIDENTIAL                   MONTHLY FEE
(by number of dwelling units)
0-2                           $3,332
3-20                          $6,029
21-59                         $7,620
60-250                        $9,722
251-500                       $12,184
501-1,000                     $11,016
1,001 or more                 $12,276
 
 
NONRESIDENTIAL                             MONTHLY FEE
(by square footage of largest improvement)
0-4,999                                    $5,342
5,000-9,999                                $6,461
10,000-59,999                              $7,730
60,000-99,999                              $9,629
100,000 or more                            $11,067
 
(Ord. Nos. 30714; 32057; 32310; 32329; 33232)
SEC. 27-53.1.   HABITUAL NUISANCE PROPERTY FEES.
   For a property that has been finally determined to satisfy the presumptions
in Section 27-48 the owner shall pay a monthly fee to the city according to the
table below for each month that the presumptions in Section
27-48 are satisfied. In this section, residential and nonresidential refer to
those uses as defined in the Dallas Development Code, as amended. The fees are
not refundable in whole or in part.
RESIDENTIAL                   MONTHLY FEE
(by number of dwelling units)
RESIDENTIAL                   MONTHLY FEE
(by number of dwelling units)
0-2                           $1,003
3-20                          $1,600
21-59                         $1,699
60-250                        $1,833
251-500                       $3,016
501-1,000                     $2,999
1,001 or more                 $3,099
 
 
NONRESIDENTIAL                             MONTHLY FEE
(by square footage of largest improvement)
0-4,999                                    $1,599
5,000-9,999                                $1,682
10,000-59,999                              $1,790
60,000-99,999                              $3,225
100,000 or more                            $3,274
 
(Ord. No. 33232)
SEC. 27-54.   DELIVERY OF NOTICES.
   Any notice to be provided by the city pursuant to this article shall be
deemed effective if made to the owner. Notice is effective when:
      (1)   personally delivered to the owner; or
      (2)   mailed by certified U.S. mail, with return receipt requested, and
addressed to the owner at the last address provided in the registration of the
property under
Article VII of this chapter, as amended, or, if the property is not subject to
registration under this chapter, then to the last address in the central
appraisal district records. Mailed notice shall be deemed received and
effective three days after the date of mailing whether the notice was actually
received or whether the notice was returned unclaimed or undeliverable. (Ord.
Nos. 30714; 32057)
SECS. 27-55 THRU 27-58.
(Repealed by Ord. 30236)
ARTICLE IX.
RESERVED.
SECS. 27-59 THRU 27-72.
(Repealed by Ord. 30236)
CHAPTER 28
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
28-1.   Short title.
Sec.
28-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-3.   Applicability of traffic regulations in parks, public housing projects
and public hospital grounds.
Sec.
28-4.   Authority to remove vehicles; redemption; fees.
Sec.
28-5.   Release of impounded vehicles to lienholders.
Sec.
28-5.1.   Authority to immobilize vehicles; redemption; fees.
ARTICLE II.
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION.
Division 1. Traffic Engineer.
Sec.
28-6.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-7.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-8.   Traffic engineer - Duties.
Sec.
28-9.   Traffic engineer - Appointment of technicians and clerical staff; fees
for services.
Sec.
28-10.   Emergency and experimental regulations.
Division 2. Traffic Division.
Sec.
28-11.   Establishment and control.
Sec.
28-12.   Duties generally.
Sec.
28-13.   Records of traffic violations.
Sec.
28-14.   Investigation of accidents.
Sec.
28-15.   Traffic accident reports.
Sec.
28-16.   Same - Submission of annual traffic safety reports.
Sec.
28-17.   Traffic accident studies.
ARTICLE III.
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
Sec.
28-18.   Authority of police and fire department officials.
Sec.
28-19.   Parking enforcement officers.
Sec.
28-20.   Obedience to chapter required; penalty.
Sec.
28-20.1.   Presumption in fleeing from a police officer.
ARTICLE IV.
ACCIDENTS.
Sec.
28-21.   Intentional collisions.
Sec.
28-22.   Duty to give information and render aid.
Sec.
28-23.   Presumption in hit and run accidents.
ARTICLE V.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
Sec.
28-24.   Authority to install.
Sec.
28-24.1.   Traffic barricade manual.
Sec.
28-24.2.   Fees for plan reviews and field adjustments.
Sec.
28-25.   Authorized installation presumed.
Sec.
28-26.   Parking designations; authority to install.
Sec.
28-26.1.   Bus lane designations; authority to install; prohibition; exception.
Sec.
28-27.   Manual and specifications.
Sec.
28-27.1.   Placement of crime watch signs and volunteers in patrol signs.
Sec.
28-28.   Testing under actual conditions of traffic.
Sec.
28-29.   Existing devices affirmed and ratified.
Sec.
28-30.   Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
Sec.
28-31.   Interference with devices or railroad signs or signals.
Sec.
28-32.   Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones and mark
traffic lanes.
Sec.
28-33.   Traffic engineer to erect signs designating pedestrianways.
Sec.
28-34.   Bicycles, motorcycles, etc., prohibited from using pedestrianways.
Sec.
28-34.1.   Installation, removal, and repair of speed bumps in alleys; fees.
ARTICLE VI.
OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
Division 1. Generally.
Sec.
28-35.   Backing into intersection prohibited.
Sec.
28-36.   Operation upon parkways.
Sec.
28-37.   Identification of funeral procession.
Sec.
28-38.   Funeral or other procession; operation of vehicles.
Sec.
28-39.   Same - Driving through prohibited.
Sec.
28-40.   Operation of motorcycles, etc.
Sec.
28-41.   Riding in portions of vehicles not designed or equipped for
passengers.
Sec.
28-41.1.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-41.1.1.   Restrictions on the use of motor assisted scootersand electric
bicycles.
Sec.
28-41.2.   Regulating the use of hand-held mobile telephones and mobile
communication devices in school zones.
Sec.
28-42.   Driving on Four-Way Place and Stone Place.
Sec.
28-42.1.   Cruising prohibited in designated areas.
Division 2. Speed Regulations.
Sec.
28-43.   Speeds greater than 30 miles per hour on public streets or 15 miles
per hour on public alleys not reasonable or prudent.
Sec.
28-44.   Streets other than expressways and freeways.
Sec.
28-45.   Expressways and freeways.
Sec.
28-46.   Streets in park areas.
Sec.
28-47.   Maximum speed limits; determination.
Sec.
28-48.   Same - Alteration.
Sec.
28-49.   Posting of speed limit signs.
Sec.
28-50.   Speed in school zones; signs; designated streets.
Sec.
28-51.   Speed in parking lot of Dallas Convention Center.
Sec.
28-52.   Speed in the Dallas City Hall Parking Garage.
Sec.
28-52.1.   Speed in the Bullington Street Truck Terminal.
Division 3. Turning Movements.
Sec.
28-53.   Obedience to no-turn signs.
Sec.
28-54.   Limitation on U Turns.
Sec.
28-55.   Left turns restricted when emerging from or entering alleys or private
driveways in the central business district.
Sec.
28-56.   Central business district defined.
Sec.
28-57.   Reserved.
Division 4. Stops.
Sec.
28-58.   Vehicles to stop when traffic is obstructed.
Division 5. Operation of Vehicles near Vulnerable Road Users.
Sec.
28-58.1.   Definition.
Sec.
28-58.2.   Protection of vulnerable road users.
ARTICLE VII.
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
Sec.
28-59.   One-way streets and alleys.
Sec.
28-60.   One-way streets in school zones.
ARTICLE VIII.
PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHTS AND DUTIES.
Sec.
28-61.   Duties of pedestrians while on sidewalks.
Sec.
28-61.1.   Standing and walking in certain areas prohibited.
Sec.
28-62.   Entering or alighting from vehicle; loading and unloading so not to
interfere with traffic.
Sec.
28-63.   Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted.
Sec.
28-63.1.   Prohibiting crossing in central business district other than at
crosswalk.
Sec.
28-63.2.   Designation of one-way pedestrian zones.
Sec.
28-63.3.   Solicitations to occupants of vehicles on public roadways
prohibited.
ARTICLE IX.
SIZE AND WEIGHT OF VEHICLES.
Sec.
28-64.   Weight of load on enumerated bridges, per axle.
Sec.
28-65.   Vehicles carrying greater loads than as required by Section
28-64.
Sec.
28-66.   Civil liability for violation of article.
Sec.
28-67.   Signs warning of maximum load limit on bridges.
Sec.
28-68.   Routes for over-size equipment; damage caused by over-size equipment.
ARTICLE X.
TRUCK ROUTES.
Sec.
28-69.   Operation within central business district; boundaries of central
business district defined.
Sec.
28-70.   Operation in public parks.
Sec.
28-71.   Designated for trailers, semitrailers or pole trailers.
Sec.
28-72.   Departure from designated routes; hours on residential streets.
Sec.
28-73.   Same - Justification of departure.
Sec.
28-74.   Signs.
Sec.
28-75.   Alternate routes.
ARTICLE XI.
STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING GENERALLY.
Division 1. Generally.
Sec.
28-76.   Obedience to signs.
Sec.
28-76.1.   Unattended vehicles presumed left by owner.
Sec.
28-76.2.   Illegally stopped vehicles; may be required to move.
Sec.
28-76.3.   Parking ban.
Sec.
28-76.4.   Parking defenses for city council members and law enforcement
officers.
Sec.
28-76.5.   Unattended motor vehicles.
Sec.
28-76.6.   Valid vehicle registration and temporary license plate required;
display of license plate.
Sec.
28-77.   Unauthorized reserving of parking spaces.
Sec.
28-78.   Animal-drawn wagons, pushcarts or bicycles.
Sec.
28-79.   Vehicle to be parked within limit lines.
Sec.
28-80.   Parking of commercial vehicles.
Sec.
28-81.   Parking of vehicles with capacity of more than one and one-half tons
in certain districts.
Sec.
28-81.1.   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places.
Division 2. Prohibited in Specified Places.
Sec.
28-82.   Parking near railroad tracks; prohibited generally; permitted for
loading.
Sec.
28-83.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-84.   Parking for more than 24 hours prohibited.
Sec.
28-85.   Parking for certain purposes and parking on highways and parkways
prohibited.
Sec.
28-86.   Parking by parking lot owners.
Sec.
28-87.   Parking in alleys.
Sec.
28-88.   Standing or parking on one-way roadways, two-way roadways, and cul-de-
sacs.
Division 3. Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only.
Sec.
28-89.   Curb loading zones - Authority to designate; times operative.
Sec.
28-90.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-91.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-92.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-93.   Same - Use not exclusive.
Sec.
28-94.   Use of passenger curb loading zones.
Sec.
28-95.   Use of freight curb loading zones by commercial vehicles.
Sec.
28-96.   Use of freight curb loading zones by non-commercial vehicles.
Sec.
28-96.1.   Loading zone permit - Application; fee; expiration; transferability.
Sec.
28-97.   Vehicles backed to curb for loading.
Sec.
28-98.   Position of vehicles backed to curb for loading, etc.
Sec.
28-99.   Authority to designate public carrier stands.
Sec.
28-100.   Parking of busses and taxicabs regulated.
Sec.
28-101.   Restricted Use of Bus Stops, Taxicab Stands, and Stands Designated
for Other Passenger Common Carrier Motor Vehicles.
Sec.
28-102.   Stopping of busses within intersection or crosswalk.
Division 4. Paid Parking Payment Devices.
Sec.
28-103.   Authority to install and operate paid parking payment devices.
Sec.
28-103.1.   Paid parking area.
Sec.
28-103.2.   Paid parking spaces.
Sec.
28-103.3.   Rate setting for paid parking.
Sec.
28-104.   Indication of expiration of parking time.
Sec.
28-105.   Vehicle to be parked within limit lines of paid parking spaces.
Sec.
28-106.   Payment required.
Sec.
28-107.   Parking where paid parking payment device has expired.
Sec.
28-108.    Parking where paid parking payment device is displaying a violation
signal.
Sec.
28-109.   Stopping, standing, or parking beyond maximum legal time limit
prohibited.
Sec.
28-110.   Use of paid parking spaces for loading and unloading.
Sec.
28-111.   Tampering with paid parking payment devices.
Sec.
28-112.   Deposit of slugs and non- authorized payment devices prohibited.
Sec.
28-113.   Collection and disposition of money deposited.
Sec.
28-114.   Convenience fee for paid parking payments by telephone or the
Internet.
Sec. 28-114.1.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-114.2.   Interim hourly rates for paid parking in the Deep Ellum paid
parking area.
Sec. 28-114.3.   Reserved.
Sec. 28-114.4.   Reserved.
Sec. 28-114.5.   Reserved.
Sec. 28-114.6.   Reserved.
Sec. 28-114.7.   Reserved.
Sec. 28-114.8.   Reserved.
Sec. 28-114.9.   Reserved.
Sec. 28-114.10.   Reserved.
Sec. 28-114.11.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-114.12.   Restricted access to paid parking spaces; exceptions.
Sec.
28-114.13.   Paid parking rates in city owned or operated parking lots.
Division 5. Restricted or Prohibited in Certain Areas.
Sec.
28-115.   Parking, stopping, and standing vehicles in private parking areas -
authority to regulate; application of section.
Sec.
28-116.   Private parking areas - Approval of time limit, parking ban and
parking plan; Sections
28-115 to
28-119 not mandatory.
Sec.
28-117.   Private parking areas - Erection of signs; content of signs; marking
of parking spaces.
Sec.
28-118.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-119.   Same - Enforcement.
Sec.
28-120.   Parking on vacant property in residential or apartment districts -
Erection of signs.
Sec.
28-121.   Same - Prohibited when signs erected.
Division 5A. Parking for Disabled Persons.
Sec.
28-121.1.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-121.2.   Offenses.
Sec.
28-121.3.   Voluntary designation of parking spaces or areas for disabled
persons on private property.
Sec.
28-121.4.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-121.5.   Removal of unauthorized vehicles.
Sec.
28-121.6.   Reserved.
Division 5B. Residential Permit Parking Program.
Sec.
28-121.7.   Purpose.
Sec.
28-121.8.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-121.9.   Designation of residential permit parking zones.
Sec.
28-121.10.   Residential parking permit.
Sec.
28-121.11.   Offenses; permit revocation.
Division 5C. Resident-parking-only Program.
Sec.
28-121.12.   Purpose.
Sec.
28-121.13.   General authority and duty of director.
Sec.
28-121.14.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-121.15.   Designation of resident-parking- only zones; elimination or
modification of zones.
Sec.
28-121.16.   Resident-parking-only permit.
Sec.
28-121.17   Temporary parking permits.
Sec.
28-121.18.   Offenses; permit revocation.
Division 6. Dallas Convention Center Parking Facility.
Sec.
28-122.   Area designated.
Sec.
28-123.   Purpose.
Sec.
28-124.   Certain vehicles prohibited from stopping, standing or parking.
Sec.
28-125.   Parking prohibited; erection of signs regulating same.
Sec.
28-126.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-127.   Authority to remove illegally parked vehicles.
Sec.
28-128.   Authority to issue parking citations to illegally parked vehicles.
Division 6A. Dallas City Hall Parking Garage.
Sec.
28-128.1.   Area designated.
Sec.
28-128.2.   Purpose.
Sec.
28-128.3.   Certain vehicles prohibited from entering.
Sec.
28-128.4.   Failure to obey signs prohibited; erection of signs.
Sec.
28-128.5.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-128.6.   Illegally parked vehicles - Authority to remove and issue parking
citations.
Sec.
28-128.7.   Traffic control.
Division 6B. Bullington Street Truck Terminal.
Sec.
28-128.8.   Area designated.
Sec.
28-128.9.   Purpose.
Sec.
28-128.10.   Operating hours.
Sec.
28-128.11.   Certain vehicles prohibited during normal operating hours.
Sec.
28-128.12.   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited.
Sec.
28-128.13.   Permission from director; defenses.
Sec.
28-128.14.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-128.15.   Authority to remove vehicles and issue citations.
Sec.
28-128.16.   Traffic control.
Division 7. Administrative Adjudication of Parking Violations.
Sec.
28-129.   Parking violations made civil offenses.
Sec.
28-130.   General authority and duty of director.
Sec.
28-130.1.   Hearing officers; powers, duties, and functions.
Sec.
28-130.2.   Parking citations; form.
Sec.
28-130.3.   Service of a parking citation; presumption of service.
Sec.
28-130.4.   Liability of the vehicle owner and operator; presumption of
liability.
Sec.
28-130.5.   Answering a parking citation.
Sec.
28-130.6.   Adjudication by mail.
Sec.
28-130.7.   Hearings for disposition of a parking citation; parking citation as
prima facie evidence.
Sec.
28-130.8.   Failure to answer a parking citation or appear at a hearing.
Sec.
28-130.9.   Fine schedule; other fees.
Sec.
28-130.10.   Enforcement of order.
Sec.
28-130.11.   Immobilization/impoundment hearing.
Sec.
28-130.12.   Appeal from hearing.
Sec.
28-130.13.   Disposition of fines, penalties, and costs.
ARTICLE XII.
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR LOVE FIELD AND DALLAS EXECUTIVE AIRPORT.
Sec.
28-131.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-132.   Speed restrictions; reasonable and prudent.
Sec.
28-133.   Designation of one-way roads.
Sec.
28-134.   Erection of “do not enter” signs; obedience to “do not enter” signs.
Sec.
28-135.   Erection of stop signs; obedience to stop signs.
Sec.
28-136.   Erection of turn signs; obedience to turn signs.
Sec.
28-137.   Authorization to establish no parking, stopping, or standing signs.
Sec.
28-138.   Authorization to establish passenger loading zones.
Sec.
28-139.   Authorization to establish loading zones.
Sec.
28-140.   Authorization to establish special use zones, call box stands, etc.
Sec.
28-141.   Designation of public parking areas.
Sec.
28-142.   Vehicles not to block roads, driveways, ramps, taxiways, or
entrances.
Sec.
28-143.   Restricted areas.
Sec.
28-144.   Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
Sec.
28-145.   Throwing of bottles, etc., on streets, roads, etc.
Sec.
28-146.   Issuance of traffic tickets or notices to violators of this article.
ARTICLE XIII.
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Sec.
28-147.   Procedure upon arrest for violation of chapter.
Sec.
28-148.   Giving false name upon arrest for traffic violations.
Sec.
28-149.   Giving false address upon arrest for traffic violations.
Sec.
28-150.   Violation of written promise to appear.
Sec.
28-151.   Procedure upon failure of traffic violator to appear.
Sec.
28-152.   Payment of fines; when pleading guilty.
Sec.
28-153.   Disposition of fines and forfeitures.
Sec.
28-154.   Authority to arrest without warrant for violations of chapter.
Sec.
28-155.   Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV.
FREEWAY REGULATIONS.
Sec.
28-156.   Vehicular access to enumerated streets to be designated.
Sec.
28-157.   Pedestrians prohibited from crossing enumerated streets.
Sec.
28-158.   Hitchhiking prohibited on freeways.
Sec.
28-158.1.   Reserved.
Sec.
28-159.   Animal-drawn vehicles, motor driven cycle, and pushcarts prohibited
from using enumerated streets.
Sec.
28-159.1.   Drivers prohibited from stopping on enumerated streets; defenses.
ARTICLE XV.
MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORTS FOR HIRE.
Sec.
28-160.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-161.   Escort license required.
Sec.
28-162.   Same - Minimum age of person obtaining.
Sec.
28-163.   Same - Application; information required.
Sec.
28-164.   Same - Investigation; issuance.
Sec.
28-165.   Same - Refusal to issue or renew.
Sec.
28-166.   Same - Revocation.
Sec.
28-167.   Same - Appeal.
Sec.
28-168.   Same - Insurance.
Sec.
28-169.   Same - One year term.
Sec.
28-170.   Escort license - Fee; transferability.
Sec.
28-171.   Same - Posting.
Sec.
28-172.   Functions, powers and duties of police department.
Sec.
28-173.   Chauffeur’s license - Required; application.
Sec.
28-174.   Same - Issuance; denial.
Sec.
28-175.   Same - Revocation.
Sec.
28-176.   Same - Appeal from refusal to issue or renew; from decision to
revoke.
Sec.
28-177.   Same - Fee, fingerprints and photograph; nontransferable.
Sec.
28-178.   Same - To be carried on person.
Sec.
28-179.   Employment of qualified operators responsibility of owner.
Sec.
28-180.   Police officers may furnish escorts.
Sec.
28-181.   Escorts for funeral cortege not required.
Sec.
28-182.   Requirements for motor vehicles used in escort service.
Sec.
28-183.   Funeral escort guides; uniform and equipment requirements.
Sec.
28-184.   Operating procedures.
Sec.
28-185.   Advertisements; limitations.
ARTICLE XVI.
PARADES.
Sec.
28-186.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-187.   Permit required; exceptions.
Sec.
28-188.   Application for parade permit; fee.
Sec.
28-189.   Issuance of parade permit.
Sec.
28-190.   Denial of parade permit.
Sec.
28-191.   Revocation of parade permit.
Sec.
28-192.   Appeal of denial or revocation of parade permit.
ARTICLE XVII.
STREETCAR REGULATIONS.
Sec.
28-193.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-194.   Authority of the director of transportation and public works.
Sec.
28-195.   Operation of streetcars and other vehicles.
Sec.
28-196.   Unlawful conduct on or near a streetcar.
Sec.
28-197.   Smoking, eating, and drinking prohibited on a streetcar.
Sec.
28-198.   Obstructing tracks; defacing or disturbing property.
Sec.
28-199.   Police assistance required.
ARTICLE XVIII.
LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT SYSTEM.
Sec.
28-200.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-201.   Operation of vehicles in the transitway mall and transit corridor.
Sec.
28-202.   Transitway mall safety quadrants.
ARTICLE XIX.
SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT STREET RACES AND RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITIONS.
Division 1. Definitions.
Sec.
28-203.   Definitions.
Division 2. Spectators Prohibited at Street Races and Reckless Driving
Exhibitions.
Sec.
28-204.   Spectators prohibited at street races and reckless driving
exhibitions.
Sec.
28-205.   Penalty.
Division 3. Abatement of Nuisance Vehicles Engaged in Street Races or Reckless
Driving Exhibition.
Sec.
28-206.   Declaration and abatement of nuisance vehicles.
Sec.
28-207.   Notice of nuisance and abatement to legal and registered owners and
lienholders.
Sec.
28-208.   Administrative abatement of nuisance.
Sec.
28-209.   Judicial abatement of nuisance proceedings.
Sec.
28-210.   Joint property interest release.
Sec.
28-211.   Stipulated vehicle release agreement.
Sec.
28-212.   Vehicle title vesting in the city.
Sec.
28-213.   Sale of abated vehicle.
Sec.
28-214.   Disposition of low-value vehicles.
Sec.
28-215.   Distribution of sale proceeds.
Sec.
28-216.   Accounting of sale proceeds.
Sec.
28-217.   Stolen vehicles.
Sec.
28-218.   Innocent owner remedy.
Sec.
28-219.   Towing and storage fees.
Division 4. Aiding Street Racing or Reckless Driving Exhibitions.
Sec.
28-219.1.   Aiding street racing and reckless driving exhibitions.
ARTICLE XX.
PHOTOGRAPHIC ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM
VIOLATIONS.
Division 1. Generally.
Sec.
28-220.   Definitions.
Sec.
28-221.   General authority and duties of the director and department.
Sec.
28-222.   Enforcement officers - powers, duties, and functions.
Sec.
28-223.   Hearing officers - powers, duties, and functions.
Division 2. Enforcement of School Bus Stop Arm Violations as Civil Offenses.
Sec.
28-224.   School bus stop arm violations as civil offenses; defenses;
presumptions.
Sec.
28-225.   Civil school bus stop arm citations; form.
Sec.
28-226.   Service of a civil school bus stop arm citation.
Sec.
28-227.   Answering a civil school bus stop arm citation.
Sec.
28-228.   Adjudication by mail.
Sec.
28-229.   Hearings for disposition of a school bus stop arm citation; citation
and photographic recorded images as prima facie evidence.
Sec.
28-230.   Failure to answer a civil school bus stop arm citation or appear at a
hearing.
Sec.
28-231.   Civil fines for school bus stop arm violations; penalties and other
costs.
Sec.
28-232.   Appeal from hearing.
Sec.
28-233.   Effect of liability; exclusion of civil remedy; enforcement.
Sec.
28-234.   Disposition of civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed for school
bus stop arm violations.
ARTICLE XXI.
MISCELLANEOUS FEES.
Sec.
28-235.   Engineering review and location fees.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 28-1.   SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the Dallas Traffic Ordinance. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this chapter:
      (1)   ALLEY means any narrow street described in this chapter that has no
legal or official name other than “alley.”
      (2)   APPROVED ABBREVIATIONS. The following approved abbreviations may be
used in connection with issuing traffic tickets, citations, and complaints for
violation of the Dallas Traffic Ordinance: “Street” may be abbreviated as
“St.”; “Avenue” may be abbreviated as “Ave.” or “Av.”; “Freeway” may be
abbreviated as “Frwy.” or “Fwy.”; “Lane” may be abbreviated as “Ln.”; “Drive”
may be abbreviated as “Dr.”; “Road” may be abbreviated as “Rd.”; “Boulevard”
may be abbreviated as “Blvd.”; “Expressway” may be abbreviated as “Exp.”,
“Ewy.” or “Expwy.”; “Place” may be abbreviated as “Pl.”; “Court” may be
abbreviated as “Ct.”; “Parkway” may be abbreviated as “Pkwy.”; “Circle” may be
abbreviated as “Cir.”; “Highway” may be abbreviated as “Hwy.”; “Plaza” may be
abbreviated as “Plz.”; “Square” may be abbreviated as “Sq.”; and “Terrace” may
be abbreviated as “Ter.” In all cases where the word is abbreviated it shall be
understood to mean the same as though fully written out.
      (3)   ARTERIAL means a street designated as either a principal or a minor
arterial in the city’s thoroughfare plan.
      (4)   BOOT means a lockable vehicle wheel clamp or similar device that is
designed to be placed on a parked vehicle to prevent the operation of the
vehicle until the device is unlocked and removed.
      (5)   CHIEF OF POLICE means the chief of the police department of the
city or the chief’s authorized representative.
      (6)   CITY MARSHAL means the city marshal of the city, or the marshal’s
authorized representative.
      (7)   COLLECTOR- DISTRIBUTOR ROAD means an auxiliary roadway, separated
laterally from, but generally parallel to, the freeway through roadway, which
serves to collect and distribute traffic from several access connections
between selected points of ingress to and egress from the through traffic
lanes.
      (8)   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE means any vehicle that displays a valid
commercial, truck, or truck-tractor state license plate.
      (9)   CURB means the lateral lines of a roadway, whether constructed
above grade or not, which are not intended for vehicular travel.
      (10)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter, and includes
representatives, agents, and department employees designated by the director.
      (11)   DIVIDED ROADWAY or DIVIDED HIGHWAY means a roadway or highway
divided into two roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical
barrier, or clearly indicated dividing section between the two roadways.
      (12)   HORSE means any saddle or harness animal.
      (13)   IMMOBILIZE means to place a boot on a parked vehicle to prevent
the operation of the vehicle until the boot is unlocked and removed.
      (14)   LIMIT LINES means boundaries of paid parking spaces, loading
zones, safety or danger zones, crosswalks, and lines marked for the purpose of
excluding traffic and parking.
      (15)   LOADING ZONE means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
      (16)   ONE-WAY STREET means any street or highway on which traffic is
restricted to movement in one direction only.
      (17)   OPERATOR means any person in control of a vehicle, including a
railroad train or vehicle being towed.
      (18)   PAID PARKING AREA means any area where parking is regulated by
pay- to-park signage and payment is required at the paid parking payment
device.
      (19)   PAID PARKING HOLIDAYS include only the following days:
         (A)   New Year’s Day (January 1);
         (B)   Martin Luther King’s Birthday (third Monday in January);
         (C)   President’s Day (third Monday in February);
         (D)   Memorial Day (last Monday in May);
         (E)   Juneteenth National Independence Day (June 19)
         (F)   Independence Day (July 4);
         (G)   Labor Day/Cesar E. Chavez Day (first Monday in September);
         (H)   Indigenous Peoples’ Day (second Monday in October);
         (I)   Veterans Day (November 11)
         (J)   Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November); and
         (K)   Christmas Day (December 25).
      (20)   PAID PARKING PAYMENT DEVICE means any device used to accept
payment for parking, such as parking meters, pay station kiosks, mobile
devices, or other methods approved by the director.
      (21)   PAID PARKING SPACE means a space that is delineated on a public
right-of- way for which payment is required to park a vehicle.
      (22)   PARK or PARKING means the standing of vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
      (23)   PARKING BAN means certain hours during the day at which time
standing, parking, or stopping of a vehicle is prohibited along the curb of
designated streets as indicated by signs authorized by the traffic engineer.
      (24)   PARKING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER means the person designated by the
city manager to perform the functions of parking enforcement officer or his
authorized representative.
      (25)   PARKING VIOLATION means a violation of any provision of this
chapter governing the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle.
      (26)   PARKWAY means that portion of a street or highway between the curb
lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, not
intended for the use of pedestrians; also, the intervening space between the
roadways of a divided street or highway or any island or area, whether or not
clearly defined by curbs or markings, which divides any portion of any street,
highway, or intersection into separate lanes for vehicular traffic.
      (27)   PEACE OFFICER means officers who are required to obtain and
maintain a commission through the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement and
listed in Section 2.12 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. This includes
police officers, city marshals, and arson investigators.
      (28)   PUBLIC PLACE means any place where the general public has a right
to assemble, or to which people commonly resort for purposes of business,
amusement, recreation or other lawful purpose.
      (29)   SERVICE ROAD means an auxiliary roadway adjacent to a freeway,
expressway, or arterial that is used by traffic desiring access to abutting
property and by traffic seeking ingress to or egress from the adjacent freeway,
expressway, or arterial.
      (30)   STAND or STANDING means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
      (31)   STOP or STOPPING, when prohibited, means any halting even
momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
      (32)   TIME STANDARD (OFFICIAL), for purposes of designating certain
hours in this chapter, means central standard time or central daylight-saving
time as may be in current use in the city.
      (33)   TRAFFIC DIVISION means the traffic division of the police
department of the city.
      (34)   TRAFFIC ENGINEER means the person designated by the city manager
to perform the functions of traffic engineer or his authorized representative.
      (35)   VEHICLE has the meaning assigned to it by Section 541.201 of the
Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
      (36)   VIADUCT means a bridge- like structure to carry a roadway over a
valley or ravine, or across another roadway.
   (b)   All other words used in this chapter shall have the meanings assigned
to them by the state vehicle laws or their ordinary and commonly accepted
meanings as set forth in Webster’s New International Dictionary (Unabridged),
and other dictionaries of recognized standing. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 15004; 16577;
17226; 19173; 20012; 20269; 20965; 21186; 21194; 27697; 30654; 32470; 32735)
SEC. 28-3.   APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS IN PARKS, PUBLIC HOUSING
PROJECTS AND PUBLIC HOSPITAL GROUNDS.
   (a)   The regulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic on all ways, roads,
streets, alleys, and places, whether named or not, open to the public, whether
dedicated or not, in all public parks owned or controlled by the city, in all
the public housing projects owned, controlled, or operated by the housing
authority of the city, or any other housing project whose streets or ways are
open to the public, and in all public hospital grounds located in the city,
shall be controlled and regulated in accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   All traffic-control devices installed within the public parks or
public housing projects, including all parking, stop, speed, and directional
signs, and any other kind of a traffic control sign, shall be obeyed as
provided in this chapter. This section shall be cumulative of other traffic
ordinances now in effect concerning traffic regulations in public parks. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-4.   AUTHORITY TO REMOVE VEHICLES; REDEMPTION; FEES.
   (a)   A city peace officer, or parking enforcement officer is authorized to
remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or other property of any description
from a street to a place designated by the chief of police or the director,
when:
      (1)   the vehicle or property is left unattended upon a bridge or viaduct
or in a tunnel or underpass;
      (2)   the vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to any
private driveway;
      (3)   the vehicle is found upon a street and a report has previously been
made that the vehicle has been stolen or a complaint has been filed and a
warrant issued charging that the vehicle has been unlawfully taken from the
owner;
      (4)   the peace officer or parking enforcement officer has reasonable
grounds to believe that the vehicle has been abandoned;
      (5)   a vehicle upon a street is so disabled that its normal operation is
impossible or impractical and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle
are incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other reason to such an
extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or are not in the
immediate vicinity of the disabled vehicle;
      (6)   a peace officer arrests any person driving or in control of a
vehicle for an alleged offense and the officer is by law required to take the
person arrested immediately before a magistrate;
      (7)   the vehicle is standing, parked, or stopped in any portion of a
street, and the peace officer or parking enforcement officer has reason to
believe that the vehicle constitutes a hazard or interferes with the normal
function of a governmental agency or that the safety of the vehicle is
imperiled;
      (8)   the vehicle is standing, parked, or stopped in violation of the
parking ban regulations;
      (9)   the vehicle is standing, parked, or stopped in violation of any
provision of this chapter;
      (10)   the vehicle is the subject of a hearing officer's order for a
parking violation and impoundment of the vehicle is authorized by Section
28-130.10 of this chapter;
      (11)   the vehicle is in an accident and the vehicle's owner or operator
fails to show evidence of financial responsibility as required under Chapter
601 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended; or
      (12)   the vehicle is stopped by a police officer or city marshal for an
alleged violation of a city or state traffic law or other law applicable to the
operation of a vehicle on the roadway and the vehicle's owner or operator fails
to show evidence of financial responsibility as required under Chapter 601 of
the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
   (b)   A vehicle removed and towed under this section must be kept at the
place designated by the chief of police or the director until application for
redemption is made by the owner or the owner's authorized agent, who will be
entitled to possession of the vehicle upon payment of costs of immobilization,
towing, notification, impoundment, and storage. The chief of police or the
director shall charge fees for storage of vehicles at city pound locations in
accordance with the following regulations:
      (1)   The storage fee is $20.77 for each day or portion of a day that a
vehicle not longer than 25 feet is stored and $39.99 for each day or portion of
a day that a vehicle longer than 25 feet is stored, except that a storage fee
may not be charged for more than one day if the vehicle remains at the city
pound location for less than 12 hours.
      (2)   Storage fees on a stolen vehicle will be charged as outlined in
Paragraph (1) of this subsection, commencing on the second day following the
date notice is received by the owner of the vehicle, or the owner's agent, that
the vehicle may be claimed.
      (3)   Storage fees on a vehicle owned by an arrested person will be
charged as outlined in Paragraph (1) of this subsection, commencing on the date
of impoundment.
      (4)   Storage fees will not be collected when a vehicle is not involved
in an accident, but is taken into protective custody and the driver is
incapacitated due to physical injury or other illness to the extent that the
driver is unable to care for the vehicle.
      (5)   Storage fees on any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident
will be charged as outlined in Paragraph (1) of this subsection, commencing on
the date of impoundment.
      (6)   An impoundment fee of $22.85, in addition to applicable towage,
notification, and storage fees, will be charged for a vehicle that has been
removed and towed to a city pound location.
      (7)   A notification fee of $50, in addition to applicable towage,
impoundment, and storage fees, will be charged for a vehicle that has been
removed and towed to a city pound location.
      (8)   All unpaid fines, penalties, and costs assessed against the person
by a hearing officer for a parking violation if the vehicle was towed as result
of parking violation fees.
   (c)   A police officer or city marshal may, at his discretion, with the
express written permission of an arrested person, leave an arrested person's
vehicle at the scene of the arrest or other location. In these instances, the
arresting officer shall ensure that the vehicle is legally parked and secured.
   (d)   The chief of police, the director, or a designated representative may
release a vehicle without payment of immobilization, towage, notification,
impoundment, or storage fees under the following circumstances:
      (1)   a vehicle was taken into protective custody when the incident did
not involve an arrest, violation, or automobile accident;
      (2)   a vehicle is owned by or belongs to an individual who is not a
citizen of the United States, who does not permanently reside in the United
States, and who is entitled to diplomatic immunity;
      (3)   subsequent investigation results in a determination that there was
no violation of this code or the Texas Motor Vehicle Laws or that the arrested
person did not commit a criminal offense; or
      (4)   a vehicle is owned by or belongs to the victim of a violent crime
and was taken into custody for evidentiary purposes.
   (e)   If a vehicle was towed and stored for an evidentiary or examination
purpose, the chief of police or a designated representative shall release the
vehicle without payment of towage and storage fees when required to do so under
Article 18.23 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if he removes or attempts to remove a
vehicle from a city pound location without first paying the towage,
notification, impoundment, and storage fees that have accrued on the vehicle.
   (g)   As a consequence of the fees to be charged for vehicles stored at city
pound locations and for purposes of state law, the city council hereby
designates all city pound locations as storage facilities operated for
commercial purposes. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 14686; 15949; 16287; 16477; 17406;
17547; 18411; 19300; 20076; 20448; 20965; 21819; 22906; 22964; 24743; 25384;
26134; 26293; 27189; 32362; 32470; 33232)
SEC. 28-5.   RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES TO LIENHOLDERS.
   Upon payment of all fees required by Section
28-4, a vehicle impounded by the police department pursuant to the enforcement
of the provisions of this code may be released to the lienholder, or an
authorized agent, holding a valid and existing mortgage lien on the vehicle
impounded if the mortgage lienholder:
      (1)   furnishes to the police department, for its inspection:
         (A)   the mortgage lien contract, or a certified copy of the contract,
specifying that, upon default of the mortgagor, the mortgagee is entitled to
possession of the vehicle; and
         (B)   the certificate of title with the lien appearing on it; and
      (2)   furnishes to the police department an affidavit stating that:
         (A)   the mortgage lienholder holds a lien on the impounded vehicle;
         (B)   the mortgagor has defaulted;
         (C)   the mortgage lienholder desires possession and is entitled to
possession of the vehicle; and
         (D)   the mortgage lienholder agrees to indemnify and hold harmless
the city, its police department, and its employees upon delivery of the vehicle
to the mortgage lienholder. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 20448; 21819)
SEC. 28-5.1.   AUTHORITY TO IMMOBILIZE VEHICLES; REDEMPTION; FEES.
   (a)   A peace officer or a parking enforcement officer is authorized to
immobilize or cause the immobilization of any vehicle that is the subject of a
hearing officer's order for a parking violation when the placement of a boot on
the vehicle is authorized by Section
28-130.10 of this chapter.
   (b)   During the first 24 hours after a vehicle has been immobilized under
this section, a peace officer or a parking enforcement officer may leave the
vehicle immobilized or remove or cause the removal of the vehicle from the
street in accordance with Section
28-4 of this article. After a vehicle has been immobilized for 24 hours, the
vehicle must be removed from the street in accordance with Section
28-4 of this article.
   (c)   The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or the owner's authorized agent,
may apply for redemption of the vehicle in a place and manner designated by the
director. The owner or the owner's authorized agent will be entitled to
possession of the vehicle upon payment of:
      (1)   an immobilization fee of $100;
      (2)   all unpaid fines, penalties, and costs assessed against the person
by a hearing officer for a parking violation; and
      (3)   all towage, storage, notification, preservation, and service fees
incurred if the vehicle was removed from a street in accordance with Section
28-4 of this article.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   removes, disables, tampers with, or damages a boot placed on a
vehicle pursuant to this section;
      (2)   tows or moves an immobilized vehicle from the location at which the
vehicle was immobilized, unless at the direction of a peace officer or a
parking enforcement officer; or
      (3)   removes or relocates any notice placed on an immobilized vehicle,
unless the person was a peace officer, a parking enforcement officer, the owner
of the vehicle, or the vehicle owner's authorized agent.
   (e)   An offense under Subsection (d)(1) or (d)(2) of this section is
punishable by a fine of $500. An offense under Subsection (d)(3) is punishable
by a fine of not more than $500. (Ord. Nos. 20965; 21819; 26309; 32470)
ARTICLE II.
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION.
Division 1. Traffic Engineer.
SEC. 28-6.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 15004)
SEC. 28-7.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 17226)
SEC. 28-8.   TRAFFIC ENGINEER - DUTIES.
   The traffic engineer shall have control and direction of the traffic zone
marking personnel, the parking meter installation and maintenance personnel,
traffic signal installation and maintenance personnel, the marking of all
traffic zones, and the installation of signals and road markers relating to
direction and control of traffic. The traffic engineer shall also make
continuous studies of the movement of traffic on the streets of the city and
shall make periodic recommendations to the city manager as to necessary
regulations, practices, and controls for the safe and prompt movement of
traffic in the city. The traffic engineer shall perform such other duties as
may be required by the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 21186)
SEC. 28-9.   TRAFFIC ENGINEER - APPOINTMENT OF TECHNICIANS AND CLERICAL STAFF;
FEES FOR SERVICES.
   (a)   The traffic engineer may appoint technicians and clerical staff as may
be necessary subject to the approval of the city manager and consistent with
civil service rules and regulations and the city charter.
   (b)   A fee of $30 an hour will be charged, in accordance with departmental
policy, for services provided by the traffic engineer’s staff relating to
traffic control service record inquiries. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 19300)
SEC. 28-10.   EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The traffic engineer shall make continuous traffic surveys and studies
of the movement of traffic on the streets of the city, and the chief of police
or a duly authorized agent will cooperate to make effective the provisions of
this chapter and of other traffic ordinances of the city, and to make and
enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions. A temporary or experimental regulation shall take effect at such
time as the appropriate traffic-control sign, signal, or device is in place as
required under this chapter or other traffic ordinances of the city. A
temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for a period of
time not to exceed 90 days unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (b)   If the traffic engineer or the chief of police determines that a
hazardous condition still exists after the expiration of the 90 day period due
to street construction, reconstruction, or repairs and an extension of
temporary traffic restrictions is necessary for the peace, safety, and general
welfare, then the traffic engineer is empowered to extend the temporary
regulations governing traffic at and around the construction site, until the
completion of the project. The traffic engineer shall keep a record of the
temporary and experimental regulations, and these records will reflect the date
that the traffic control signs, signals, and devices were installed and
removed. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 19749; 21186)
Division 2. Traffic Division.
SEC. 28-11.   ESTABLISHMENT AND CONTROL.
   There is hereby established in the police department a traffic division to
be under the control of a police officer appointed by the chief of police.
(Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-12.   DUTIES GENERALLY.
   It shall be the duty of the traffic division with aid as may be rendered by
other members of the police department to enforce the traffic regulations of
the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the
city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents, to
cooperate with the traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the
division by this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-13.   RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   The police department shall keep a record of all citations for offenses in
violation of this chapter, other traffic ordinances of the city, or of the
state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record
of the final disposition of all alleged offenses. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-14.   INVESTIGATION OF ACCIDENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police
officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to
assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law
causing or contributing to traffic accidents. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-15.   TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   The police department shall maintain a system of filing traffic accident
reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be maintained
alphabetically by location. These reports shall be available for the use and
information of the traffic engineer. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-16.   SAME - SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORTS.
   The police department shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be
filed with the city manager. Such report shall contain information on traffic
matters of the city as follows:
   (a)   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed or
injured as a result of traffic accidents, and other pertinent traffic accident
data.
   (b)   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data
on the safety activities of the police.
   (c)   The plans and recommendations of the department for future traffic
safety activities. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-17.   TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.
   When accidents at any particular location become numerous or severe, the
traffic division shall cooperate with the traffic engineer in conducting
studies of the accidents and determining remedial measures. (Ord. 14584)
ARTICLE III.
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
SEC. 28-18.   AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or
officers who are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce the traffic laws
of the city and the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the
city.
   (b)   Officers of the police department or officers who are assigned by the
chief of police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or
signal, in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire
or other emergency, to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, officers
of the police or fire departments may direct traffic as conditions require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (c)   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing the traffic in the immediate vicinity.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if he intentionally fails or refuses to
comply with the lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire
department officer. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-19.   PARKING ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   (a)   There is hereby created in the department of transportation and public
works, under the direction of the director, a division known as parking
enforcement and management, which will be an organized auxiliary division to
the department of transportation and public works.
   (b)    A parking enforcement officer is authorized to:
      (1)   issue citations for any parking violation within the city;
      (2)   impound any vehicle that is:
         (A)   in violation of a parking or fire lane regulation; or
         (B)   the subject of a hearing officer's order for a parking violation
when impoundment of the vehicle is authorized by Section
28-130.10 of this chapter; and
      (3)   immobilize any vehicle that is the subject of a hearing officer's
order for a parking violation when the placement of a boot on the vehicle is
authorized by Section
28-130.10 of this chapter.
   (c)   It is the duty of a parking enforcement officer to direct and guide
motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic in the city as directed by the director.
   (d)   A parking enforcement officer is authorized to direct traffic by
voice, hand, or signal, in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the
event of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic, or to protect
pedestrians, a parking enforcement officer may direct traffic as conditions
require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (e)   A parking enforcement officer is not eligible for membership in the
Firemen, Policemen and Fire Alarm Operators Pension Fund created pursuant to
Article 6243a, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, but is eligible for membership in
the employee's retirement fund of the city of Dallas.
   (f)   A parking enforcement officer, while in the performance of official
duties, is deemed to be engaged in the performance of a governmental function.
   (g)   A parking enforcement officer may not be armed with firearms.
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 19579; 20269; 20965; 22026; 27697; 32470; 32864)
SEC. 28-20.   OBEDIENCE TO CHAPTER REQUIRED; PENALTY.
   (a)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to do an act
forbidden, fail to perform an act required, or commit an act made an offense by
this chapter.
   (b)   A person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, for
which another penalty is not provided by state law or other city ordinance,
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 19963)
SEC. 28-20.1.   PRESUMPTION IN FLEEING FROM A POLICE OFFICER.
   The person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be presumed to be
the driver of a vehicle involved in fleeing from a police officer when, in
violation of state law, the driver willfully fails to bring his vehicle to a
stop, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude a pursuing police vehicle, after
being given a visual or audible signal to stop by a uniformed officer in an
appropriately marked official police vehicle. Proof may be made by a copy or
facsimile of the registration of the vehicle with the State Highway Department
or County Motor Vehicle License Department or any other licensing agency
showing the name of the person to whom the license plates were issued. This
proof shall constitute prima facie evidence of the fact that the person to whom
the certificate of registration was issued was the driver of the vehicle. This
presumption may be rebutted by competent evidence. (Ord. 19180)
ARTICLE IV.
ACCIDENTS.
SEC. 28-21.   INTENTIONAL COLLISIONS.
   A person commits an offense if while driving, operating, or in control of a
vehicle, animal, railroad engine, or railroad car he intentionally causes, or
permits the vehicle, animal, railroad engine, or railroad car to come in
collision with any other vehicle, animal, person, street sign, street post,
water plug, mailbox, or other obstacle or object in or on any street, alley,
avenue, highway, or other public place in the city. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-22.   DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to a
bicycle or other device propelled wholly or in part by human power which is
driven or attended by a person, shall give his name, address, and the
registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if
available exhibit his operator’s, commercial operator’s, or chauffeur’s license
to the person driving or attending the bicycle or device. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-23.   PRESUMPTION IN HIT AND RUN ACCIDENTS.
   The person in whose name a vehicle is registered, shall be presumed to be
the driver of the vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to a
vehicle or other object, when the driver fails to stop and render the duties
required of drivers under state law. Proof may be made by a copy or facsimile
of the registration of the vehicle with the State Highway Department or County
Motor Vehicle License Department or any other licensing agency showing the name
of the person to whom the license plates were issued. This proof shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the fact that the person to whom such
certificate of registration was issued was the driver of the automobile. This
presumption may be rebutted by competent evidence. (Ord. 14584)
ARTICLE V.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
SEC. 28-24.   AUTHORITY TO INSTALL.
   (a)   The traffic engineer shall conduct studies and investigations of the
public streets and highways within the city and shall determine those places on
public streets and highways where a particular danger or hazard exists to motor
vehicle traffic and pedestrian traffic and shall place and maintain traffic
control signs, signals, and devices in accordance with these studies and
determinations as required under this chapter and other traffic laws. In
addition, the city manager, the director of transportation and public works,
the chief of police, the chief of fire-rescue, or personnel acting under their
authority, and public contractors or their employees performing work pursuant
to any federal, state, county, road district, or city contract, may place and
maintain barricades, detour signs, or other warning devices at places where
danger becomes apparent as a result of hazards caused by the weather or natural
phenomena, defects, or obstructions in or near streets, alleys, sidewalks,
parkways, parks, or other public places, as a result of building construction
or demolition, or where street, alley, or sidewalk construction or repair is
underway.
   (b)   The traffic engineer shall conduct studies and investigations of the
public streets and highways within the city and, in accordance with these
studies, recommend to the city council those places on public streets and
highways where permanent traffic diverters should be located. After the city
council approves a location, the department of transportation and public works
is authorized to install and maintain permanent traffic diverters at the
approved location. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 14900; 22026; 23694; 28424; 30239; 30654;
32864)
SEC. 28-24.1.   TRAFFIC BARRICADE MANUAL.
   (a)   The traffic engineer is authorized to prescribe a traffic barricade
manual, conforming to the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
approved by the Texas Transportation Commission, for providing barricades,
warning signs, and other traffic control devices that alert the public to
hazards caused by construction, repair, pavement excavation or cuts, or other
uses requiring closure of any portion of a public street or public right-of-
way.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he fails to comply with any provision
of the city’s traffic barricade manual while occupying a public street or
public right- of-way for the purpose of construction, repair, pavement
excavation or cuts, or other uses requiring closure of any portion of the
public street or public right-of-way.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the provision
of the city’s traffic barricade manual was superseded by a provision of the
Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and the person was complying
with the state provision.
   (d)   A person convicted of an offense under Subsection (b) of this section
is punishable by a fine of $500. (Ord. Nos. 15124; 19749; 27294)
SEC. 28-24.2.   FEES FOR PLAN REVIEWS AND FIELD ADJUSTMENTS.
   Fees for traffic signal plan review, traffic control plan review, traffic
signals field adjustments, and street lights plan review.
      (1)   The fee shall be paid to the director when the application is
filed. An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The director shall deposit fees in the official city depository not
later than the next business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)    No refund of the fee may be made.
      (4)   Fee schedule.
 
Type of Application               Application Fee
Traffic signal plan review        $1,000.00
Traffic control plan review       $1,000.00
Traffic signals field adjustments $1,500.00
Street lights plan review         $500.00
 
(Ord. 31657)
SEC. 28-25.   AUTHORIZED INSTALLATION PRESUMED.
   In any prosecution for violation of this chapter, the authorized
installation of a traffic control device or signal shall be presumed. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-26.   PARKING DESIGNATIONS; AUTHORITY TO INSTALL.
   (a)   The traffic engineer shall conduct studies and investigations of the
public streets and highways within the city and shall study:
      (1)   the needs of the public for parking vehicles on public streets;
      (2)   the width and length of public streets where parking is desired;
      (3)   the availability of parking space and frequency of parking on the
public streets; and
      (4)   the needs of business and commercial establishments to have
regulated parking on the public streets.
   (b)   After making such studies, the traffic engineer shall:
      (1)   designate those areas and times on public streets and highways in
the city where parking, stopping, or standing should be allowed, or parking
bans should be in effect, and regulate parking, stopping, standing, or parking
bans by installing appropriate signs, by installing paid parking payment
devices or designating paid parking spaces (when authorized by Division 4,
“Paid Parking Payment Devices,” or Article XI, “Stopping, Standing, and Parking
Generally,” of this chapter), or by marking curbs, giving notice that parking,
stopping, or standing is allowed or parking bans are in effect and for what
period of time;
      (2)   determine when parking, stopping, or standing motor vehicles should
be prohibited on public streets or highways in the city and regulate such
prohibition by installing appropriate signs, by providing individual signs or
information on each paid parking payment device so affected, or by marking
curbs, giving notice that parking, stopping, or standing, is prohibited; and
      (3)   paint or mark each individual paid parking space.
   (c)   The traffic engineer shall make changes in the parking, stopping,
standing, or parking ban regulations from time to time as required by the
studies and investigations. The traffic engineer shall also keep accurate
records of all parking designations, prohibitions, and sign installations.
   (d)   The traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs prohibiting or
restricting parking on one or both sides of any roadway that is on public
school property as conditions require to facilitate the flow of traffic.
   (e)   When an official sign, curb marking, or street marking prohibits
parking for an interval of two hours or less, the prohibition is in effect
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of every day except Sundays and
meter and parking ban holidays, unless otherwise indicated by the sign or
marking.
   (f)   The traffic engineer may, upon application by a person whose property
abuts a roadway, install or remove signs prohibiting or restricting parking on
one or both sides of the roadway. The application must be made on a form
provided by the traffic engineer and accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee of $240. The traffic engineer may approve or deny the application in
accordance with departmental policy. If an application for the installation of
signs is approved, the applicant must pay a fee of $200 for each sign
installed. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 14974; 15194; 19300; 21194; 22762; 30993; 32735;
32863)
SEC. 28-26.1.   BUS LANE DESIGNATIONS; AUTHORITY TO INSTALL; PROHIBITION;
EXCEPTION.
   (a)   The traffic engineer shall conduct studies and investigations of the
public streets and highways within the city and shall study the needs of the
public for areas on the public streets for the exclusive use of busses during
certain hours of the day, the width and length of areas on public streets where
bus lanes are desired and, after making such studies, the traffic engineer
shall designate those areas on public streets and highways of the city where
areas for the exclusive use of busses are required and should be in effect by
means of appropriate signs and street markings giving notice that only busses
may use an area of a public street or highway during certain hours of the day.
The traffic engineer may change areas designated for the exclusive use of
busses from time to time as required by studies and investigations. The traffic
engineer shall also keep accurate records of all bus lane designations, sign
installations, and street markings.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he operates a motor vehicle, other than
a bus in an area upon a public street or highway within the city designated by
a sign and street marking as an area for the exclusive use of busses.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that an operator of
a motor vehicle is in an area designated for the exclusive use of busses for
the purpose of making a right turn and has entered the area as close as
practicable to the place where a right turn was intended to be made.
   (d)   In this section bus means a public or private motor vehicle designated
for the transportation of more than 10 passengers. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 14648)
SEC. 28-27.   MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the “Manual
and Specifications” approved by the State Highway Commission or resolutions
adopted by the city council; shall be uniform, so far as practicable, as to
type and location throughout the city; and shall be official traffic control
devices so long as such are not inconsistent with provisions of state law or
this chapter. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-27.1.   PLACEMENT OF CRIME WATCH SIGNS AND VOLUNTEERS IN PATROL SIGNS.
   (a)   Upon recommendation of the police department, the city traffic
engineer is authorized to place crime watch signs and volunteers in patrol
(V.I.P.) signs on existing city sign standards that support city traffic
control and informational signs when in the traffic engineer’s judgment the
sign will not interfere with traffic safety.
   (b)   A person desiring the placement of a crime watch sign or a volunteers
in patrol (V.I.P.) sign shall submit an application for placement of the sign
to the police department. The application must designate the location requested
for placement. If the police department and the traffic engineer determine that
the location requested will not interfere with traffic safety, the police
department shall notify the applicant to submit a sign to the traffic engineer
who shall place the sign as requested; otherwise, the traffic engineer shall
assist the applicant in finding an alternate location.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section:
      (1)   CRIME WATCH SIGN means a sign of a standard design approved by the
chief of police that:
         (A)   is no larger than 14 inches wide and 20 inches tall;
         (B)   depicts the logo of the National Sheriffs’ Association
neighborhood watch sign; and
         (C)   does not contain any other message or any identification of a
neighborhood, neighborhood group, or other person or organization on the sign.
      (2)   VOLUNTEERS IN PATROL (V.I.P.) SIGN means a sign of a standard
design approved by the chief of police that:
         (A)   is no larger than 14 inches wide and 20 inches tall;
         (B)   states, in white lettering on a blue background, “THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD PATROLLED BY VOLUNTEERS IN PATROL”; and
         (C)   does not contain any other message or any identification of a
neighborhood, neighborhood group, or other person or organization on the sign.
(Ord. Nos. 17167; 17225; 23822)
SEC. 28-28.   TESTING UNDER ACTUAL CONDITIONS OF TRAFFIC.
   The traffic engineer may test all forms of traffic control devices under
actual conditions of traffic. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-29.   EXISTING DEVICES AFFIRMED AND RATIFIED.
   Traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings previously placed or
erected by the police department or department of transportation and public
works, or any predecessor department, and now in use for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding traffic are affirmed, ratified, and declared to
be official traffic control devices, provided that these traffic control
devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter.
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 22026; 28424; 30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 28-30.   DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he places, maintains, or displays, upon
or in view of a highway, any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device
which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of an official traffic control device or a railroad sign or
signal, or which warns or attempts to warn the operator of a vehicle of speed
control enforcement being conducted on the highway.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he places or maintains, upon any
highway, an official traffic signal or sign on which commercial advertising is
printed. This section shall not prohibit the erection of signs of a type which
cannot be mistaken for official signs upon private property adjacent to
highways. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-31.   INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNALS.
   A person commits an offense if, without lawful authority, he alters,
attempts to alter, defaces, injures, knocks down, or removes any official
traffic control device, barricade, detour sign, or warning sign (whether
permanent or temporary), or any railroad sign, signal, inscription, shield, or
insignia. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-32.   AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES AND
MARK TRAFFIC LANES.
   The traffic engineer shall on the basis of engineering and traffic surveys:
   (1)   designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where surveys indicate
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at other
places where surveys indicate they are necessary;
   (2)   establish safety zones at places where the surveys indicate it is
necessary for the protection of pedestrians;
   (3)   mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at places where it is found
necessary, consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the
city. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-33.   TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO ERECT SIGNS DESIGNATING PEDESTRIANWAYS.
   The traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs at each entrance of a
pedestrianway constructed over an expressway, designating such pedestrianways
as safety crossings for school children, and the signs may state that riding
bicycles, motorcycles and motorbikes along or across such pedestrianways is
prohibited. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-34.   BICYCLES, ANIMALS, VEHICLES PROHIBITED FROM USING PEDESTRIANWAYS.
   A person commits an offense if he rides a bicycle, animal, or vehicle across
a pedestrianway constructed over an expressway, designated by the traffic
engineer as a pedestrianway for school children or as a pedestrianway under the
master plan of the city. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-34.1.   INSTALLATION, REMOVAL, AND REPAIR OF SPEED BUMPS IN ALLEYS;
FEES.
   (a)   The traffic engineer may install or remove speed bumps in an alley if
he receives:
      (1)   a written request for the installation or removal signed by all of
the resident owners or tenants having frontage along the alley with at least 80
percent of the owners or tenants being in favor of the installation or removal;
and
      (2)   payment of the fee calculated under Subsection (d).
   (b)   The requirement of Subsection (a)(1) shall be satisfied if:
      (1)   at least 80 percent of the resident owners or tenants having
frontage along the alley are in favor of the installation or removal and have
signed the written request; and
      (2)   the remaining resident owners or tenants have been notified of the
request either in person or by deposit of a written notice properly addressed
and postage prepaid in the United States mail. Notice by mail must be given at
least 10 days prior to the installation or removal.
   (c)   The traffic engineer may repair existing speed bumps in an alley if he
receives:
      (1)   a written request for the repair from a resident owner or tenant
having frontage along the alley; and
      (2)   payment of the fee calculated under Subsection (d).
   (d)   The fee for the installation, removal, or repair of speed bumps shall
be an estimate of the actual cost of the work to be performed, as determined by
the traffic engineer. (Ord. 17828)
ARTICLE VI.
OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
Division 1. Generally.
SEC. 28-35.   BACKING INTO INTERSECTION PROHIBITED.
   A person commits an offense if, as the operator of a vehicle, he backs the
vehicle into an intersection or over a crosswalk. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-36.   OPERATION UPON PARKWAYS.
   A person commits an offense if he drives or operates a vehicle upon a
parkway except at a permanent or temporarily established authorized driveway.
(Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-37.   IDENTIFICATION OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by the
display of a pennant upon the outside of the lead vehicle and the hearse, and
all other vehicles in the procession shall have their headlamps turned on.
(Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-38.   FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION; OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
   Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand
edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely
as practical and safe. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-39.   SAME - DRIVING THROUGH PROHIBITED.
   A person, not a member of a funeral procession, commits an offense if he
drives a vehicle between the vehicles comprising the funeral procession while
they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as
required in this chapter. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-40.   OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES, ETC.
   A person commits an offense if he operates a motorcycle, motor scooter,
mini-bike, or motor-driven bicycle on private property, unless the vehicle is
equipped with a muffler meeting the requirements of Texas motor vehicle laws.
No parent, guardian, or other adult person shall knowingly permit a person
under the age of 17 years who is under the control of such parent, guardian, or
adult, to violate this section. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-41.   RIDING IN PORTIONS OF VEHICLES NOT DESIGNED OR EQUIPPED FOR
PASSENGERS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he rides upon any portion of a vehicle
not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not
apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty of employment
or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if as a passenger, in addition to an
operator, he rides upon a motor scooter or motor assisted bicycle, or if as the
operator of a motor scooter or motor assisted bicycle, he permits a person to
ride as a passenger, unless the vehicle is equipped with a seat and a set of
foot rests for the passenger. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-41.1.   RESERVED.
(Repealed by Ord. 31479)
SEC. 28-41.1.1.   RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTERSAND
ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)    BUFFER/FURNISHING/CURB ZONE means the areas between the curb and
the sidewalk clear zone that provides separation and protection from moving
vehicle traffic.
      (2)   CHILD means any individual younger than 17 years of age.
      (3)   ELECTRIC BICYCLE:
         (A)   has the meaning assigned by Section 664.001 of the Texas
Transportation Code, as amended;
         (B)   the term does not include:
            (i)   a motorized mobility device, as defined by Section 542.009 of
the Texas Transportation Code, as amended;
            (ii)   an electric personal assistive mobility device, as defined
by Section 551.201 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended; or
            (iii)   a neighborhood electric vehicle, as defined by Section
551.301 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
      (4)   HELMET means a properly-fitted bicycle helmet that:
         (A)   is not structurally damaged; and
         (B)   conforms to current standards of the American National Standards
Institute, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the Snell Memorial
Foundation, or any federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction over bicycle
helmets.
      (5)   MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTER has the meaning assigned by Section 551.351
of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
      (6)   PARENT means a person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent,
step-parent, court-appointed guardian or conservator of a child, or adult with
care, custody, or control of a child.
      (7)   PASSENGER means any person riding upon or attached to a motor
assisted scooter who is not the primary operator of the vehicle.
      (8)   PEDESTRIAN ZONE means the portion of the street that accommodates
non-vehicular activity, it extends from the face of the building or edge of the
property line to the face of the curb.
      (9)   SIDEWALK CLEAR ZONE means the portion of the pedestrian zone that
is specifically reserved for pedestrian travel.
      (10)   SHARED DOCKLESS VEHICLE has the meaning assigned by Article X,
"Shared Dockless Vehicle Operating Permit" of
Chapter 43, "Streets and Sidewalks," of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
      (11)   SLOW RIDE ZONE means an area where shared dockless vehicles may
not exceed 10 miles per hour or the speed limit otherwise posted.
      (12)   STATE FAIR GROUNDS means the area:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the southeast right-of-way of Parry Avenue and
the T. & P. Railroad;
THENCE eastward along the south boundary of the T. & P. Railroad right-of-way
to the beginning of a curve bearing to the right having a radius of 459.12
feet;
THENCE southeastward along said curve to the northwest right-of-way of
Pennsylvania Avenue;
THENCE southwestward along the northwest right- of-way of Pennsylvania Avenue
to its intersection with the northwesterly prolongation of the southwest right-
of-way of Gaisford Street;
THENCE southeastward along the northwesterly prolongation and southwest right-
of-way of Gaisford Street to the intersection with the northwest right-of-way
of Fitzhugh Avenue;
THENCE southwestward along the northwest right- of-way of Fitzhugh Avenue to
the northeast right-of-way of Robert B. Cullum Boulevard;
THENCE northwestward along the northeast right- of-way of Robert B. Cullum
Boulevard to the intersection with the southeast right-of-way of Parry Avenue;
THENCE northeastward along the southeast right- of-way of Parry Avenue to the
place of beginning.
      (13)   STATE FAIR OF TEXAS means the annual fall fair held at Fair Park.
      (14)   TRAIL means a pathway for pedestrian circulation, alternative
transportation, and recreational uses that is designed and constructed in
compliance with standards and specification adopted and maintained by the city.
      (15)   WEARING A HELMET means that a helmet is properly attached to a
person's head with the chin straps of the helmet securely fastened and
tightened.
   (b)   Every motor assisted scooter and electric bicycle must be equipped
with a lamp on the front that emits a white light that is visible at a distance
of not less than 500 feet and a red reflector on the rear that is visible from
a distance of not less than 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   The traffic engineer is authorized to designate zones where the
operation of motor assisted scooters is prohibited and slow ride zones for
motor assisted scooters and electric bicycles. Slow ride zones are in the areas
where, in the professional judgment of the traffic engineer:
      (1)   congested pedestrian or non-motorized traffic is present;
      (2)   without a speed limit, a significant speed differential would exist
between pedestrians or non-motorized traffic and motor assisted scooters and
electric bicycles; and
      (3)   without a speed limit, the presence of motor assisted scooters and
electric bicycles could endanger public safety.
   (d)   A rider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter imposed on
a driver of a vehicle, except those by which their nature can have no
application.
   (e)   A rider shall obey the instruction of traffic signals, signs, and
other traffic-control devices as applicable to vehicles, unless directed by a
peace officer.
   (f)   Unless a bike lane is specifically designated otherwise, a rider
traveling in a bike lane may not travel in the opposite direction of adjacent
motor vehicles in the roadway.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if the person:
      (1)   operates or rides a motor assisted scooter on any sidewalk within
the city;
      (2)   operates or rides a motor assisted scooter or an electric bicycle
at a speed greater than:
         (A)   20 miles per hour;
         (B)   the designated speed limit in a designated slow ride zone; or
         (C)   the posted speed limit on a public street or trail.
      (3)   operates or rides a motor assisted scooter on the state fair
grounds during the State Fair of Texas;
      (4)   operates or rides a motor assisted scooter in a public park or
public plaza;
      (5)   is a parent of a child and the parent knowingly permits, or by
insufficient control allows, the child to operate or ride a motor assisted
scooter on any sidewalk within the city;
      (6)   is a child and operates or rides a motor assisted scooter or
electric bicycle without wearing a helmet while in the public right-of-way or
in a public park or public plaza within the city;
      (7)   is a parent of a child and the parent knowingly permits, or by
insufficient control allows, the child to operate or ride a motor assisted
scooter or electric bicycle in the public right-of-way or in a public park or
public plaza within the city when the child is not wearing a helmet;
      (8)   transports any passenger on a motor assisted scooter or electric
bicycle while in the public right-of-way or public park or public plaza within
the city, unless the device is equipped with a seat and a set of foot rests for
the passenger;
      (9)   fails to yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian while operating a
motor assisted scooter or an electric bicycle;
      (10)   operates a motor assisted scooter on a trail where riding is
prohibited or during the hours that riding is prohibited on the trail; or
      (11)   operates a motor assisted scooter or electric bicycle on public
landscaping or art or on public amenities in a manner that is contrary to the
intended use of the amenity.
   (h)   In the public right-of-way, a person shall park a motor assisted
scooter or an electric bicycle in a standing upright position:
      (1)   on concrete or other non-porous surface;
      (2)   in a space designated by the city for the parking of motor assisted
scooters or electric bicycles;
      (3)   in the pedestrian zone if it is fully contained in the buffer/
furnishing/curb zone; or
      (4)   fastened to a bicycle rack in the right-of-way, if the device
includes a locking mechanism.
   (i)   A person may not park a motor assisted scooter or electric bike:
      (1)   within 10 feet of an intersection or crosswalk, unless that area is
a space designated by the city for the parking of motor assisted scooters or
electric bicycles;
      (2)   on a roadway unless that area is a space designated by the city for
the parking of motor assisted scooters or electric bicycles;
      (3)   on a sidewalk or public path in such a way as to obstruct traffic
that prevents the free passage over any part of the sidewalk or public path,
including in the sidewalk clear zone or pedestrian zone;
      (4)   along a blockface where the combined width of the sidewalk clear
zone and buffer/furnishing/ curb zone is less than eight feet;
      (5)   in a space designated as a motor vehicle parking or loading space
or between two designated vehicle parking spaces;
      (6)   within, against, or adjacent to a public transit shelter or public
transit stop, in a manner which restricts the use of the shelter or stop by
pedestrians who are waiting for public transportation;
      (7)   in a manner that obstructs fire suppression appurtenances, building
entryways or exits, or vehicular driveways;
      (8)   on any private property without permission of the property owner;
or
      (9)   in a public park or plaza unless that area is a space designated by
the city for the parking of motor assisted scooters or electric bicycles.
   (j)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$200. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this section, a culpable
mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this
section.
   (k)   A peace officer has the authority to enforce Subsection (g) of this
section and to issue citations. A parking enforcement officer has authority to
enforce the provisions of this section and to issue citations for violations of
this section including moving violations. (Ord. Nos. 30935; 31048; 31383;
31479; 32232)
SEC. 28-41.2.   REGULATING THE USE OF HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONES AND MOBILE
COMMUNICATION DEVICES IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   ENGAGING IN A CALL means talking into, dialing, or listening on a
hand-held mobile telephone, but does not include holding a mobile telephone to
activate or deactivate the telephone.
      (2)   HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONE means a mobile telephone with which a
user engages in a call using at least one hand (or prosthetic device or aid in
the case of a physically disabled person).
      (3)   HANDS-FREE MOBILE TELEPHONE means a mobile telephone that has an
internal feature or function or that is equipped with an attachment or
addition, whether or not permanently part of the mobile telephone, by which a
user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or
aid in the case of a physically disabled person) whether or not the use of
either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate or deactivate the
mobile telephone.
      (4)   MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICE means a text-messaging device or other
electronic, two- way communication device that is designed to receive and
transmit voice communication, text communication, or both. The term includes a
mobile telephone and a personal digital assistant (PDA).
      (5)   MOBILE TELEPHONE means a device used by subscribers and other users
of wireless telephone service to access such service.
      (6)   SCHOOL ZONE means a school traffic zone as designated in Section
28-50 of this chapter.
      (7)   TEXT MESSAGE means a two-way communication (whether real-time or
asynchronous) in which data (composed in whole or in part of text, numbers,
images, or symbols) is sent, entered, or received by a method other than by
voice and transmitted through either a short message service (SMS) or a
computer network. The term does not include a communication transmitted through
a global positioning or navigation system.
      (8)   WIRELESS TELEPHONE SERVICE means two-way, real time voice
telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched
telephone network and is commonly referred to as cellular service or personal
communication service.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person uses a hand-held mobile
telephone to engage in a call or uses a mobile communication device to send,
read, or write a text message, while operating a moving motor vehicle in a
school zone:
      (1)   on an official school day;
      (2)   during the hours when the school zone is in effect;
      (3)   when signs are conspicuously posted to indicate the beginning and
end of the school zone; and
      (4)   when signs stating “NO TEXT- MESSAGING OR HAND-HELD CELL PHONE USE
IN ACTIVE SCHOOL ZONE” or similar language are conspicuously posted at each
entrance to the school zone.
   (c)   An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to or in
the immediate proximity of his or her ear while the vehicle is in motion is
presumed to be engaging in a call under this section. Immediate proximity is
any distance that permits the user of a mobile telephone to hear
telecommunications transmitted over the telephone and does not require physical
contact with the user’s ear.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person was:
      (1)   operating an authorized emergency vehicle and using the mobile
telephone or mobile communication device in the course and scope of the
person’s official duties;
      (2)   using the mobile telephone or mobile communication device to:
         (A)   report illegal activity to a law enforcement agency;
         (B)   communicate with an emergency response operator, a fire
department, a law enforcement agency, a hospital, a physician’s office, or a
health clinic regarding a medical or other emergency situation; or
         (C)   prevent injury to a person or property; or
      (3)   using a hands-free mobile telephone in a hands-free manner.
   (e)   A person convicted of an offense under this section shall be punished
by a fine of $200.
   (f)   An offense under this section is not a moving violation and may not be
made a part of a person’s driving record or insurance record.
   (g)   In addition to enforcement by a peace officer of the city of Dallas,
this section may be enforced by a peace officer of another governmental entity
pursuant to a duly authorized interlocal agreement between the governmental
entity and the city of Dallas. (Ord. 27101)
SEC. 28-42.   DRIVING ON FOUR-WAY PLACE AND STONE PLACE.
   A person commits an offense if he drives a vehicle on, over, or along Four-
Way Place (formerly known as Exchange Place) or Stone Place, except for
official city maintenance vehicles. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-42.1.   CRUISING PROHIBITED IN DESIGNATED AREAS.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   CRUISE or CRUISING means to operate a motor vehicle, or to permit
the operation of a motor vehicle under one’s care, custody, or control, so as
to pass the same traffic control point within a no cruising zone three times
within any two-hour period.
      (2)   NO CRUISING ZONE means any of the following streets or areas:
         (A)   The area within the West End Historic District bounded by and
including the following streets or portions of streets:
 
STREET          EXTENT
Elm Street      Lamar Street to Houston Street
Houston Street  Elm Street to Ross Avenue
Ross Avenue     Houston Street to Record Street
Record Street   Ross Avenue to McKinney Avenue
McKinney Avenue Record Street to Lamar Street
Lamar Street    McKinney Avenue to Elm Street.
 
         (B)   The area within the Deep Ellum District bounded by and including
the following streets or portions of streets:
 
STREET                  EXTENT
Good-Latimer Expressway Elm Street to Commerce Street
Commerce Street         Good-Latimer Expressway to Hall Street
Hall Street             Commerce Street to Elm Street
Elm Street              Hall Street to Good-Latimer Expressway.
 
         (C)   The following streets or portions of streets:
 
STREET            EXTENT
Clarendon Drive   Westmoreland Road to Hampton Road
Hampton Road      Sharon Avenue to Catherine Street
Westmoreland Road Sharon Avenue to Brooklyndell Avenue.
 
      (D)   The following streets or portions of streets:
 
STREET                EXTENT
Shady Trail           Willowbrook Road to Fabens Road
Harry Hines Boulevard Royal Lane to Lombardy Lane
Walnut Hill Lane      Composite Drive to Harry Hines Boulevard
Southwell Road        Ables Lane to Harry Hines Boulevard.
 
      (3)   TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT means any point established by the chief of
police within a no cruising zone for the purpose of monitoring cruising.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if:
      (1)   between 8:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. on any day of the week, he cruises
in an area marked in accordance with Subsection (e) as a no cruising zone, as
defined in Subsection (a)(2)(A) or (a)(2)(B);
      (2)   between 3:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m. on any day of the week, he cruises
in an area marked in accordance with Subsection (e) as a no cruising zone, as
defined in Subsection (a)(2)(C); or
      (3)   between 4:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day of the week, he cruises
in an area marked in accordance with Subsection (e) as a no cruising zone, as
defined in Subsection (a)(2)(D).
   (c)   A citation will be issued under Subsection (b) any time after the
third passage of the vehicle by the traffic control point.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the motor
vehicle was:
      (1)   an official public safety or emergency vehicle;
      (2)   a licensed public transportation vehicle; or
      (3)   a vehicle being used for business purposes.
   (e)   The traffic engineer shall mark a no cruising zone by conspicuously
posting appropriate signs at each entrance to the zone. (Ord. Nos. 20606;
23616; 25274; 31714)
Division 2. Speed Regulations.
SEC. 28-43.   SPEEDS GREATER THAN 30 MILES PER HOUR ON PUBLIC STREETS OR 15
MILES PER HOUR ON PUBLIC ALLEYS NOT REASONABLE OR PRUDENT.
   A person commits an offense if he operates a vehicle on any street within
the city at a speed greater than 30 miles per hour or on any public alley at a
speed greater than 15 miles per hour, unless otherwise provided by this
chapter. Any speed in excess of 30 miles per hour on a public street or 15
miles per hour in a public alley, unless otherwise provided by this chapter,
shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and
is unlawful. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-44.   STREETS OTHER THAN EXPRESSWAYS AND FREEWAYS.
   A person commits an offense if he operates or drives a vehicle on the
following designated streets at a speed greater than the speed designated by
this section for that street or portion of that street, and any speed in excess
of the limit provided in this section shall be prima facie evidence that the
speed is not reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful.
STREET EXTENT SPEED
              (MPH)
STREET                     EXTENT                     SPEED
                                                      (MPH)
Abrams Road                North city limits to       40
                           Skillman Street
Abrams Road                Paulus Avenue to Beacon    35
                           Street
Abrams Road                Skillman Street to         35
                           Lakeshore Drive
Airdrome Drive             Mockingbird Lane to Lemmon 35
                           Avenue
Alamo Street               Cedar Springs Road to      35
                           Wichita Street
Alonzo Place               McCoy Place to Washington  20
                           Avenue
Alpha Road                 The west city limits to    35
                           Hillcrest Road
Applegrove Street          Morris Street to Greenleaf 20
                           Street
Applegrove Street          Bickers Street to Canada   20
                           Drive
Arapaho Road               Dallas Parkway to Golden   40
                           Creek Road
Arapaho Road               Golden Creek Road to Coit  35
                           Road
Audelia Road               The north city limits to   40
                           Skillman Street
Audelia Road               Skillman Street to         35
                           Northwest Highway
                           Tom Braniff Lane to one-
Aviation Place             half mile north of Tom     20
                           Braniff Lane
Baker Avenue               Pointer Avenue to Toronto  20
                           Avenue
Barnes Bridge Road         Ferguson Road to the east  35
                           city limits
Barnes Bridge Road         Garland Road to Shiloh     35
                           Road
Barry Avenue               Crosstown Expressway to R. 35
                           L. Thornton Freeway
N. Beckley Avenue          750 feet north of Commerce 35
                           Street to Canada Drive
N. Beckley Avenue          Zang Boulevard to 750 feet 35
                           south of Commerce Street
Belt Line Road             West city limits to Spring 40
                           Creek Road
Belt Line Road             Spring Creek Road to Coit  35
                           Road
                           1250 feet east of Sanders
E. Belt Line Road          Loop to 450 feet east of   50
                           S. Northlake Road
Bernal Drive               Walton Walker Boulevard to 35
                           Westmoreland Road
Bethurum Street            Railroad Avenue to         20
                           Woodville Avenue
Beulah Place               Lyons Street to Watt Sims  20
                           Walk
Big Town Boulevard         Forney Road to the city    40
                           limits of Mesquite, Texas
Bishop Avenue              Colorado Boulevard to      35
                           Davis Street
Bluffview Boulevard        Lemmon Avenue to Lovers    35
                           Lane
Bonnie View Road           Ledbetter Drive to         40
                           Simpson-Stuart Road
Bonnie View Road           Simpson-Stuart Road to     35
                           Riverside Drive
Bonnie View Road           Riverside Drive to the     45
                           south city limits
Brookhaven Avenue          Illinois Avenue to Beckley 25
                           Avenue
Brown Place                Kings Road to Hawthorne    20
                           Avenue
Bruton Road                Second Avenue to Moonlight 35
                           Avenue
Bruton Road                Moonlight Avenue to Jim    50
                           Miller Road
Bruton Road                Jim Miller Road to the     35
                           east city limits
Bucknell Drive             Northwest Highway to       25
                           Trammell Drive
Bucker Boulevard           Edgelake Drive to C.F.     40
                           Hawn Freeway
Buckner Boulevard          Northwest Highway to       45
                           Edgelake Drive
                           The city limits at the Elm
California Crossing Road   Fork of the Trinity River  40
                           to Northwest Highway
Calypso Street             Holystone Street to        20
                           Hampton Road
Campbell Road              Coit Road to Preston Road  35
Camp Wisdom Road           Turnout Lane to Clark Road 40
Camp Wisdom Road           3500 feet west of FM 1382  35
                           to Turnout Lane
Camp Wisdom Road           West city limits to        40
                           Lancaster Road
Canaan Street              Choice Street to Vesper    20
                           Street
Canaan Street              Parsons Street to the      20
                           south end of Canaan Street
Canada Drive               Pluto Street to Borger     35
                           Street
Canada Drive               Borger Street to Gulden    45
                           Street
Canada Drive               Gulden Street to Beckley   35
                           Avenue
Carver Place               Alonzo Place to La Fayette 20
                           Place
Carver Place               Cochran Place to Munger    20
                           Avenue
Cedar Crest Boulevard      Martin Luther King Jr.     35
                           Boulevard to Stella Avenue
                           From a point 800 feet east
Cedardale Road             of Glorietta Lane to       35
                           Langdon Drive
Cedar Springs Road         Mockingbird Lane to        35
                           Hudnall Street
Cedar Springs Road         Mockingbird Lane to a
(northbound)               point 500 feet south of    40
                           Howard Megredy Circle
Cedar Springs Road         From a point 500 feet
(northbound)               south to 500 feet north of 30
                           Howard Megredy Circle
Cedar Springs Road         From a point 500 feet
(northbound)               north to 1770 feet north   20
                           of Howard Megredy Circle
Cedar Springs Road         Mockingbird Lane to a
(southbound)               point 350 feet north of    40
                           Howard Megredy Circle
Cedar Springs Road         From a point 350 feet
(southbound)               north to 1725 feet north   30
                           of Howard Megredy Circle
Cedar Springs Road         From a point 1725 feet
(southbound)               north to 2375 feet north   20
                           of Howard Megredy Circle
Centerville Road           Garland Road to Shiloh     35
                           Road
                           Singleton Boulevard to
Chalk Hill Road            eight-tenths of a mile     35
                           north of Davis Street
                           Davis Street to eight-
Chalk Hill Road            tenths of a mile north of  40
                           Davis Street
Choice Street              Parsons Street to Canaan   20
                           Street
Church Road                Abrams Road to Ashglen     35
                           Circle
Clarendon Drive            Corinth Street Road to     35
                           Cumberland Street
Clark Road                 The south city limits to   40
                           Interstate Highway 20
Cochran Place              McCoy Place to Carver      20
                           Place
Cockrell Hill Road         Davis Street to Interstate 40
                           Highway 30
                           Kiest Boulevard to a point
Cockrell Hill Road         two hundred fifty feet     40
                           south of Corral Drive at
                           the south city limits
                           Kiest Boulevard to the
Cockrell Hill Road         south city limits of       35
                           Cockrell Hill
                           Frankford Road at the
Coit Road                  north city limits to       45
                           McCallum Boulevard
                           McCallum Boulevard to a
Coit Road                  point 130 feet north of    40
                           Campbell Road
Coit Road                  Spring Valley Road to      40
                           Forest Lane
Columbia Avenue            Carroll Avenue to Beacon   35
                           Street
Commerce Street            Rock Island Street to      35
                           Trinity River
Commerce Street            Fort Worth Avenue to the   35
                           Trinity River
Commodore Drive            Bexar Street to Woodville  20
                           Street
Commonwealth Drive         Irving Boulevard to        45
                           Stemmons Freeway
Congress Place             Kings Road to Hawthorne    20
                           Avenue
Continental Avenue         Singleton Boulevard to     35
                           Core Street
Corinth Street Road        150 feet east of Atwood    35
                           Street to Morrell Avenue
Corinth Street Road        Morrell Avenue to Ohio     40
                           Avenue
                           East levee of the Trinity
Corinth Street Viaduct     River to 150 feet east of  35
                           Atwood Street
Corrigan Avenue            Ledbetter Drive to Bonnie  25
                           View Road
Crosstown Expressway       Fitzhugh Avenue to Barry   35
                           Avenue
                           Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway
Dallas Parkway             to 435 feet north of       40
                           Arapaho Road
                           435 feet north of Arapaho
Dallas Parkway             Road to the north city     45
                           limits
Danieldale Road            Old Hickory Trail to R. L. 40
                           Thornton Freeway
Davis Street               The west city limits to    45
                           Tatum Avenue
Davis Street               Tatum Avenue to Dwight     35
                           Avenue
Davis Street               Dwight Avenue to           40
                           Westmoreland Avenue
Davis Street               Cliffdale Avenue to        35
                           Marlborough Avenue
Deepwood Drive             Carter Road to Western     25
                           Hills Drive
Delhi Street               Pointer Avenue to Toronto  20
                           Avenue
Dennison Street            Delhi Street to Rupert     20
                           Street
Denton Drive               The northwest city limits  35
                           to Webb Chapel Extension
Denton Drive               Webb Chaptel Extension to  40
                           Mockingbird Lane
Denton Drive               Mockingbird Lane to Maple  35
                           Avenue
                           McCallum Boulevard to 270
Dickerson Street           feet south of Hiddencreek  35
                           Drive
Dolphin Road               Samuell Boulevard to       35
                           Haskell Avenue
                           C. F. Hawn Freeway to
Dowdy Ferry Road           Murdock-Dowdy Ferry        35
                           Connection
                           Murdock-Dowdy Ferry
Dowdy Ferry Road           Connection to the south    40
                           city limits
Duncanville Road           Keeneland Parkway to the   40
                           south city limits
East Grand Avenue          Wayne Street to Tenison    35
                           Parkway
East Grand Avenue          Tenison Parkway to Gaston  35
                           Avenue
Easton Road                Lippit Avenue to the Santa 35
                           Fe Railroad
                           Jim Miller Road to the
Elam Road                  east city limits at Acres  35
                           Drive
Elsie Faye Heggins Street  Botham Jean Boulevard to   35
                           Spring Avenue
Emerald Street             Lu Field Road to Royal     35
                           Lane
Empire Central             John W. Carpenter Freeway  35
                           to Harry Hines Boulevard
                           500 feet south of          Set by Texas
FM 1382                    Interstate Highway 20 to   Transportation Commission
                           2.6 miles south of Camp    Minute Order No. 108474,
                           Wisdom Road                as amended
                           2.1 miles north to 2.6     Set by Texas
FM 1382                    miles north of Lyndon B.   Transportation Commission
                           Johnson Freeway            Minute Order No. 108474,
                                                      as amended
Fair Oaks Avenue           125 feet north of Merriman 35
                           Parkway to Abrams Road
Ferguson Road              Samuell Boulevard to       40
                           Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway
Fish Trap Road             Shaw Street to Dennison    20
                           Street
Fish Trap Road             Canada Drive to Bickers    20
                           Street
Five Mile Parkway          Rugged Drive to Lost Creek 25
                           Drive
Fitzhugh Avenue            Crosstown Expressway to    35
                           Second Avenue
Floyd Road                 The north city limits to   35
                           Valley View Lane
Forest Lane                Preston Road to Skillman   40
                           Street
Forest Lane                Skillman Street to the     45
                           east city limits
Forest Lane                Harry Hines Boulevard to   35
                           Preston Road
Forney Road                Jim Miller Road to Buckner 35
                           Boulevard
Forney Road                Buckner Boulevard to Sam   40
                           Houston Road
Fort Worth Avenue          Davis Street to            40
                           Westmoreland Road
Fort Worth Avenue          Westmoreland Road to West  35
                           Commerce Street
Frankford Road             All portions within the    40
                           city limits
Garden Lane                Pinkston Drive to Roberts  20
                           Avenue
Garland Road               Gaston Avenue to           35
                           Tranquilla Drive
Garland Road               Tranquilla Drive to Barnes 40
                           Bridge Road
Garland Road               Barnes Bridge Road to      45
                           Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway
Gaston Avenue              Cambria Boulevard to East  35
                           Grand Avenue
Gladiolus Lane             Boulder Drive to Franklin  25
                           Street
Goldman Street             Canada Drive to Dennison   20
                           Street
Great Trinity Forest Way   Bonnie View Road to        40
                           Wadsworth Drive
Great Trinity Forest Way   Wadsworth Drive to         50
                           Pemberton Hill Road
Great Trinity Forest Way   Pemberton Hill Road to     45
                           Oklaunion Drive
Great Trinity Forest Way   Oklaunion Drive to C. F.   40
                           Hawn Freeway
Greenleaf Street           Holystone Street to        20
                           Applegrove Street
Greenville Avenue          The north city limits to   40
                           Walnut Hill Lane
Greenville Avenue          Walnut Hill Lane to        35
                           Mockingbird Lane
Gus Thomasson Road         Joaquin Drive to Maylee    35
                           Boulevard
Gus Thomasson Road         Santa Fe Railroad to       35
                           Kilkenny Place
Hampton Road               Akron Street to Dallas-    40
                           Fort Worth Turnpike
Hampton Road               415 feet north of Canada   35
                           Drive to Akron Street
S. Hampton Road            Dallas-Fort Worth Turnpike 35
                           to Cliff Teen Court
                           Cliff Teen Court to the
S. Hampton Road            south city limits at       40
                           Danieldale Road
Hampton Road Bridge (the
bridge connecting N.       415 feet north of Canada
Hampton Road and Inwood    Drive to 870 feet south of 45
Road over the Trinity      Conveyor Lane
River)
                           The northwest city limits
Harry Hines Boulevard      to 200 feet south of       45
                           Treadway Street
Harry Hines Boulevard      200 feet south of Treadway 40
                           Street to Ivan Street
Harry Hines Boulevard      Ivan Street to Payne       35
                           Street
Haskell Avenue             Ring Street to Dolphin     35
                           Road
Highland Road              San Rafael Drive to Jim    35
                           Miller Road
Hillcrest Road             North city limits to       35
                           Northwest Highway
Holystone Street           Canada Drive to Bickers    20
                           Street
Horizon North Parkway      Midway Road to the north   35
                           city limits
                           One-fourth of a mile south
Houston Street Viaduct     of Young Street to         40
                           Lancaster Avenue
N. Houston Street          Ross Avenue to Harry Hines 35
                           Boulevard
Illinois Avenue            Pierce Street to Belknap   35
                           Avenue
Illinois Avenue            Belknap Avenue to Overton  40
                           Road
Illinois Avenue            Overton Road to Central    35
                           Expressway
Illinois Avenue            Walton Walker Boulevard to 40
                           Pierce Street
Inwood Road                The north city limits to   40
                           Royal Lane
Inwood Road                Royal Lane to 870 feet     35
                           south of Conveyor Lane
                           The west city limits at
Irving Boulevard           the east levee of Trinity  45
                           River to Crampton Street
Irving Boulevard           Crampton Street to Pump    40
                           Plant B Road
Irving Boulevard           Pump Plant B Road to       35
                           Industrial Boulevard
Jarvis Street              Pilgrim Drive to Commodore 20
                           Drive
                           The city limits of
Jefferson Boulevard        Cockrell Hill, Texas to    35
                           Hampton Road
                           The west city limits to
Jefferson Boulevard        1200 feet west of Via      40
                           Bishop Grahmann
                           1200 feet west of Via
Jefferson Boulevard        Bishop Grahmann to Calumet 35
                           Avenue
Jefferson Boulevard        300 feet south of Young
Viaduct                    Street to the southwest    40
                           end of the viaduct
Jim Miller Road            Samuell Boulevard to       40
                           Forney Road
Jim Miller Road            Forney Road to 300 feet    35
                           south of Scyene Road
Jim Miller Road            300 feet south of Scyene   40
                           Road to Bruton Road
Jim Miller Road            Bruton Road to Loop 12     35
John West Road             Lakeland Drive to La Prada 35
                           Drive
                           From a point 600 feet east
Jordan Valley Road         of Palomino Road to the    35
                           east leg of Windfall
                           Circle
Joyce Way                  Douglas Avenue to Preston  20
                           Road
Jupiter Road               The north city limits to   40
                           Northwest Highway
Jupiter Road               Northwest Highway to       35
                           Centerville Road
Keeler Street              Wells Street to Canaan     20
                           Street
                           300 feet north to 1330
Keller Springs Road        feet west of Westgrove     35
                           Drive
                           1330 feet west of
Keller Springs Road        Westgrove Drive to the     40
                           west city limits
                           Mountain Creek Parkway to
Kiest Boulevard            a point 500 feet west of   45
                           Duncanville Road
                           From a point 500 feet west
Kiest Boulevard            of Duncanville Road to a   40
                           point 500 feet east of
                           Morse Drive
                           From a point 500 feet east
Kiest Boulevard            of Morse Drive to Van      35
                           Cleave Drive
Kiest Boulevard            Van Cleave Drive to Rector 40
                           Street
Kiest Boulevard            Rector Street to Cedar     35
                           Crest Boulevard
Kingsbridge Street         Canada Drive to Greenleaf  20
                           Street
Kingsbridge Street         Bickers Street to          20
                           Singleton Boulevard
Kingsley Road              Abrams Road to Jupiter     35
                           Road
                           The Balch Springs city
Kleberg Road               limits to the U.S. 175     35
                           east service road
La Fayette Place           Hall Street to Carver      20
                           Place
La Prada Drive             The northeast city limits  35
                           to Oates Drive
La Prada Drive             Oates Drive to John West   40
                           Road
Lake Highlands Drive       Northwest Highway to       35
                           Buckner Boulevard
Lake June Road             Pemberton Hill Road to     40
                           Amity Lane
                           Amity Lane to the east
Lake June Road             city limits at Cheyenne    35
                           Road
Lakeland Drive             Garland Road to John West  35
                           Road
Lakeview Parkway (State    The west city limits of
Highway 66)                Rockwall to the east city  55
                           limits of Rowlett
Lakeview Parkway (State    1000 feet east of
Highway 66)                Edgewater Drive to 50 feet 50
                           west of Shipp Road
Lamar Street               Pine Street to Central     35
                           Expressway
Lancaster Road             Ohio Avenue to Kingsley    35
                           Drive
Lancaster Road             Kingsley Drive to Arden    40
                           Road
Lancaster Road             Arden Road to Simpson-     45
                           Stuart Road
                           Simpson-Stuart Road to the
Lancaster Road             city limits at Cedardale   50
                           Road
Langdon Drive              Cedardale Road to the      35
                           southeast city limits
Laureland Road             775 feet west of Greenspan 35
                           Drive to Oxbow Lane
Lawnview Avenue            Samuell Boulevard to La    35
                           Barba Street
Leath Street               Kingsbridge Street to      20
                           Hampton Road
Ledbetter Drive            Whispering Cedar Drive to  40
                           Cockrell Hill Road
Ledbetter Drive            Cockrell Hill Road to      45
                           S.R.L. Thornton Freeway
Ledbetter Drive            S. R.L. Thornton Freeway   40
                           to Bonnie View Road
Ledbetter Drive            Loop 12 to Kolloch Drive   35
Lemmon Avenue              Northwest Highway to Capps 35
                           Drive
Lemmon Avenue              Capps Drive to Thedford    40
                           Avenue
Lemmon Avenue East         Turtle Creek Boulevard to  35
                           Lemmon Avenue
Lombardy Lane              Harry Hines Boulevard to   35
                           Webb Chapel Road
Lovers Lane                Lemmon Avenue to Briarwood 35
                           Lane
Lovers Lane                Greenville Avenue to       35
                           Abrams Road
Luna Road                  Royal Lane to Northwest    40
                           Highway
Market Center Boulevard    Harry Hines Boulevard to   35
                           Irving Boulevard
Marsalis Avenue            Opera Street to Laureland  35
                           Road
Marsh Lane                 Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway  35
                           to Northwest Highway
                           1000 feet north of Trinity
Marsh Lane                 Mills Road to the          35
                           Carrollton city limits
Martin Luther King Jr.     Overpass at Lamar Street   35
Boulevard                  to Cedar Crest Boulevard
Masters Drive              Sam Houston Road to C. F.  40
                           Hawn Freeway
Matilda Bridge             Mockingbird Lane to        35
                           Greenville Avenue
Maylee Boulevard           Ferguson Road to Gus       35
                           Thomasson Road
McCallum Boulevard         Preston Road to Duffield   35
                           Drive
McCoy Place                Thomas Avenue to Munger    20
                           Avenue
McKinnon Street            Harry Hines Boulevard to   35
                           Ivan Street
McKinnon Street            Ivan Street to Payne       35
                           Street
Meandering Way             Lynworth Drive to Highland 35
                           Glen Trail
Merrifield Road            Verde Way to Davis Street  35
Merrifield Way             Mountain Creek Boulevard   45
                           to Verde Road
Midway Road                The north city limits to   35
                           Shore Crest Drive
Midway Road                Trinity Mills Road to the  40
                           north city limits
Military Parkway           Dolphin Road to Lovett     35
                           Avenue
Military Parkway           Lovett Avenue to Delafield 40
                           Lane
                           Delafield Lane to the east
Military Parkway           city limits at Sam Houston 45
                           Road
Mill Place                 Viking Place to Hatcher    20
                           Street
Miller Road                Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway  40
                           to the east city limits
Miller Road                150 feet east of Sunrise   40
                           Drive to C. A. Roan Drive
                           2700 feet east of
Miller Road                Centerville Road to 850    40
                           feet west of Dexham Road
Mockingbird Lane           McMillan Avenue to Briar   35
                           Creek Lane
Mockingbird Lane           Briar Creek Lane to Peavy  40
                           Road
Mockingbird Lane           Doug Drive to Robin Road   35
Monaghan Court             Eighth Street to Clarendon 20
                           Drive
Monte Place                Lyons Street to Hatcher    20
                           Street
Montfort Road              Belt Line Road to Arapaho  35
                           Road
Moody Street               Wichita Street to Akard    35
                           Street
Morris Street              Westmoreland Road to Baker 20
                           Avenue
Morris Street              Pointer Avenue to Rupert   20
                           Street
Morris Street              Kingsbridge Street to      20
                           Goldman Street
                           From a point 1150 feet
Mountain Creek Parkway     south of Eagle Ford Drive  35
                           to the southeast city
                           limits
Mountain Creek Parkway     1150 feet south of Eagle   35
                           Ford Drive to Clark Road
Mountain Creek Parkway     Grady Niblo Road to W.     45
                           Illinois Avenue
Munger Boulevard           Bryan Street to R. L.      35
                           Thornton Freeway
Municipal Street           Bexar Street to Rochester  20
                           Street
Murdock Road               Loop 12 to Murdock-Dowdy   40
                           Ferry Connection
Murdock-Dowdy Ferry        Murdock Road to Dowdy      40
Connection                 Ferry Road
Ninth Street               Cliffdale Avenue to        20
                           Jefferson Boulevard
                           The west city limits at
Northwest Highway          the Elm Fork of the        45
                           Trinity River to 1360 feet
                           east of Shady Trail
                           1360 feet east of Shady
Northwest Highway          Trail to 550 feet west of  40
                           Starlight Road
Northwest Highway          550 feet west of Starlight 35
                           Road to Central Expressway
Northwest Highway          Central Expressway to the  45
                           east city limits
Oates Drive                Ferguson Road to the east  35
                           city limits
Olympus Boulevard          Ranch Trail to Belt Line   35
                           Road
Park Lane                  Hillcrest Road to          35
                           Greenville Avenue
Park Lane                  Larmanda Street to Abrams  35
                           Road
Parma Place                Spring Avenue to Teal      20
                           Place
Parsons Street             Bexar Street to Choice     20
                           Street
Pearl Street               McKinney Avenue to Live    35
                           Oak Street
Pemberton Hill Road        C. F. Hawn Freeway to Loop 35
                           12
Pilgrim Drive              Commodore Drive to         20
                           Bethurum Avenue
Plano Road                 Forest Lane to Chesterton  40
                           Drive
Plano Road                 Chesterton Drive to        35
                           Northwest Highway
Pleasant Drive             Bruton Road to Grovecrest  35
                           Drive
Pointer Avenue             Vacek Street to Singleton  20
                           Boulevard
Polk Street                Turner Avenue to Twelfth   35
                           Street
Polk Street                Vernon Avenue to Ledbetter 35
                           Drive
                           Ledbetter Drive to the
Polk Street                south city limits at       40
                           Danieldale Road
Prairie Creek Road         Forney Road to Scyene Road 40
Prairie Creek Road         Scyene Road to Fostoria    35
                           Drive
Preston Road               The north city limits to   45
                           Arapaho Road
Preston Road               Arapaho Road to Northwest  35
                           Highway
Prestonwood Boulevard      Arapaho Road to Belt Line  35
                           Road
Pueblo Street              Rupert Street to           20
                           Kingsbridge Street
Ravinia Drive              Jefferson Boulevard to     20
                           Gladstone Drive
Record Crossing Road       Stemmons Freeway to Harry  35
                           Hines Boulevard
Red Bird Lane              Cockrell Hill Road to      40
                           Marvin D. Love Freeway
Regal Row                  Governors Row to the       35
                           Irving city limits
Regal Row                  Governors Row to Harry     40
                           Hines Boulevard
Remond Drive               Westmoreland Road to Fort  35
                           Worth Avenue
Restland Road              Valley View Lane to        40
                           Greenville Avenue
Riverfront Boulevard       Irving Boulevard to        35
                           Corinth Street
Robert B. Cullum Boulevard Ash Lane to Second Avenue  35
Rosemeade Parkway          Marsh Lane to Dallas       35
                           Parkway
                           2700 feet south of Chaha
Rowlett Road               Road to 1700 feet north of 40
                           Roan Road
Royal Lane                 The west city limits to    35
                           Central Expressway
Royal Lane                 Central Expressway to      40
                           Greenville Avenue
Royal Lane                 Greenville Avenue to       35
                           Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway
Rupert Street              Bickers Street to the cul- 20
                           de-sac
Rupert Street              Pointer Avenue to Toronto  20
                           Avenue
                           The northeast city limits
St. Augustine Road         at Sam Houston Road to     35
                           Middlefield Road
Sam Houston Road           All portions within the    40
                           city limits
Samuell Boulevard          Dolphin Road to 300 feet   35
                           east of Enderley Place
Samuell Boulevard          300 feet east of Enderley  40
                           Place to Buckner Boulevard
                           300' East of Trinity Ct.,
Sandy Lake Road            Coppell to 160 East of     40
                           McInnish Park
Scyene Circle              All portions within the    45
                           city limits
Scyene Road                Second Avenue to Lagow     35
                           Street
Scyene Road                Lagow Street to Scyene     45
                           Circle
                           Scyene Circle east of
Scyene Road                Scyene Road to the east    45
                           city limits at Sam Houston
                           Road
                           Scyene Circle west of
Scyene Road                Scyene Road to six-tenths  35
                           of a mile west of Buckner
                           Boulevard
Seagoville Road            Elam Road to Prairie Creek 35
                           Road
Seagoville Road            Masters Drive to Acres     40
                           Drive
                           860 feet south of Dixon
Second Avenue              Avenue to C. F. Hawn       40
                           Freeway
Shady Trail                Walnut Hill Lane to        35
                           Northwest Highway
Shaw Street                Applegrove Street to       20
                           Goldman Street
Shiloh Road                Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway  40
                           to Santa Anna Avenue
Shiloh Road                Santa Anna Avenue to       35
                           Ferguson Road
Shoreview Road             Audelia Road to Thurgood   25
                           Lane
Simpson-Stuart Road        Lancaster Road to Bonnie   40
                           View Road
Simpson-Stuart Road        Bonnie View Road to        35
                           Central Expressway
Singleton Boulevard        Walton Walker Boulevard to 35
                           Hampton Road
Skillman Street            Forest Lane to 640 feet    45
                           north of Walling Lane
Skillman Street            640 feet north of Walling  40
                           Lane to Sandhurst Lane
Skillman Street            Sandhurst Lane to Richmond 35
                           Avenue
                           Interstate Highway 20 to
South Belt Line Road       900 feet south of Beckett  40
                           Road
South Ledbetter Drive      Walton Walker Boulevard to 40
                           Whispering Cedar Drive
Southern Oaks Boulevard    Illinois Avenue to Overton 35
                           Road
Southwestern Boulevard     Greenville Avenue to       35
                           Skillman Street
Spring Avenue              Wahoo Street to Hatcher    25
                           Street
Spring Valley Road         Dallas Parkway to Coit     35
                           Road
Spur 482 (Storey Lane)     The west city limits to    45
                           Harry Hines Boulevard
                           1100 feet east of
State Highway 66           Edgewater Drive to 1300    50
                           feet west of Mark Lane
Stonebridge Drive          Turtle Creek Boulevard to  20
                           Fitzhugh Avenue
Sylvan Avenue              Irving Boulevard to Morris 35
                           Street
                           150 feet north of
Sylvan Avenue              Singleton Boulevard to     35
                           Colorado Boulevard
Teagarden Road             Dowdy Ferry Road to        35
                           Muleshoe Road
Teal Place                 Spring Avenue to Beulah    20
                           Place
Telephone Road             Dallas City Limits to      45
                           Bonnie View Road
Tenison Parkway            East Grand Avenue to       25
                           Samuell Boulevard
Thomas Avenue              Leonard Street to Hall     25
                           Street
Tippecanoe Street          Tuxedo Street to Woodville 20
                           Street
Toronto Street             Westmoreland Road to Fish  20
                           Trap Road
Treehaven Street           Pilgrim Drive to Commodore 20
                           Drive
Trepur Court               All portions within the    20
                           city limits
                           Voss Road to two-tenths of
Trinity Mills Road         a mile west of Dallas      40
                           Parkway
                           Two-tenths of a mile west
Trinity Mills Road         of Dallas Parkway to       35
                           Dallas Parkway
Tuxedo Street              Bethurum Avenue to         20
                           Commodore Drive
Twelfth Street             Polk Street to Beckley     35
                           Avenue
Tyler Street               Colorado Boulevard to      35
                           Canty Street
Tyler Street               Page Avenue to Vernon      35
                           Avenue
Tyler Street Connection    Twelfth Street to Tyler
(formerly Polk St. Cut-    Street                     35
off)
University Hills Boulevard Ledbetter Drive to         40
                           Wheatland Road
Vacek Street               Rupert Street to the cul-  20
                           de-sac
Valleria Drive             Illinois Avenue south to   20
                           the dead end of the street
                           Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway
Valley View Lane           (east of Central           40
                           Expressway, north) to
                           Restland Road
Vernon Avenue              Tyler Street to Polk       35
                           Street
Vesper Street              Bexar Street to the west   20
                           end of Vesper Street
Victory Avenue             Houston Street to          35
                           Continental Avenue
Viking Place               Hatcher Street to Mill     20
                           Place
Walnut Street              Greenville Avenue to the   40
                           Garland, Texas city limits
Walnut Hill Lane           Greenville Avenue to Fair  40
                           Oaks Avenue
Walnut Hill Lane           Fair Oaks Avenue to Abrams 35
                           Road
Walnut Hill Lane           Stemmons Freeway to Harry  40
                           Hines Boulevard
Walnut Hill Lane           Harry Hines Boulevard to   35
                           Greenville Avenue
                           1350 feet south of
Walton Walker Boulevard    Illinois Avenue to         50
                           Ledbetter Drive
Watt Sims Walk             Hatcher Street to Mill     20
                           Place
Webb Chapel Extension      Harry Hines Boulevard to   35
                           Lombardy Lane
                           The city limits at Lyndon
Webb Chapel Road           B. Johnson Freeway to two- 35
                           tenths of a mile northwest
                           of Northwest Highway
Wells Street               Canaan Street to Southern  20
                           Pacific Railroad
West Commerce Street       Westmoreland Road to Lone  35
                           Star Drive
Westmoreland Road          Doug Drive to Ledbetter    35
                           Drive
Westmoreland Road          Ledbetter Drive to         40
                           Wheatland Road
Wheatland Road             All portions within the    45
                           city limits
Wildwood Drive             California Crossing Road   40
                           to the south city limits
Wolf Street                Santiago Plaza to Harry    20
                           Hines Boulevard
Woodville Street           Bethurum Avenue to         20
                           Commodore Drive
Wright Street              Illinois Avenue to         35
                           Edgefield Avenue
Wycliff Avenue             Stemmons Freeway to Irving 35
                           Boulevard
                           Central Expressway to a
Youngblood Road            point one mile east of     15
                           Central Expressway
                           Greenbriar Lane to one-
Zang Boulevard             eighth of a mile south of  35
                           Clarendon Drive
                           One-eighth of a mile south
Zang Boulevard             of Clarendon Drive to      40
                           three-tenths of a mile
                           south of Saner Avenue
 
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 14696; 14818; 14869; 14922; 14974; 15194; 15430; 15455;
15541; 15699; 15760; 15835; 16018; 16091; 16166 16288; 16411; 16524; 16577;
16624; 16821; 16901; 16986; 17041; 17146; 17345; 17456; 17576; 17667; 17875;
18265; 18283; 18483; 18484; 18982; 18983; 19749; 20196; 20475; 21237; 21564;
22643; 22926; 23078; 23556; 23917; 25833; 26500; 27294; 27700; 28871; 30022;
30217; 31552; 32291; 32488; 32848; 32960; 33071; 33152)
SEC. 28-45.   EXPRESSWAYS AND FREEWAYS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates or drives a vehicle on any
of the following designated freeways or expressways at a speed greater than the
speed designated by this section for that freeway or expressway or portion of
freeway or expressway, and any speed in excess of the limit provided in this
section shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable nor
prudent and is unlawful.
STREET EXTENT SPEED  (MPH)
STREET                    EXTENT                     SPEED  (MPH)
Central Expressway        Woodall Rodgers Freeway to 50
                          Live Oak Street
                          From a point 600 feet
Central Expressway        south of Taylor Street to  35
                          Park Row
                                                     Set by Texas
Central Expressway (S. M. Park Row to C. F. Hawn     Transportation Commission
Wright Freeway; US 175)   Freeway                    Minute Order No. 106769,
                                                     as amended
Central Expressway (S. M. C. F. Hawn Freeway to a
Wright Freeway; SH 310)   point two-tenths of a mile 50
                          north of Overton Road
Central Expressway (S. M. From a point two- tenths
Wright Freeway; SH 310)   of a mile north of Overton 50
                          Road to Linfield Drive
Central Expressway (S. M. Linfield Drive to a point
Wright Freeway; SH 310)   750 feet north of          50
                          Ledbetter Drive
                          From a point 750 feet
Central Expressway (SH    north of Ledbetter Drive   50
310)                      to the south city limits
                          at Langdon Drive
C. F. Hawn Freeway (US    S. Central Expressway (SH  Set by Texas
175)                      310) to Prairie Creek Road Transportation Commission
                                                     Minute Order No. 114203
C. F. Hawn Freeway (US    Prairie Creek Road to      Set by Texas
175)                      Dallas south city limits   Transportation Commission
                                                     Minute Order No. 114203
Dallas Ft. Worth Turnpike West city limits to        Set by Texas
(IH 30)                   Stemmons Freeway (IH 35E)  Transportation Commission
                                                     Minute Order No. 114203
                          From a divergent point of  Set by North Texas Tollway
Dallas North Tollway      McKinnon Avenue and Harry  Authority Resolution No.
                          Hines Boulevard to the     97-30, as amended
                          north city limits
E.R.L. Thorton Freeway    First Avenue to Rockwall   Set by Texas
(IH 30)                   county line                Transportation Commission
                                                     Minute Order No. 114203
Good-Latimer Expressway   Taylor Street to Central   35
                          Expressway
                          Dallas county line to      Set by Texas
Interstate Highway 30     Rockwall west city limits  Transportation Commission
                                                     Minute Order No. 114203
                                                     Set by Texas
Interstate Highway 35E    All portions within the    Transportation Commission
Managed Lanes             city limits                Minute Order No. 114058,
                                                     as amended
                                                     Set by Texas
Interstate Highway 635    All portions within the    Transportation Commission
Managed Lanes             city limits                Minute Order No. 114554,
                                                     as amended
                                                     Set by Texas
John W. Carpenter Freeway All portions within the    Transportation Commission
(SH 183)                  city limits                Minute Order No. 106769,
                                                     as amended
Julius Schepps Freeway    E. R. L. Thornton Freeway  Set by Texas
(IH 45)                   (IH 30) to Hutchins north  Transportation Commission
                          city limits                Minute Order No. 114203
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway Grand Prairie east city    Set by Texas
(IH 20)                   limits to Duncanville west Transportation Commission
                          city limits                Minute Order No. 114203
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway Duncanville east city      Set by Texas
(IH 20)                   limits to Lancaster west   Transportation Commission
                          city limits                Minute Order No. 114203
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway Lancaster east city limits Set by Texas
(IH 20)                   to Hutchins west city      Transportation Commission
                          limits                     Minute Order No. 114203
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway Hutchins east city limits  Set by Texas
(IH 20)                   to Balch Springs west city Transportation Commission
                          limits                     Minute Order No. 114203
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway Farmers Branch city limits Set by Texas
(IH 635)                  to Stemmons Freeway (IH    Transportation Commission
                          35E)                       Minute Order No. 114203
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway N. Central Expressway (US  Set by Texas
(IH 635)                  75) to Kingsley Road       Transportation Commission
                                                     Minute Order No. 114203
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway Stemmons Freeway (IH 35E)  Set by Texas
(IH 635)                  to N. Central Expressway   Transportation Commission
                          (US 75)                    Minute Order No. 114203
Marvin D. Love Freeway    S. R. L. Thornton Freeway  Set by Texas
(US 67)                   (IH 35E) to Dallas south   Transportation Commission
                          city limits                Minute Order No. 116424
Mountain Creek Lake       From the Grand Prairie     Set by North Texas Tollway
Bridge                    city limits to Mountain    Authority Resolution No.
                          Creek Parkway              97-31, as amended
N. Central Expressway     Richardson south city      70
                          limits to Mockingbird Lane
N. Central Expressway     Mockingbird Lane to        65
                          Woodall Rodgers Freeway
N. Central Expressway (IH Woodall Rodgers Freeway    Set by Texas
345)                      (Spur 366) to E. R. L.     Transportation Commission
                          Thorton Freeway (IH 30)    Minute Order No. 114203
President George Bush     All portions within the    Set by North Texas Tollway
Turnpike                  city limits                Authority Resolution No.
                                                     01-40, as amended
R. L. Thornton Freeway    Stemmons Freeway to First  55
(IH 30)                   Avenue
S. R. L. Thorton Freeway  E. R. L. Thorton Freeway   Set by Texas
(IH 35E)                  (IH 30)to Dallas south     Transportation Commission
                          city limits                Minute Order No. 114203
S. R. L. Thornton Freeway 800 feet South of Kiest    75, Set by Texas
(IH 35E XP) Express Lanes Boulevard to Colorado      Transportat ion Commissio
                          Avenue                     n Minute Order No. 116424
                          Walton Walker Boulevard    Set by Texas
Spur 408                  (Loop 12) to Lyndon B.     Transportation Commission
                          Johnson Freeway (IH 20)    Minute Order No. 114229
Stemmons Freeway (IH 35E) R. L. Thornton Freeway to  55
                          Woodall Rodgers Freeway
                                                     Set by Texas
Stemmons Freeway (IH 35E) Woodall Rodgers Freeway to Transportation Commission
                          Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway  Minute Order No. 106769,
                                                     as amended
                                                     Set by Texas
Stemmons Freeway (IH 35E) Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway  Transportation Commission
                          to the north city limits   Minute Order No. 106410,
                                                     as amended
                          170 feet south of W
N. Stemmons Freeway (IH   Northwest Highway (Loop    70, Set by Texas
35E XP) Express Lanes     12) to 290 feet north of L Transportati on Commission
                          B J Freeway (IH 635)       Minute Order No. 114058
                          centerline
                          290 feet north of L B J    75, Set by Texas
N. Stemmons Freeway (IH   Freeway (IH 635)           Transportati on Commission
35E XP) Express Lanes     centerline to north city   Minute Order No. 115123
                          limit
                                                     Set by Texas
U.S. Highway 80           R. L. Thornton Freeway to  Transportation Commission
                          the east city limits       Minute Order No. 106769,
                                                     as amended
                          Stemmons Freeway to the    Set by Texas
Walton Walker Boulevard   city limits of Irving,     Transportation Commission
(Loop 12)                 Texas                      Minute Order No. 106769,
                                                     as amended
Walton Walker Boulevard   Spur 408 to a point 1350
(Loop 12)                 feet south of Illinois     55
                          Avenue
Walton Walker Boulevard   Spur 408 to Irving south   Set by Texas
(Loop 12)                 city limits                Transportation Commission
                                                     Minute Order No. 114229
                          North Central Expressway
Woodall Rodgers Freeway   to 1440 feet west of       50
                          Stemmons Freeway
                          1440 feet west of Stemmons
Woodall Rodgers Freeway   Freeway to the east levee  40
                          of the Trinity River
                          The east levee of the
Woodall Rodgers Freeway   Trinity River to Beckley   35
                          Avenue
 
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he operates or drives a vehicle on the
following designated roads at a speed greater than the speed designated by this
section for that road or portion of that road, and any speed in excess of the
limit provided in this section shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is
not reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful.
STREET EXTENT SPEED
              (MPH)
STREET                               EXTENT                               SPEED
                                                                          (MPH)
Central Expressway East Service Road The north city limits to Northwest   40
                                     Highway
Central Expressway West Service Road The north city limits to Northwest   40
                                     Highway
Central Expressway Service Roads     Northwest Highway to Live Oak Street 35
Central Expressway West Service Road Grand Avenue to Haven Street         35
Central Expressway East Service Road Pennsylvania Avenue to Harding       35
                                     Street
C. F. Hawn Freeway Service Roads     Lake June Road to Big Oaks Drive     40
C. F. Hawn Freeway Service Roads     Big Oaks Drive to the southeast city 45
                                     limits at Cade Road
Interstate Highway 30 service roads  Stemmons Freeway to the Grand        40
                                     Prairie city limits
John W. Carpenter Freeway Service    All portions within the city limits  40
Roads
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway Service    From the Farmers Branch, Texas city  45
Roads                                limits to Emerald Street
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway Service    All remaining portions within the    40
Roads                                city limits
Marvin D. Love Freeway Service Roads All portions within the city limits  40
R. L. Thornton Freeway Service Roads All portions within the city limits  40
R. L. Thornton Freeway Collector-    All portions between Malcolm X       45
Distributor Road                     Boulevard and Stemmons Freeway
State Highway 190 access roads       All portions within the city limits  45
Stemmons Freeway West Service Road   Regal Row to Mockingbird Lane        40
Stemmons Freeway West Service Road   Commonwealth Drive to Industrial     40
                                     Boulevard
Stemmons Freeway West Service Road   Industrial Boulevard to Commerce     35
                                     Street
Stemmons Freeway East Service Road   Industrial Boulevard to Regal Row    40
Walton Walker Boulevard East Service Illinois Avenue to 2300 feet north   40
Road                                 of Davis Street
Walton Walker Boulevard East Service 2300 feet north of Davis Street to
Road                                 900 feet north of the Interstate     35
                                     Highway 30 bridge
Walton Walker Boulevard East Service 900 feet north of the Interstate
Road                                 Highway 30 bridge to Singleton       40
                                     Boulevard
Walton Walker Boulevard West Service Illinois Avenue to 2300 feet north   40
Road                                 of Davis Street
Walton Walker Boulevard West Service 2300 feet north of Davis Street to   35
Road                                 50 feet north of Richey Street
Walton Walker Boulevard West Service 50 feet north of Richey Street to    40
Road                                 Singleton Boulevard
Woodall Rodgers Freeway North        Central Expressway to Routh Street   35
Service Road
 
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 14922; 14974; 15194; 15455; 16018; 16166; 16411; 16501;
17345; 18265; 18283; 19749; 19814; 20196; 22643; 22731; 25833; 27294; 27700;
28583; 28871; 29613; 30022; 31770; 32597; 32847; 33152)
SEC. 28-46.   STREETS IN PARK AREAS.
   A person commits an offense if he operates or drives a vehicle on a street,
roadway, path, or parking area open to the public, whether dedicated or not,
contained within the following designated city parks, at a speed greater than
the speed designated, and any speed in excess of the limit provided in this
section shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable nor
prudent and is unlawful.
PARK MAXIMUM SPEED (MPH)
PARK                                                      MAXIMUM SPEED (MPH)
Arcadia Park                                              20
Arcadia Heights Park                                      20
Bachman Park                                              20
Barnes Bridge Road (from Lake Ray Hubbard Generator Plant 15
to the edge of Lake Ray Hubbard)
Crawford Park                                             15
Fair Oaks Park (excluding Merriman Parkway)               15
Fair Oaks Park (Merriman Parkway)                         30
Fair Park                                                 20
Kiest Park (excluding picnic area)                        20
Kiest Park (picnic area)                                  10
L. B. Houston (gun range)                                 15
L. B. Houston (golf course)                               20
Mountain Creek Lake Park                                  20
Norbuck Park                                              25
North Lake Park                                           20
Reverchon Park                                            15
Robertson Park, North                                     20
Robertson Park, South                                     20
Rochester Park                                            20
Samuell, East Park                                        20
Samuell-Grand Park                                        25
Samuell-Hobby Park                                        10
Tenison Park (picnic area)                                10
White Rock Park                                           25
 
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 14818; 15455)
SEC. 28-47.   MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; DETERMINATION.
   The traffic engineer shall determine on the basis of engineering and traffic
surveys the reasonable and safe maximum speed limits for each street within the
city and submit recommendations based on his investigation to the city council.
(Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-48.   SAME - ALTERATION.
   On the basis of the recommendations of the traffic engineer, submitted in
accordance with the preceding section, the city council may alter the maximum
speed limit established in this chapter as the council deems necessary. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-49.   POSTING OF SPEED LIMIT SIGNS.
   The traffic engineer shall post the maximum and minimum speeds established
in this division by appropriate signs in conspicuous places so that every
motorist may be aware of the speed limits. No sign shall be required in an
urban district where the maximum speed limit is 30 miles per hour and where
there is no minimum speed limit. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-50.   SPEED IN SCHOOL ZONES; SIGNS; DESIGNATED STREETS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a vehicle in a school
traffic zone at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour, and any speed in excess
of 20 miles per hour is prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable
nor prudent and is unlawful.
   (b)   The traffic engineer shall designate school traffic zones with
appropriate street markings or signs, which street markings or signs shall be
placed at the school zones by the traffic engineer. The speed limit designated
for school traffic zones shall be effective only at times when appropriate
signs advising motorists of the speed limit are placed in conspicuous places.
   (c)   The following streets or portions of streets are designated school
traffic zones when marked in accordance with Subsection (b):
STREET BLOCK(s) EXTENT
STREET       BLOCK(s) EXTENT
Aberdeen     6800-    300'W. of Hillcrest Road to Briarmeadow Drive
Avenue       7000
Abrams Road  1400-    260'S. of Ridgeway Street to 260'N. of Glasgow Drive
             1600
Abrams Road  3600-    170' S. of Anita Street to 260' S. of Bob-O-Links Drive
             3900
Abrams Road  5200-    150'S. of Crestmont Drive to 60'N. of Glennox Lane
             5400
Abrams Road  7300-    120'S. of Winedale Drive to 200'N. of Walnut Hill Lane
             7400
Abrams Road  8900-    350'S. to 755'N. of Whitehurst Drive
             9000
Abrams Road  11900-   510'S. to 565'N. of Chimney Hill Lane
             12400
Adams Avenue 300      240'S. of 9th Street to 250'N. of Melba Street
Airline Road 8200-    200' S. of Wentwood Drive to 200' S. of Northwest Parkway
             8400
Airline Road 10000-   200' S. to 200' N. of Lakehurst Avenue
             10100
Al Lipscomb  2400-    20' W. of Good Latimer Expressway to 60' E. of Malcolm X
Way          2800     Boulevard
Alaska       2000-    150'N. of E. Woodin Boulevard to 230'S. of Montana Avenue
Avenue       2200
Albrook Road 200-300  126' N. of Meredith Avenue to 60' S. of Mt. Pleasant
                      Street
Allen Street 2000     120´ S. to 240´ N. of Guillot Street
Allen Street 2800-    60'S. of Cole Avenue to 60'S. of Howell Street
             2900
Altman Drive 3000-    110'W. to 340'E. of Goodyear Drive
             3100
Amity Lane   1800-    250'N. of Cradlerock Drive to 15'N. of Checota Drive
             1900
Ann Arbor    100-300  200´ W. of Sun Valley Drive to 360' E. of Southern Hills
Avenue                Drive
Ann Arbor    800-1000 150'E. of Maryland Avenue to 350'E. of Neptune Road
Avenue
Ann Arbor    1700-    200'E. of Lancaster Road to 800'W. of Denley Drive
Avenue       1900
Ann Arbor    2100     175'N. of Veterans Drive to Veterans Drive
Avenue
Ann Arbor    2200-    175'W. to 175'E. of Garrison Street
Avenue       2300
Anson Road   2400-    1000'W. of Denton Drive to 200'W. of Thurston Avenue
             2700
Appleridge   17900    405´ N. of Frankford Road to Frankford Road
Drive
Arapaho Road 6200-    200' W. of Golden Creek Road to 340' E. of Nedra Way
             6600
Arapaho Road 7400-    Terrace Lawn Circle (W. Leg) to 160'W. of El Estado Drive
             7800
Arborside    8000-    110'S. of Canter Drive to 200'N. of Moss Farm Lane
Drive        8600
Ashbrook     4900-    100' S. of Hovenkamp Drive to 335' N. of Everglade Road
Road         5100
Aspen Street 2300-    260' N. of Highfield Drive to 120'S. of Bluff Creek Drive
             2500
Audelia Road 8400     350' S. to 450' N. of Trevor Road
Audelia Road 9900-    30'N. of Dartridge Drive to 280'N. of Church Road
             1010 0
Audelia Road 11700-   220' N. to 180' S. of Forest Lane
             11800
Audelia Road 12100-   250'N. of Applecreek Drive to 320'N. of Chimney Hill Lane
             12400
Audelia Road 13000-   100'N. of Lawler Road to 85'N. of Claymore Drive
             13180
Bainbridge   3000-    155'N. of Meadow Stone Lane to 200'S. of Kirnwood Drive
Drive        3300
Barnes       1900-    290'W. of Desdemona Drive to 130'E. of Joaquin Drive
Bridge Road  2300
Barnes       3300-    230' N. of Ruidosa Avenue to 30' N. of Pepperidge Circle
Bridge Road  3500
S. Barry     1000-    75'S. of Gurley Avenue to 200'S. of E. Grand Avenue
Avenue       1200
Bayside      1900-    150'W. of Puget Street to 230'E. of Darien Street
Street       2000
Beacon       500-700  180'N. of Junius Street to 160'N. of Tremont Street
Street
Beckley      200N-    Melba Street to Sunset Avenue
Avenue       200S
N. Beckley   1100-    280'N. of Colorado Boulevard to 250'S. of Madison Avenue
Avenue       1300
S. Beckley   2800-    150'S. of Overton Road to 50'S. of Mitscher Street
Avenue       3600
Bedford      2800     Kingbridge Street to 160' E. of Kingbridge Street
Street
Bellcrest    5600-    300'S. of Persimmon Road to 300'S. of Golden Hills Drive
Drive        5700
Bellewood    9600     Chiswell Road to 75' E. of Broken Bow Road
Drive
S. Belt Line 1400-    20'E. of Indian Wells Road to 40'W. of Biggs Street
Road         1500
Bernal Drive 4400-    100' W. of Peoria Avenue to 60' E. of Schoefield Drive
             4600
Bernal Drive 5400-    300'W. of Clymer Drive to Kenesaw Drive
             5500
Berridge     5000-    100' N. of Chariot Drive to 155' N. of St. Francis Avenue
Lane         5100
Berryhill    6100-    0' N. of Town North Drive to 200' N. of Freemont Street
Street       6200
Bethurum     2700     60' E. to 620' E. of Bexar Street
Avenue
Bexar Street 5600-    45' S. of C.F. Hawn Service Road to 160' E. of Dyson
             5800     Street
Bickers      1900-    100' E. of Darien Street to 260'W. of Puget Street
Street       2000
Bickers      2500-    200' W. of Holystone Street to 180' E. of Vine Maple
Street       2900     Place
Bickers      3200-    150' E. of Westmoreland Road to 190'E. of Fuery Street
Street       3300
N. Bishop    1000-    190'S. to 195'N. of Neches Street
Avenue       1100
Black Oak    3700-    100' E. of Bellcrest Drive to 200' E. of Loud Drive
Drive        3800
Blackburn    3000-    350' E. of McKinney Avenue to 220' W. of Cole Avenue
Street       3200
Blanton      2200-    220'N. of Riverway Drive to Greenmound Avenue
Street       2300
Blue Ridge   3900-    210' W. of Guadalupe Avenue to 365' E. of Los Angeles
Boulevard    4200     Boulevard
Boaz Street  5300-    200'E. of Inwood Road to 125'E. of West Greenway
             5500     Boulevard
Boca Bay     3900-    300'E. of Haydale Drive to 200'W. of Rosser Road
Drive        4100
Bombay       2500-    20'E. of Waneba Drive to 75'E. of Brookdale Drive
Avenue       2700
Bonnie View  500-600  150'N. of Morrell Avenue to Sanderson Avenue
Road
Bonnie View  800-1100 100'S. of Harrell Avenue to Gallatin Street
Road
Bonnie View  3100-    60'S. of Millermore Street to 150'S. of King Cole Drive
Road         3300
Bonnie View  3900     270'S. of Beauchamp Street to Fordham Road
Road
Bonnie View  4100-    200'N. of Fordham Road to 230'S. of Linfield Road
Road         4300
Bonnie View  5000-    230'N. of Corrigan Avenue to 200'S. of Stag Road
Road         5100
Bonnie View  5700-    380'N. to 410'S. of Persimmon Road
Road         5800
Bonnie View  6200-    220'N. of Pinebrook Lane to 50'N. of Pacesetter Street
Road         6300
Bonnie View  6400-    200'N. of Ivy Ridge Street to 350'S. of Tioga Street
Road         6500
Boulder      3700-    60' N. of Gladiolus Lane to 225' N. of Larkspur Lane
Drive        3900
Brentfield   6500-    150'E. of Meadowcreek Drive to 160'W. of Shadybank Road
Drive        6900
Briargrove   3400     60'N. to 1100'N. of Old Mill Road
Lane
Briargrove   4100-    287'W. of Voss Road to 310'W. of High Star Lane
Lane         4200
Brockbank    9500     65'N. to 905'N. of Storey Lane
Drive
Brockbank    9700-    250'N. of Bynum Avenue to 200'N. of Valley Meadow Drive
Drive        9800
Brockbank    10300-   19'S. of Bay Oaks Drive to 452'S. of Merrell Road
Drive        10400
Bruton Road  7100-    60'W. of Mack Lane to 150'E. of Las Cruces Lane
             7500
Bruton Road  8300-    280' E. of McCutcheon Lane to 490' W. of McCutcheon Lane
             8600
Bruton Road  8800-    390'W. to 225'E. of Greendale Lane
             8900
Bruton Road  9500-    220'W. to 260'E. of St. Augustine Road
             9600
Bryan Street 4500-    130' W. of Holly Avenue to 30' E. of Grigsby Avenue
             4700
N. Buckner   2700     333'N. to 375'S. of Gross Road
Boulevard
Bunchberry   10200-   Whispering Hills Drive to 175'W. of Forest Ridge Drive
Drive        103 00
Burbank      2000     Harry Hines Boulevard to 340' N. of Harry Hines Boulevard
Street
Burns Avenue 1100-    200'N. of Kernack Street to 230'N. of Beechwood Avenue
             1200
Caddo Street 2000-    50'S. of Lafayette Street to 160'S. of Thomas Avenue
             2200
Calculus     3900-    High Meadow Drive to 180'E. of Haydale Drive
Road         4100
Campbell     6800-    20'W. of Colegrove Drive to 230'W. of Park Hill Drive
Road         7000
Campbell     17700-   30'S. of Twinbrooks Drive to 60'S. of Fallsview Lane
Road         18000
Camp Wisdom  300-400  300'W. to 200'E. of Brierfield Drive
Road
E. Camp      1500-    300'W. to 300'E. of Old Ox Road
Wisdom Road  1800
W. Camp      7900-    130'E. of Eagle Ford Drive to 1025'W. of Eagle Ford Drive
Wisdom Road  8100
Canada Drive 2700-    300' E. of to 470' W. of Holystone Street
             2800
Candlenut    3900-    150'W. to 150' E. of Haydale Drive
Road         4000
Capital      3900-    70'W. of Carroll Avenue to 330'W. of Peak Avenue
Avenue       4400
Carroll      300-600  225'N. of Worth Street to 115' S. of Victor Street
Avenue
Carroll      1500-    137' S. of Ross Avenue to 150' S. of Lafayette Street
Avenue       2000
Carroll      2300-    170'S. of Capitol Avenue to 175'N. of Weldon Street
Avenue       2500
Casa Oaks    9900-    125'N. of Larry Drive to 20'S. of Andrea Lane
Drive        1000 0
Catawba Road 8100-    125'W. of Elsby Avenue to 150'E. of Bluffview Boulevard
             8300
Cedar Crest  2200-    340'E. to 320'W. of Bonnie View Road
Boulevard    2300
Cedar Crest  2600-    200'N. of Diceman Avenue to 5'S. of Chrysler Drive
Boulevard    2800
Cedar        4000-    215'S. of the west leg of Knight Street to 175'N. of the
Springs Road 4100     east leg of Knight Street
Cedar        5500-    300'N. of Hedgerow Drive to 250'N. of Inwood Road
Springs Road 5600
Celestial    5100     210'W. of Noel Road to 65'W. of Montfort Drive.
Road
Centerville  1700-    210' W. of Desdemona Drive to 170' E. of Galena Street
Road         2100
Centerville  2300-    260'E. to 260'W. of Joaquin Drive
Road         2400
Chaparral    8800     70' N. of Ranch Trail to 50' S. of Stampede Lane
Waters Way
Chariot      7300-    90' W. of Berridge Lane to 220' E. of Trace Road
Drive        7500
Chariot      7800-    220' W. to 250' E. of Wimbleton Way
Drive        7900
Chaucer      7400     270'N. of Kirnwood Drive to Kirnwood Drive
Place
Chenault     1500-    200' W. of Dilido Road to 200' E. of Chevrolet Drive
Street       1700
Cherry       800-900  200' N. to 180' S. of Keeneland Parkway
Laurel Lane
Cheyenne     700-900  20'S. of Big Thicket Drive to 50'S. of Pleasant Woods
Road                  Drive
Cheyenne     1500-    205'N. of Cradlerock Drive to 50'N. of Checota Drive
Road         1600
Chimney Hill 10000-   160'W. to 170'E. of Pleasant Valley Drive
Lane         101 00
Chiswell     9100-    20' S. of Overwood Road to 125' S. of Highedge Drive
Road         9300
Church Road  9000-    125' W. of Arborgate Drive to 370' E. of Tory Sound Drive
             9100
Church Road  9300-    200'W. of White Rock Trail to 30'W. of Dahman Circle
             9500
Church Road  9700-    250'E. of Audelia Road to 60'W. of Winding Ridge Drive
             9800
Church Road  10200-   Trailpine Drive to 210'E. of Kirkhaven Drive
             103 00
Churchill    6100-    200'W. of Whitley Lane to 240'E. of Hughes Lane
Way          6300
W. Clarendon 1300-    300'W. of Windomere Avenue to 300'E. of Edgefield Avenue
Drive        1500
Claremont    8000-    Stonycreek Drive to El Cerrito Drive
Drive        8100
Cliffbrook   7200-    535'E. of Birchridge Drive to 380'W. of Meandering Way
Drive        7400
Clover Lane  3700-    70'E. of Marsh Lane to 350'E. of Mixon Drive
             3800
Club Meadow  8400-    240'S. of Summer Glen Lane to 150'N. of Loma Vista Drive
Drive        8800
S. Cockrell  2600     100'S. of Wood Valley Drive to 220'S. of Briarglen Drive
Hill Road
S. Cockrell  3000-    250' S. to 250' N. of Kiest Boulevard
Hill Road    3200
Coit Road    13500-   150'S. of Purple Sage Road to 200'N. of Spring Grove
             137 00   Avenue
Cold Harbor  11800-   215'N. to 255'S. of Deep Valley Drive
Drive        11900
Cole Avenue  3800-    205'S. to 270'N. of Haskell Avenue
             3900
Colorado     700-800  230' W. to 250' E. of Ewing Avenue
Boulevard
W. Colorado  900-1100 220' E. of N. Clinton Avenue to 250' E. of Turner Avenue
Boulevard
W. Colorado  1000-    30' W. of N. Winnetka Avenue to 130' E. of N. Winnetka
Boulevard    1100     Avenue
W. Colorado  2500-    170'W. of Westmount Avenue to 50'W. of Stevens Ridge
Boulevard    2800     Drive
Comal Street 700-800  150' W. to 100' E. of Ewing Avenue
Coming       200E-    110'E. of Beckley Avenue to 110'W. of Toluca Avenue
Avenue       200W
Community    3200     225'S. to 215'N. of Timberline Drive
Drive
Congress     4000-    160'N. to 160'S. of Throckmorton Street
Avenue       4100
Conner Drive 1300-    15'N. of Lake June Road to 425'S. of Grovecrest Drive
             1400
Conroe       3100-    480' S. of Nomas Street to Nomas Street
Street       3200
Corinth      300-400  350'S. of Avenue B to 15'S. of Avenue D
Street
Corning      700-1000 210'E. of Ewing Avenue to 165' W. of Maryland Avenue
Avenue
Cortland     7600-    150'N. of Anson Road to 50'S. of Bombay Avenue
Avenue       7700
Cox Lane     11900-   60'N. of Crest Cove Circle to 270'S. of High Vista Drive
             12100
Cradlerock   10500-   200'W. of Amity Lane to Cheyenne Road
Drive        106 00
N. Crawford  100-300  200'S of Ninth Street to 100'N. of Eighth Street
Street
Cromwell     11300-   130'S. of Flair Drive to 60'S. of Winged Foot Court
Drive        11500
Crown Shore  3800     130'W. of Cold Harbor Lane to 140'E. of Cox Lane
Drive
Dale Crest   9800-    175' S. to 345' N. of Park Lane
Drive        9900
Darien       3600-    Bickers Street to Bayside Street
Street       3700
W. Davis     400-600  170'E. of Woodlawn Avenue to 200'W. of Cedar Hill Avenue
Street
W. Davis     1500-    220'E. of Montclair Avenue to 440'W. of Mary Cliff Road
Street       1800
W. Davis     2400-    20'W. of N. Terrace Boulevard to 75'E. of Bernice Street
Street       2500
W. Davis     4900-    35'E. of Justin Avenue to 75'E. of Bond Avenue
Street       5100
Deerfield    3700-    150'S. of Gibb Williams Road to 100'N. of Bridal Wreath
Lane         3800     Lane
Deer Path    1900-    200'E. of Garrison Street to 225'W. of Easter Avenue
Drive        2200
Delmar       2800-    150'S. of Marquita Avenue to 120'N. of Vickery Boulevard
Avenue       3000
Delmar       4100     200'N. of Winton Street to 100'S. of Anita Street
Avenue
Denley Drive 1200-    100'S. of Forester Drive to 75'S. of Genoa Avenue
             1400
Dennis Road  11300-   320' S. of Northaven Road to 200' N. of Modella Avenue
             116 00
Diceman      9000-    Old Gate Lane to 100' W. of San Saba Drive
Drive        9100
Dickerson    17800-   270' S. of Hidden Creek Drive to 235' N. of Maribeth
Street       18000    Drive
Dilido Road  3100-    25' N. of Britain Way to 100' S. of Senate Street
             3700
Drury Drive  1100-    600'W. of Polk Street to 1000'E. of Regatta Drive
             1400
Duncanville  2000-    380'N. to 1225'N. of Illinois Avenue
Road         2300
Duncanville  2200     1610'N. to 2735'N. of Illinois Avenue
Road
Dunlap Drive 8600-    235'W to 265'E. of Odeneal Street
             8700
Durham       8200-    200' S. of Wentwood Drive to 50' S. of Northwest Parkway
Street       8400
Easter       3200-    210´ N. of Deerpath Drive to 25´ S. of Village Way
Avenue       3300
Easton Road  400-800  380' S. of Bon Aire Drive to 160' S. of Lippit Avenue
Eastridge    6500-    200' N. of Ridgecrest Road to 250' S. of Ridgecrest Road
Drive        6700
Eastridge    6700-    180' S. of Slopes Drive to 200' S. of Park Lane
Drive        6800
Edd Road     1400     390'E. of Vida Lane to 40'W. of Garden Grove Drive
N. Edgefield 600-800  200'N. of Kings Highway to 150'S. of Taft Street
Avenue
S. Edgefield 400-700  190'S. of Brooklyn Avenue to 170'N. of Twelfth Street
Avenue
S. Edgefield 1000-    500'N. of Lebanon Avenue to 200'N. of Clarendon Drive
Avenue       1200
S. Edgefield 2100-    150'N. of Wilbur Street to 75'N. of Berkley Avenue
Avenue       2300
Edgemere     10700-   175'S. of Azalea Lane to 200' S. of Royal Lane
Road         10900
Edgeworth    500-700  100'S. of Seagoville Road to 150'N. of Rylie Crest Drive
Drive
E. Eighth    500-800  90' E. of N. Ewing Avenue to 55' W. of Lansing Street
Street
E. Eighth    1000-    Eads Avenue to 240' E. of Denley Drive
Street       1300
Elam Road    6200-    15'W. of Bethpage Avenue to 240'W. of Ella Avenue
             6300
Elam Road    7000-    310'W. to 290'E. of Jim Miller Road
             7100
Elam Road    8400-    100'W. of Ravenwood Drive to 15'E. of Freddie Drive
             8500
Elam Road    10500    250'E. to 250'W. of Pleasant Vista Drive
Ella Avenue  300-400  230'S. of Alcorn Avenue to 200'N. of Misty Wood Drive
Elsie Faye   2400-
Heggins      2500     200' E. of Leland Avenue to 250' E. of Crozier Street
Street
Elsie Faye   2700-
Heggins      3000     250' W. of Malcolm X Boulevard to 30' E. of Louie Lane
Street
Elsie Faye   3200-    10' W. of Spring Garden Drive to 200' W. of Bradshaw
Heggins      3300     Street
Street
N. Ervay     400-600  195'S. to 75'N. of Patterson Avenue
Street
S. Ervay     900-1000 90'S. to 185'N. of Corsicana Street
Street
S. Ervay     1500-    100' S. of Gano Street to Sullivan Drive
Street       1600
Esperanza    13400-   300' S. of Brookgreen Drive to 450' S. of Spring Valley
Road         14000    Road
Estate Lane  10200-   220'W. to 200'E. of Kirkhaven Drive
             10300
Everglade    5300-    75'E. of Elkridge Drive to 150'E. of Hazelhurst Lane
Road         5600
N. Ewing     200      E. Eighth Street to E. Jefferson Boulevard
Avenue
N. Ewing     700-900  150' S. of Comal Street to 105' N. of Colorado Boulevard
Avenue
S. Ewing     1200-    200'N. of Winters Street to 170'S. of Genoa Avenue
Avenue       1400
S. Ewing     1500-    90' N. of Korgan Street to 30' N. of Vermont Avenue
Avenue       1600
S. Ewing     2000-    170'S. to 180'N. of E. Woodin Boulevard
Avenue       2100
S. Ewing     2900-    200'N. of McVey Avenue to 275'S. of Corning Avenue
Avenue       3100
Fair Oaks    7000     170' E. to 895' E. of Ridgecrest Road
Avenue
Fair Oaks    7400-    150' N. to 1910' N. of Pineland Avenue
Avenue       7600
Farola Drive 2000-    20'N. of Montalba Avenue to 300'N. of Itasca Drive
             2200
Ferguson     7800-    250'S. to 1300'N. of Highland Road
Road         8100
Ferguson     9600-    1400'E. to 370'W. of Peavy Road
Road         9700
Ferguson     9800-    225' N. to 225' S. of Millmar Drive
Road         9900
Ferguson     10800-   75'N. of Cassandra Way to 150'S. of Delford Circle
Road         110 00
Ferndale     9400-    120'S. of Lakemere Road to 65' S. of Chesterton Drive
Road         9800
Ferndale     9800-    150'S. of Estate Lane to 150'S. of Caribou Trail
Road         9900
Ferris                220' N. of Whitehurst Drive to end of Ferris Branch
Branch       9000     Boulevard
Boulevard
Fieldfare    10100    150'S. of Fieldfare Court to Killion Drive
Drive
Fifty-Second 2100-    215'E. to 285'W. of Eastgate Circle
Street       2200
Fifty-Second 2300-    215'W. of Horizon Drive to 195'E. of Veterans Drive
Street       2400
N. Fitzhugh  3000-    360'S. to 280'N. of McKinney Avenue
Avenue       3100
S. Fitzhugh  1000-    100'S. of Gurley Avenue to 300'N. of E. Grand Avenue
Avenue       1100
Flair Drive  3400-    320'E. of Sonnet Drive to 250'E. of Cromwell Drive
             3500
Fordham Road 800-1000 160' E. of Maryland Avenue to 334' W. of Utah Avenue
Fordham Road 2800-    Stanley Smith Drive to 400'E. of Bonnie View Road (East
             3000     Leg)
Forest Lane  4500-    190'W. of Welch Road to 270'E. of Nanwood Drive
             4800
Forest Lane  8800-    480'E. to 520'W. of Shepherd Road
             8900
Forest Lane  9600-    820'E. to 400'W. of Oakshire Place
             9700
Forest Lane  9700-    230' W. to 230' E. of Audelia Road
             9800
Forestgate   11900-   500' N. of Forest Lane to 100' W. of east leg of
Drive        12000    Forestgate Drive
Forney Road  7700     350'E. to 1050'W. of Wimbelton Way
Fort Worth   2600-    370'W. to 290'E. of Westmount Avenue
Avenue       2700
Fox Creek    8300-    210' W. of Wisdom Creek Drive to 200' E. of Firethorn
Trail        8400     Drive
Frankford    2500-    500' E. of Kelly Boulevard to 150' W. of Creststone Drive
Road         2600
Frankford    4100-    375'E. of Voss Road to 32'W. of Whispering Gables Drive
Road         4200
Frankford    5700-    200'W. of Gallery Road/ Windflower Way to 450'W. of
Road         5800     Campbell Road
S. Franklin  3700-    210' S. of Gibb Williams Road to 25' N. of Bridal Wreath
Street       3900     Lane
Fullerton    1200-    100' S. of Remond Drive to Colorado Boulevard
Drive        1300
Garden Grove 10300    650'S. of Edd Road to Edd Road
Drive
Gaston       5700-    170'S. to 185'N. of Skillman Street
Avenue       5800
Gayglen      7600-    300'W. of Long Branch Lane to 15'W. of Anchorage Circle
Drive        7800
Gilbert      4300-    125' E. of Herschel Avenue to 205' W. of Prescott Avenue
Avenue       4500
Gladstone    2300-    150'E. of S. Hampton Road to 100'W. of S. Franklin Avenue
Drive        2500
Glasgow      300N-    125'N. of Reiger Avenue to 125'S. of Covington Lane
Drive        300S
Glenhaven    4100-    270'W. of Sunnyside Avenue to 280'E. of Andrews Street
Boulevard    4300
Goldwood     1800     100'E. of Indian Ridge Trail to 150'W. of Forest Meadow
Drive                 Trail
Gooding      10000-   150'N. of Killion Drive to 100'N. of Walnut Hill Lane
Drive        101 00
Goodman      5100-    60'W. of N. Bagley Street to N. Morocco Avenue
Street       5200
Goodwin      5700-    50' E. of Delmar Avenue to 390' W. of Matilda Street
Avenue       5900
E. Grand     4900-    100'E. of Fitzhugh Avenue to 80'E. of S. Barry Avenue
Avenue       5000
E. Grand     5700-    50' W. of Parkview Avenue to 50' W. of Cristler Avenue
Avenue       6200
East Grand   7200-    290'S. to 530'N. of LaVista Drive
Avenue       7500
Great        3000-
Trinity      3200     525'W. of Bonnie View Road to 70'W. of Greencrest Drive
Forest Way
Great        6900-
Trinity      7200     465'E. to 500'W. of Jim Miller Road
Forest Way
Green Cove   600-800  350'E. of Lone Oak Trail to 300'W. of Oak Trail
Lane
Greenleaf    3600-    70'S. of Holly Stone Street to 35'N. of Bickers Street
Street       3700
Greenmeadow  2900-    John West Road to 180'N. of Forestcliff Drive
Drive        3000
Greenmound   8800-    200'W. of McKim Drive to Blanton Street
Avenue       9000
Greenspan    6600-    100'N. of Midvale Drive to 300'N. of Brierfield Drive
Drive        6900
Greenspan    7700-    400'N. to 350'S. of Kirnwood Drive
Drive        7800
Greenville   2800-    Vickery Boulevard to 70'N. of Vanderbilt Avenue
Avenue       3000
Greenway     7400-    100'N. of Glenwick Lane to 160'S. of Boaz Street
Boulevard    7500
Gross Road   1700-    110'W. of Lindaro Lane to Felicia Court
             2100
Gus          2900-
Thomasson    3000     140'E. of Shiloh Road to 130'W. of Matterhorn Drive
Road
Gus          3200-
Thomasson    3300     30'E. of Libby Lane to the Mesquite city limits
Road
Gus
Thomasson    10300    170' S. of Mandalay Drive to 80' S. of Ruth Ann Drive
Road
Hampton Road 2000     215'S. of Elmwood Boulevard to 265'N. of Wright Street
N. Hampton   500-600  230' S. to 250' N. of Davis Street
Road
N. Hampton   3200-    210' S. to 235' N. of Dennison Street
Road         3300
N. Hampton   3700-    70' S. of Bayside Street to 330' N. of Calypso Street
Road         4100
S. Hampton   400-600  280'N. of W. Twelfth Street to 230'S. of Gladstone Drive
Road
S. Hampton   2900-    135' S. to 800' S. of Perryton Drive
Road         3000
S. Hampton   4000-    200' N. to 315' S. of Vatican Lane
Road         4100
Hargrove     9400     150' S. of Oradell Lane to Sheila Lane
Drive
Harry Hines  8500-    350'S. to 330'N. of Regal Row
Boulevard    8600
Harter Road  800-900  Riverton Road to 20' S. of Tarleton Street
Harvest Hill 4500-    255'W. of Welch Road to 250'E. of Harriet Drive
Road         4800
Harvest Hill 5100-    200'E. of Inwood Road (East Leg) to Forest Bend Road
Road         5200
N. Haskell   1800-    400' N. to 200' S. of Munger Avenue
Avenue       1900
N. Haskell   3100     40'W. of McKinney Avenue to 30'E. of Cole Avenue
Avenue
Haymarket    1200-    100'S. of Cade Road to 465'S. of Sewell Circle
Road         1400
Hazelhurst   4800-    20'S. of Everglade Road to 50'N. of Fallon Place
Lane         5000
Healey Drive 2500-    210'W. of Casa Oaks Drive to 190'E. of Shiloh Road
             2700
Hedgeway     10000-   Walnut Hill Lane to 300' N. of Killion Drive
Drive        10100
Henderson    1800-    10'W. of Lewis Street to 250' W. of McMillan Avenue
Avenue       1900
N. Henderson 2500-    80' N. of Homer Street to 125' S. of Manett Street
Avenue       2700
Herschel     3700-    110' S. of Gilbert Avenue to 355' N. of Gilbert Avenue
Avenue       4000
Hermosa      10100-   190'S. of Stevens Street to 150'N. of Fuller Drive
Drive        10400
Highland     5900     90'W. of Moonstone Drive to Bonnie View Drive
Hills Drive
Highland     2000-    405' E. of Ferguson Road to 620' W. of Villa Cliff Drive
Road         2300
Highland     2400     210'N. to 200'S. of Claremont Drive
Road
Hillbrook    2900-    Lake Circle to Sondra Drive
Street       3000
Hillburn     2600     190'S. of Piedmont Drive to Piedmont Drive
Drive
Hillcrest    9700-    140'N. of Stichter Avenue to 150'S. of Waggoner Drive
Road         10300
Hillcrest    14000-   220' S. of Spring Valley Road to 30' S. of Meadowcreek
Road         14200    Drive
Hillcrest    15700    45'S. of La Bolsa Drive to 300'N. of Arapaho Road
Road
Hillcrest    16300-   270'S. to 260'N. of Brentfield Drive
Road         164 00
Hillcrest    16900-   220'S. of Park Hill Drive to Dye Drive
Road         170 00
Hillside     2700-    80'N. of Westlake Avenue to 120'N of Blanch Circle
Drive        2800
Hodde Street 6800-    100'E. of Woodmont Drive to Jim Miller Road
             7000
Holcomb Road 600-700  80'S. of Old Homestead Drive to 600'N. of Elam Heights
                      Drive
Holly Hill   7000     240' W. to 780' E. of Ridgecrest Road
Drive
Horn Beam    12700    550'S. of Bunchberry Drive to Bunchberry Drive
Drive
Hovenkamp    4800-    100'N. of Winding Woods Trail to Ashbrook Road
Drive        4900
Hudnall      3100-    200' W. to 200' E. of Vandelia Street
Street       3200
Hume Drive   7600-    500'W. of Buckner Boulevard to Piedmont Drive
             7900
Hunnicut     8200-    15'W. of Rivercrest Drive to 5'E. of Coolgreene Drive
Road         8300
Idaho Avenue 3900-    Grinnell Street to 200'S. of Brookmere Drive
             4200
E. Illinois  500-700  40'W. of Alaska Avenue to 20'W. of Maryland Avenue
Avenue
W. Illinois  1300-    330'E. to 345'W. of S. Edgefield Avenue
Avenue       1500
W. Illinois  3700-    300'E. of Coombs Creek Drive to 250'W. of Keats Drive
Avenue       3800
W. Illinois  4600-    268'E. to 350'W. of Knoxville Street
Avenue       4700
W. Illinois  4900-    320'W. to 300'E. of Duncanville Road
Avenue       5000
Inadale      1800-    120' E. of Peavy Road to 30' W. of Sorento Street
Avenue       1900
Indian Ridge 7500-    100'N. of Altadena Lane to 100'S. of Oak Garden Trail
Trail        7700
Inwood Road  2400-    420' S. to 160' N. of Maple Avenue
             2500
Inwood Road  2700-    270'W. of Denton Drive to 240'E. of Vandelia Street
             3200
Inwood Road  11600-   260'N. of Caladium Drive to 30'N. of Del Roy Drive
             11700
Inwood Road  12200-   260'N. of Harvest Hill Road to 760'N. of Willow Lane
             12800
Itasca Drive 10800-   150'S. of Monterrey Avenue to 150'W. of Farola Drive
             112 00
Jacqueline   1100     200'N. of Fort Worth Avenue to Colorado Boulevard
Drive
E. Jefferson 700-800  190' W. to 240' E. of N. Ewing Avenue
Boulevard
W. Jefferson 1300-    355´ W. to 330´ E. of Edgefield Avenue
Boulevard    1400
W. Jefferson 2000-    300'E. of Tennant Street to 150'E. of Oak Cliff Boulevard
Boulevard    2200
W. Jefferson 2500-    290'E. to 325'W. of Bernice Street
Boulevard    2600
W. Jefferson 3000-    290' W. of S. Westmoreland Road to 245' E. of Barnett
Boulevard    3300     Avenue
W. Jefferson 4500     200' W. of Via Bishop Grahmann to 150' E. of Calumet
Boulevard             Avenue
W. Jefferson 5000-    300'W. of Bond Avenue to 80'E. of Justin Avenue
Boulevard    5100
N. Jim       100-300  440' N. of Loop 12 to 515' N. of Atha Drive
Miller Road
N. Jim       400-700  200'N. of Hodde Street to 350'S. of Elam Road
Miller Road
N. Jim       1400-    220' S. of Seco Boulevard to 150' S. of Umphress Road
Miller Road  1600
N. Jim       3900-    100'S. of Lovett Avenue to 200'S. of Military Parkway
Miller Road  4300     (South Service Road)
N. Jim       5000-    250'S. to 150'N. of Everglade Road
Miller Road  5100
Joaquin      10900-   210'S. to 180'N. of Ruidosa Avenue
Drive        11000
John West    1300-    150'E. of Greenmeadow Drive to Hunnicut Road
Road         1400
Joseph       4000     200' N. to 200' S. of Exchange Service Drive
Hardin Drive
Junius       5800-    60'E. of Lowell Street to 15'W. of Ridgeway Street
Street       5900
Jupiter Road 11700-   125'S. of Lippitt Avenue to Lanewood Circle
             11800
Jupiter Road 12000-   125'S. to 125'N. of Fernald Avenue
             12100
Jupiter Road 12800-   370' S. to 340' N. of McCree Road
             12900
N. Justin    1100-    155' S. to 770' N. of Goodman Street
Avenue       1200
Keats Drive  2000-    80'S. of Poinsettia Drive to Rolinda Drive
             2300
Keeneland    5500     215'W. of the west service road to 235'E. of the east
Parkway               service road of Walton Walker Boulevard
Keeneland    5900-    50'E. of Cavalcade Drive to 80'W. of Kelso Drive
Parkway      6000
Kelly Road   18100-   530'N. to 550'S. of Timberglen Road
             18200
Kiest        100 E.-  200'E. of Beckley Avenue to 330'W. of the R. L. Thornton
Boulevard    300 W.   Freeway southbound service road
E. Kiest     700-1000 160'W. of Maryland Avenue to 70'W. of Utah Avenue
Boulevard
E. Kiest     1600-    125'W. of Belknap Avenue to 420'E. of Easter Avenue
Boulevard    1700
E. Kiest     1800-    230'W. of Sunnyvale Street to 50'E. of Garrison Street
Boulevard    2100
E. Kiest     3800     Cedar Crest Boulevard to 200' S. of Cedar Crest Boulevard
Boulevard
W. Kiest     900-1200 100'W. of Ryan Road to 500'E. of Navaho Drive
Boulevard
W. Kiest     3900-    317' W. to 314' E. of Los Angeles Boulevard
Boulevard    4000
W. Kiest     4600-    150' E. of Morse Drive to 640' E. of Walton Walker
Boulevard    4700     Boulevard
Killion      3900-    120'E. of Hedgeway Drive to 210'E. of Midway Road
Drive        4200
Kingbridge   2900     Singleton Boulevard to Bedford Street
Street
Kings        1300-    370' E. to 360' W. of Edgefield Avenue
Highway      1400
Kinkaid      3100-    50'W. of Harwell Drive to 485'W. of Dale Crest Drive
Drive        3300
Kirkhaven    9900-    Estate Lane to 135'N. of Robindale Drive
Drive        10000
Kirnwood     700-800  220'W. to 205'E. of Racine Drive
Drive
Kirnwood     2700-    150'E. of Bainbridge Avenue to 100'W. of Chaucer Place
Drive        2900
Knight       2700-    180' W. of Congress Avenue to 150' E. of Dickason Avenue
Street       3000
Knoxville    2500-    25'S. of Western Oaks Drive to 200'N. of La Rue Street
Street       2800
La Cosa      6400-    350'E. of Meadowcreek Drive to 200'W. of Woodbriar Drive
Drive        6700
Lagow Street 2200-    150'S. of Jamaica Street to 5'S. of Hamilton Avenue
             2500
Lakehurst    6800-    250'W. of Hillcrest Road to 150'E. of Airline Road
Avenue       7100
Lake June    6500-    260' W. of Del Oak Drive to 245' E. of Spring Lake Drive
Road         6600
Lake June    8100-    200'W. of Conner Drive to 200'E. of Pleasant Drive
Road         8300
Lake June    10800    300'W. to 300'E. of Cheyenne Road (North Leg)
Road
Lakeland     1800-    105'W. of Groveland Drive to San Benito Way
Drive        1900
Lakeland     2600     Hunnicut Road to 170'W. of Sweetwood Drive
Drive
Lakemere     10000-   10'W. of Larchwood Drive to 140'W. of Lynngrove Drive
Drive        10200
La Manga     6500-    160´ W. to 255´ E. of Shadybank Drive
Drive        6600
La Manga     7600-    100'E. of Meandering Way to 280'E. of Spring Creek Road
Drive        7800
N. Lancaster 300-400  Eighth Street to 210'N. of Seventh Street
Road
S. Lancaster 4100-    50'S. of Fordham Road to 260'S. of Ann Arbor Avenue
Road         4300
S. Lancaster 4600-    250'N. of Atlas Drive to 235'S. of Fifty- Second Street
Road         4900
Langdon      5400-    200' W. to 1140' W. of J. J. Lemmon Road
Drive        5500
La Prada     9900-    100'N. of Larry Drive to 190'N. of Hillglen Road
Drive        1000 0
Larmanda     6000-    150' E. of Town North Drive to 165' W. of Freemont Street
Street       6200
La Vista     7300-    150' N. of East Grand Avenue to 400' N. of Dead End of La
Drive        7400     Vista Drive
Lawler Road  10100-   180'W. of Whispering Hills Drive to 140'W. of Forest
             102 00   Ridge Drive
Lawnview     3000-    140' N. of Scyene Road to 200' N. of Hollis Avenue
Avenue       3100
W. Lawson    100-300  130' S. of Lasater Road to 430' S. of Golden Spur Road
Road
E. Ledbetter 600-700  300'E. to 300'W. of Marsalis Avenue
Drive
E. Ledbetter 2200-    375'E. to 375'W. of Bronx Avenue
Drive        2300
E. Ledbetter 2400-    235'E. of Horizon Drive to 235'E. of Veterans Drive
Drive        2500
W. Ledbetter 400-500  580'W. to 430'E. of Parkwood Drive
Drive
W. Ledbetter 1900-    500'E. to 500'W. of Rugged Drive
Drive        2000
W. Ledbetter 3100-    350'E. to 350'W. of Boulder Drive
Drive        3200
Lemmon       2300-    100'W. of Lucille Street to 150'E. of Watt Street
Avenue       2400
Lindsley     6000-    Mt. Auburn Avenue to 110'W. of S. Glasgow Drive
Avenue       6100
Lindsley     7000-    20' E. of Blair Boulevard to 100' W. of Shadyside Lane
Avenue       7100
Linfield     2800     120'E. of Bonnieview Road to 100'W. of Cranfill Drive
Road
Lippitt      11300-   150'E. of Lanewood Circle to 200'E. of Sunland Street
Avenue       111 00
Live Oak     4900-    200'W. of Garrett Avenue to 20'W. of Bennett Avenue
Street       5100
N. Llewellyn 100-300  400'S. of W. Ninth Street to 50'S. of W. Eighth Street
Avenue
S. Llewellyn 700-900  10'S. of Delaware Avenue to 50'N. of W. Pembroke Avenue
Avenue
Lombardy     2900-    275' W. to 295' E. of Brockbank Drive
Lane         3000
Longbranch   300-500  300'N. of Gayglen Drive to 300'S. of Komalty Drive
Lane
Losa Drive   10000-   150'E. of Peavy Road to 200'W. of Moran Drive
             103 00
E. Lovers    6000-    150'W of Skillman Street to 150'E of Ridgelawn Drive
Lane         6200
E. Lovers    6300-    180' W. of Abrams Road to 190' E. of Rexton Lane
Lane         6400
W. Lovers    4300-    260'E. of Crest Haven Road to 230'E. of Taos Road
Lane         4400
W. Lovers    4900-    430' E. to 590' W. of Briarwood Lane
Lane         5000
Lucas Drive  2100     165'E. to 405'W. of Rosewood Avenue
Lynbrook     9700     Walnut Hill Lane to 100' S. of Chesterton Drive
Drive
Lynngrove    9400-    Lakemere Drive to Edgecliff Drive
Drive        9500
Lynn Haven   1300-    50'W. of Stirling Avenue to 50'S. of Selkirk Drive
Lane         1500
N. Madison   1000-    300'W. of Beckley Avenue to 180'S. of Neches Street
Avenue       1200
Malcolm X    3600-    10' S. of Dathe Street to 200' N. of Hickman Street
Boulevard    3800
Malcolm X    4700-    50' S. of Hatcher Street to 50' S. of Hunter Street
Boulevard    5000
S. Malcolm X 2500-    20' N. of Coombs Street to 100' N. of Park Row Avenue
Boulevard    2700
Mandalay     10800    150' E. of Maylee Boulevard to Maylee Boulevard
Drive
Manett       5100-    160' N. of N. Garrett Avenue to N. Henderson Avenue
Street       5200
Maple Avenue 4400-    100' N. of Wycliff Avenue to 200' N. of Hawthorne Avenue
             4500
Maple Avenue 5400-    250'N. of Inwood Road to 150'S. of Butler Street (east
             5700     leg)
Maribeth     7500-    Osage Plaza Parkway to 200' E. of Dickerson Street
Drive        7600
Mariposa     1600-    100'N. of Dixie Lane to 500'S. of Alta Mira Drive
Drive        1700
N. Marsalis  100-400  200' E. of Ninth Street to 65' S. of E. Sixth Street
Avenue
S. Marsalis  200      155' S. of E. Jefferson Boulevard to 150' N. of E.
Avenue                Twelfth Street
S. Marsalis  2000-    75'N. of Illinois Avenue to 120'S. of Louisiana Avenue
Avenue       2200
S. Marsalis  2900-    150'N. of McVey Avenue to 330'S. of Corning Avenue
Avenue       3100
S. Marsalis  3500-    200'N. of Overton Road to 200'S. of Fordham Road
Avenue       4000
S. Marsalis  5500-    5'S. of Calcutta Drive to 10'N. of Foxboro Lane
Avenue       5700
Marsh Lane   9600-    Fontana Drive to 50'N. of Hidalgo Drive
             9700
Marsh Lane   12000-   40'W. of High Vista Drive to 320'N. of Crown Shore Drive
             121 00
Marsh Lane   17800-   340'S. to 300'N. of Briargrove Lane
             17900
Martin
Luther King, 2900-    175'E. of Jeffries Street to 300'E. of Meadow Street
Jr.          3100
Boulevard
Mary Cliff   600-800  185'S. of Ranier Street to 160'N. of Taft Street
Road
Maryland     2900-    500'N. of McVey Avenue to 230'S. of Corning Avenue
Avenue       3100
N. Masters   100-200  150'N. of Grady Lane to 250'S. of Pebble Valley Lane
Drive
N. Masters   1500-    100'S. of Shayna Drive to 200'S. of Checota Drive
Drive        1800
N. Masters   2500-    365'S. to 355'N. of N. Masters Drive
Drive        2600
S. Masters   300-400  225' N. of Old Seagoville Road to 850' N. of Old
Drive                 Seagoville Road
Mather Court 4000     265'E. of Randolph Drive to Albrook Street
Matilda      2800-    150'N. of Vickery Boulevard to 200'S. of Marquita Avenue
Street       3000
Matilda      3900-    Ellsworth Avenue to 135'N. of Mockingbird Lane
Street       4200
Maylee       10200-   80'S. of RuthAnn Drive to the east city limits
Boulevard    10300
Maylee       10600    125'W. of Cassandra Way to Ferguson Road
Boulevard
McCree Road  11000-   20' E. of Fern Hollow Lane to 140' E. of Flicker Lane
             11200
McKim Drive  2200-    50'N. of Barclay Street to McKim Circle
             2300
McKinney     2900-    Clyde Lane to 150' N. of Sneed Street
Avenue       3100
McKinney     3700-    165'S. of Blackburn Street to 120'N. of Haskell Avenue
Avenue       3900
McKinney     4100-    440'N. to 140'S. of Fitzhugh Avenue
Avenue       4200
McVey Avenue 700-1000 225'E. of Ewing Avenue to 210'W. of Maryland Avenue
Meaders Lane 5600-    30'E. of Dallas North Tollway to 260'E. of Meaders Circle
             5800
Meadow Road  6800-    200' W. of Hillcrest Road to 200' E. of Shadow Bend Drive
             7000
Meadow Road  8200-    335' E. to 195' W. of Rambler Road
             8300
Meadowcreek  4200-    290'N. of Windy Ridge Drive to 20'N. of Vista Willow
Drive        4400     Drive
Meadowcreek  5400-    35'S. of Fireflame Drive to 100'S. of Winterwood Lane
Drive        5600
Meadowknoll  9100-    Millridge Drive to 100'N. of Robin Meadow Drive
Drive        9300
Meandering   14400-   50'S. of Village Trail Drive to 40'S. of Larchview Drive
Way          14700
Meandering   15100-   180'S. to 250'N. of Round Rock Road
Way          15200
Meandering   15400-   290'S. of La Cosa Drive to 280'N. of Arapaho Road
Way          15700
Meandering   16000-   250'S. to 190'N. of La Manga Drive
Way          16100
Mercer Drive 9500     300'E. of Ash Creek Drive to 175'S. of Mariposa Street
Meredith     3900-    20'W. of Red Bud Lane to 20'E. of Albrook Street
Avenue       4100
Merrell Road 2900-    175'E. of Dundee Drive to Carrizo Lane
             3100
Merrell Road 4100     192'W. of Midway Road to 260'E. of Westlawn Drive
Metropolitan 4100-    500'W. of Lagow Street to 500'E. of Clem Street
Avenue       4300
Midbury      7000-    350'W. of St. Michaels Drive to 300'W. of St. Judes Drive
Drive        7100
Midpark Road 8300-    Esperanza Road to 860' E. of Esperanza Road
             8400
Midway Road  9300-    150' S. of Rosa Road to 175' S. of Gloster Road
             9400
Midway Road  9800-    60' N. of Valley Ridge to 50' S. of Southcrest Road
             10000
Midway Road  11000-   85' S. of San Gabriel Drive to 210' S. of Northaven Road
             11200
Military     6700-    200'W. of Wilkes Avenue to 300'E. of Jim Miller Road
Parkway      7000
Military     7700-    200'E. of Scottsdale Drive to 300'E. of Cedar Lake Drive
Parkway      7800
Military     8900-    700'W. of Prairie Creek Road to 75'E. of Kingsford Avenue
Parkway      9200
Millmar      2000-    275'E. of Ferguson Road to 350'E. of Peavy Road
Drive        2400
Millmar      2500-    150'E. of Shiloh Road to 150'W. of Casa Oaks Drive
Drive        2700
Mixon Drive  9400-    60'S. of Dunhaven Road to 60'S. of Highgrove Drive
             9700
E.           5700-
Mockingbird  5900     150'W. of Matilda Street to 150'W. of Concho Street
Lane
Monarch      5100-    180' E. of Moser Avenue to 60' E. of Garrett Avenue
Street       5200
Montana      600-700  30' E. of Marsalis Avenue to 15' E. of Alaska Avenue
Avenue
N. Montclair 600-800  300'S. of Taft Street to 500'S. of Kyle Avenue
Avenue
N. Montclair 1700-    300'N. of Fort Worth Avenue to 150'N. of Walmsley Avenue
Avenue       1900
Monterrey    2000-    Itasca Drive to 150'W. of Farola Drive
Avenue       2100
Montfort     12600-   Nuestra Drive to McShann Road
Drive        12700
Montfort     14500-   240'S. to 375'N. of Celestial Road
Drive        14600
N. Morocco   1100-    250' S. to 755' N. of Goodman Street
Avenue       1200
Morrell      1700-    170'E. to 200'W. of Hutchins Road
Avenue       1800
Morrell      2100-    200'E. to 250'W. of Avenue G
Avenue       2200
Moser Avenue 1800     90'E. of Monarch Street to 220'W. of Ross Avenue
Moss Farm    9100-    400'E. to 200'W. of Club Meadows Drive
Lane         9200
Mouser       2000-    90'E. of Bonnie View Drive to 200'E. of Signet Street
Street       2100
Munger       4500-    50' E. of Annex Avenue to Carroll Avenue
Avenue       4600
S. Munger    500-600  Junius Street to 30'N. of Tremont Street
Boulevard
Murdock Road 400-500  300'N. to 300'S. of Komalty Drive
Neches       100-300  290'W. of Madison Avenue to 35'E. of Elsbeth Avenue
Street
Nedra Way    15500-   10'N. of Warm Breeze Lane to La Cosa Drive
             15800
Neering      11600-   50' N. of Sinclair Avenue to 100' N. of Lippitt Avenue
Drive        118 00
Ninth Street 100 W.-  215'E. of Zang Boulevard to 50'W. of Patton Avenue
             300 E.
W. Ninth     800-1000 70' W. of Polk Street to 125' E. of Tyler Street
Street
Noel Road    14600    170'N. to 170'S. of Celestial Road
Nomas Street 800-1100 105' E. of Crossman Avenue to 115' W. of Sylvan Avenue
Nomas Street 5100-    200'E. of Clymer Street to 200'W. of Tumalo Trail
             5300
Northaven    2800-    140'E. of Marcus Drive to 150'W. of Dennis Road
Road         3000
Northaven    3800-    150'W. of Rosser Road to 140'W. of Snow White Drive
Road         3900
Northaven    7000-    250'E. to 250'W. of St. Judes Drive
Road         7100
Northcliff   9600-    200'E. of Brookhurst Drive to 150'W. of Peavy Road
Drive        9800
Northwest    7200-    100' E. of Airline Road to Durham Street
Parkway      7300
Nuestra      12500-   300'N. of Charlestown Drive to Montford Drive
Drive        12600
Oak Lawn     3700-    100'S of Gilbert Avenue to 150'N of Irving Avenue
Avenue       3900
Oak Trail    4900-    215'N. of Green Cove Lane to 240'S. of Town Creek Drive
             5100
Odom Drive   8500-    60'E. of Holcomb Road to 150'W. of Odeneal Street
             8600
Old Gate     1400-    80' S. of Forest Hills Boulevard to Diceman Drive
Lane         1500
Old Ox Road  5900-    5'S. of Caravan Trail to 100'N. of Indian Summer Trail
             6100
Old          9600-
Seagoville   9900     St. Augustine Drive to 400'W. of September Lane
Road
Orlando      4000-    220'W. to 175'E. of Randolph Drive
Court        4100
Osage Plaza  7700     450' S. of Maribeth Drive to 60' N. of Bromwich Drive
Parkway
Overton Road 100 W.-  165'W. to 185'E. of Beckley Avenue
             100 E.
Overton Road 800-900  Maryland Avenue to 300'E. of Idaho Avenue
Overton Road 2100-    220'W. of Easter Avenue to 360'E. of Garrison Street
             2400
E. Overton   400-700  120' E. of S. Marsalis Avenue to 510' W. of Michigan
Road                  Avenue
E. Overton   3400-    180'N. to 395'S. of Southern Oaks Boulevard
Road         3600
Palisade     8900-    140'E. of Greendale Drive to 270'W. of Prairie Creek Road
Drive        9100
Park Lane    3100-    60'W. of Harwell Drive to 125'W. of Dale Crest Drive
             3200
Park Lane    8300-    250' W. to 245' E. of Ridgecrest Road
             8400
Parkview     900-1000 150'N. to 220'S. of Gurley Avenue
Avenue
Patterson    1400-    50'W of Akard Street to Ervay Street
Street       1500
Patton       100-300  100'N. of Tenth Street to 50'S. of Eighth Street
Avenue
Paulus       100-300  50' N. of Covington Lane to 100' N. of Reiger Street
Avenue
Peavy Road   600-700  180' N. of Waterview Road to 70' S. of Northcliff Drive
Peavy Road   2600-    320' N. of Ferguson Road to 160' S. of Gross Road
             2800
Pelican      11200    15' E. of Flicker Lane to 20' W. of McCree Road
Drive
Pennsylvania 1500-    180' W. of Holmes Street to 300' W. of Edgewood Street
Avenue       2300
Pennsylvania 2900-    20'S. of Meadow Street to 100'S. of Jeffries Street
Avenue       3000
Philip       4800-    50'W. of Fitzhugh Avenue to 50'E. of S. Barry Avenue
Avenue       5000
Piedmont     7500-    150'S. to 200'N. of Hume Drive
Drive        7600
Piedmont     7700     200' N. to 180' S. of Ravehill Lane
Drive
Pine Street  2300-    50'E. of Leland Avenue to 175'E. of Latimer Street
             2500
Plano Road   9600-    370'S. to 300'N. of Kingsley Road
             9700
Pleasant     1200-    180'S. to 500'N. of Lake June Road
Drive        1300
Pleasant     12300-   75'S. of Glen Canyon Drive to 175'N. of Chimney Hill Lane
Valley Drive 12400
Pleasant     300      165'N. of Hamlin Drive to 165'S. of Wessex Drive
Vista Drive
Plymouth     600-700  215'N. to 215'S. of Avon Street
Road
S. Polk      3100-    50'S. of O’Bannon Drive to 100'S. of Kiest Boulevard
Street       3200
S. Polk      5400-    400'N. of Drury Drive to 100'S. of Clear Fork Drive
Street       5500
S. Polk      5700-    300'N. to 300'S. of Reynoldston Lane
Street       5800
S. Polk      9200-    200' N. of Wardmont Avenue to 185' S. of Brogdon Lane
Street       9400
Pomona Road  4500     Cherokee Trail to Catawba Road
Potters      3200-    20' N. of Samaritan Road to 40' N. of Kingdom Estates
House Way    3300     Drive
Prairie      3600-    60'N. of Tampas Lane to 300'S. of Cedar Run Drive
Creek Road   3800
N. Prairie   1900-    80'S. of Donnybrook Lane to 150'N. of Seaway Drive
Creek Road   2000
Preston Road 10500-   200'S. of Street Marks Circle to 200'S. of Over Downs
             106 00   Drive
Prichard     2400     180'S. of Ravehill Lane to Ravehill Lane
Lane
Prichard     2900     700'S. of Scyene Road to Scyene Road
Lane
Pritchard    2500-    195' S. of Reva Street to Hume Drive
Lane         2600
Racine Drive 7600-    5'S. of Edgedale Drive to 200'S. of Jadewood Drive
             8000
Ravensway    10000    150'S. of Church Road to 200'S. of Windledge Drive
Drive
Ravinia      2000-    80'S. of Rolinda Drive to183'S. of Poinsettia Drive
Drive        2400
S. Ravinia   1100-    20' S. of Clarendon Drive to 40' N. of Grafton Street
Drive        1200
S. Ravina    1400-    200'S. of Sharon Avenue to 150'N. of Falls Drive
Drive        1700
Raydell      3100     75'E. of Schooldell Drive to 60'W. of Barnett Avenue
Place
E. Red Bird  1300-    245'E. of Samcar Trail to 230'E. of Old Ox Road
Lane         1600
W. Red Bird  3700-    255'W. to 270'E. of Red Bird Center Drive
Lane         3800
Regal Road   1900     660' S. of Harry Hines Boulevard to Harry Hines Boulevard
Regatta      5600-    25' N. of Reynoldston Lane to 300' S. of Chalet Lane
Drive        5700
Reiger       6100     175'N. of Slaughter to 60'S. of N. Paulus Avenue
Avenue
Remond Drive 2600     145'E. of Hartsdale Drive to 100'E. of Fullerton Drive
Reynoldston  1200-    600'E. of Spring Glen Drive to 10'E. of Caracas Drive
Lane         1400
Richwater    5800-    200'W. to 570'E. of Campbell Road
Drive        6000
Ridge Center 6100-    Wandt Drive to 495' W. of Cedar Ridge Road
Drive        6200
Ridgecrest   5800-    Holly Hill Drive to 240' E. of Fair Oaks Avenue
Road         5900
Ridgecrest   6200-    220' W. of Eastridge Drive to 100' E. of Eastridge Drive
Road         6400
Ridgecrest   6300-    660' W. to 1430' W. of Eastridge Drive
Road         6400
Ridgeside    4400-    100'W. of Welch Road to 245'E. of Crestline Drive
Drive        4500
Robert B.    1600-
Cullum       1700     250'W. to 250'E. of Pennsylvania Avenue
Boulevard
Rolling      7900-    254'W. to 232'E. of Coit Road
Hills Lane   8000
Rolling      13900-   180'W. of Waterfall Way to 350'W. of Flagstone Lane
Hills Lane   140 00
Roper Street 6700-    W. University Boulevard to 200'S. of Thedford Avenue
             7100
Ross Avenue  4400-    60' W. of Ashby Street to 350' E. of Carroll Avenue
             4500
Ross Avenue  4700-    80' E. of Grigsby Avenue to 400' W. of Bennett Avenue
             4900
Ross Avenue  5200-    300'N. of Moser Avenue to 65'S. of N. Garrett Avenue
             5300
Rosser Road  12200-   40'N. of Port Royal Drive to 70'S. of High Summit Drive
             124 00
Round Rock   7500-    75'E. of Meandering Way to 220'E. of Spring Creek Road
Road         7900
Routh Street 1700-    215' N. of Ross Avenue to 50' S. of Woodall Rodgers
             2100     (North Service Road)
Royal Lane   5500-    600' W. of Netherland Drive to 100' W. of the Dallas
             5700     North Tollway off ramp
Royal Lane   6400-    260'W. to 610'E. of Edgemere Road
             6600
Royal Lane   9100-    265'E. to 265'W. of Arborside Drive
             9200
Rugged Drive 3800-    150'S. of Vatican Lane to 300'N. of Rubens Drive
             4000
Rylie Crest  11000-   100'E. of the South Leg of Haymarket Road to the east
Drive        111 00   city limits
Rylie Road   10200-   200'E. of Haymarket Road to 30'W. of Trewitt Street
             105 00
Salado Drive 16100    120'N. of La Manga Drive to 13'S. of Carta Valley Drive
San Leandro  8300-    150' W. of St. Francis Avenue to Whittier Avenue
Drive        8400
Schroeder    12300-   280'S. to 190'N. of Towns Street
Road         124 00
Scyene Road  7800-    150'E. of Scyene Circle to 100'E. of Prichard Lane
             7900
Scyene Road  9500-    530' N. to 683' S. of N. St. Augustine Road
             9600
Seagoville   11000    100'E. of Haymarket Road to the east city limits
Road
Seagoville   15600-   295'W. to 750'E. of Woody Road
Road         15900
Seagoville   16100-   450'W. to 310'E. of Stark Road
Road         16200
S.
Seagoville   300      300'W. of St. Augustine Drive to St. Augustine Drive
Road
Searcy Drive 2900     111' W. to 120' E. of Cowart Street
Sebring      6500-    60'S. of Tioga Street to 300'N. of Soft Wind Drive
Drive        6600
Seco         6800-    Celeste Drive to 300'W. of Gillette Street
Boulevard    7100
Second       4300-    10'N. of York Street to 150'N. of Carpenter Avenue
Avenue       4500
Shadybank    16400-   100'S. of Redpine Road to 150'S. of Embers Road
Road         16500
Sheila Lane  3400     300' E. of Lakefield Boulevard to Hargrove Drive
Shiloh Road  9900-    175'S. of Healey Drive to 150'N. of Milmar Drive
             10000
Shiloh Road  10800    35'W. of Centerville Road to Ferguson Road
Singleton    1600-    410'W. to 330'E. of Vilbig Road
Boulevard    1800
Singleton    2800-    190'E. of Westerfeld Avenue to 280'E. of Kingbridge
Boulevard    3000     Street
Singleton    5300-    250'E. of Clymer Street to 60'E. of Lumley Street
Boulevard    5600
Sondra Drive 6700     215'W. of Hillbrook Street to Wendover Road
Sonnet Drive 11300-   170' S. of Flair Drive to 200' N. of Orchard Ridge Court
             11400
Southern     3300-
Oaks         3400     300'N. to 300'S. of Tips Boulevard
Boulevard
Sprague      3300-    300'W. of Boulder Drive to 15'E. of Westmoreland Road
Drive        3400
Spring       6600-    800' W. of Hillcrest Road to 50' W. of Brookridge Drive
Valley Road  6900
Stag Road    3000-    1400' E. of Bonnie View Road to 1025' W. of Haas Drive
             3100
Stampede     2200     50' E. of Chaparral Waters Way to 120' W. of Olympus
Lane                  Boulevard
St.          100S-
Augustine    200N     220' S. of Grady Lane to 200' N. of Grove Oaks Boulevard
Road
N. St.
Augustine    500-700  200' S. of Calico Drive to 400' N. of Rhoda Lane
Road
N. St.
Augustine    1000     75' N. of Paramount Avenue to 75' S. of Angelus Road
Road
N. St.       1400-
Augustine    1600     420' S. to 530' N. of Musgrave Drive
Road
N. St.       2000-
Augustine    2200     50' S. of Olde Towne Rowe to 435' S. of Bruton Road
Road
N. St.       2400-
Augustine    2500     170' S. of Bluffcreek Drive to 170' N. of Highfield Drive
Road
N. St.       2900-
Augustine    3200     630' N. to 230' S. of Scyene Road
Road
St. David    2800-    225' W. of St. Gabriel Drive to 60' W. of St. Rita Drive
Drive        2900
Stevens      1800-    135' W. of Mary Cliff Road to 220'E. of Stevens Village
Forest Drive 2000     Drive
St. Francis  1600-    125'S. of San Cristobal Drive to 200'N. of San Leandro
Avenue       1700     Drive
St. Francis  4400-    205' W. of Berridge Lane to 145' E. of Trace Road
Avenue       4500
St. Judes    11200-   140' S. of Midbury Drive to 140' N. of Mason Dells Drive
Drive        11400
St. Michaels 11200-   200' S. of Midbury Drive to 180' N. of Mason Dells Drive
Drive        11400
St Moritz    6200     250' E. of Norris Street to 50' W. of Alderson Street
Avenue
Stichter     6300-    200'E. of Edgemere Road to 200'W. of Tibbs Street
Avenue       6500
Stoneview    9000-    200'S. of Beckleymeade Avenue to 200'N. of Westfall Drive
Drive        9200
Stults Road  8400-    116'E. of Pinewood Drive to 100'S. of Floyd Lake Drive
             8500
Stults Road  8600-    Shepherd Road to 200'W. of Woodshore Drive
             8800
Sunland      11600-   160'N. of Lippitt Avenue to 150'S. of Flamingo Lane
Street       118 00
Sunnyvale    4100     185'N. to 185'S. of Wilhurt Avenue
Street
Swansee      2100-    80'E. of Alamosa Drive to 100'W. of Cassia Drive
Drive        2000
Sylvan       3200-    230'S. of Nomas Street to 150'N. of McBroom Street
Avenue       3300
Teagarden    10200    250'W. to 650'E. of Education Way
Road
Telegraph    2400-    Claremont Drive to 140'E. of Rangeway Drive
Avenue       2500
Thedford     3600-    160'N. of Tyree Street to 170'E. of Victoria Avenue
Avenue       3800
Throckmorton 2700-    35'E. of Dickason Avenue to 120'W. of Congress Avenue
Street       3000
Tibbs Street 9700-    145'N. of Aberdeen Avenue to 155'N. of Walnut Hill Lane
             9900
Timberglen   3400     Kelly Boulevard to 30'W. of Justice Lane
Road
Timberglen   3600     200' W. to 210' E. of Vail Street
Road
Tioga Street 3500-    200'W. of Bonnie View Road to 190'W. of Strawberry Trail
             3800
Toluca       3000     Corning Avenue to McVay Avenue
Avenue
Tosca Lane   2100-    20'W. of Rugged Drive to 250'W. of Ovid Avenue
             2200
Town North   6800-    150'S. of Berryhill Street to 150'N. of Larmanda Street
Drive        7000
Towns Street 8200-    Schroeder Road to Dandridge Drive
             8300
Tumalo Trail 3200-    100'N. of Odessa Street to 500'N. of Nomas Street
             3300
W. Twelfth   500-600  250'E. to 250'W. of Llewellyn Avenue
Street
W. Twelfth   1300-    85'W. of Clinton Avenue to 115'W. of the south leg of
Street       1500     Windomere Avenue
W. Twelfth   2300-    35'W. of Hollywood Avenue to 165'W. of Franklin Street
Street       2500
N. Tyler     100      80'N. of Tenth Street to Melba Street
Street
Tyree Street 6800     120'N. of Thedford Avenue to Linnet Lane
Umphress     7600-    250'E. of Prichard Lane to 250'E. of Hillburn Drive
Road         7900
University   4300-    180'W. of Webster Drive to 140'E. of Roper Street
Boulevard    4700
Vail Street  18300    200' S. of Timberglen Road to Timberglen Road
Vandelia     5500-    100' S. of Inwood Road to 150' N. of Hedgerow Drive
Street       5600
Vanderbilt   5700-    200' W. of Matilda Street to 220' E. of Delmar Avenue
Avenue       5900
Vanderbilt   5800     40'E. of Matilda Street to Delmar Avenue
Avenue
Verde Valley 5100-    170'W. to 170'E. of Noel Road
Lane         5200
S. Vernon    2000-    510' N. of W. Illinois Avenue to 90' S. of Ferndale
Avenue       2500     Avenue
Veterans     4600     Ann Arbor Avenue to 500'S. of Ann Arbor Avenue
Drive
Veterans     4600-    765' N. of 52nd Street to 150' S. of Ledbetter Road
Drive        4900
Victoria     6700-    250'S. to 120'N. of Thedford Avenue
Avenue       6900
Victor       4500     N. Carroll Avenue to 270'E. of N. Carroll Avenue
Street
Voss Road    17800-   206'S. of Briargrove Lane to 65'S. of Whispering Gables
             17900    Drive
Walmsley     1300-    75'E. of Neal Street to 150'W. of N. Edgefield Avenue
Avenue       1500
Walnut Hill  2900-    210'W. of Monroe Drive to 60'E. of Goodyear Drive
Lane         3000
Walnut Hill  3300-    180' W. to 825' E. of Webb Chapel Road
Lane         3400
Walnut Hill  3800-    80' W. of Dresden Drive to 230' W. of Midway Road
Lane         4100
Walnut Hill  4900-    300' E. of Surrey Oaks Drive to 40' W. of Strait Lane
Lane         5000
Walnut Hill  6300-    270'W. of Tibbs Street to 240'E. of Edgemere Road
Lane         6500
Walnut Hill  8700-    10'W. of Claybrook Drive to 150'W. of Abrams Road
Lane         8900
Walnut Hill  9400-    500'W. to 200'E. of Meadowhill Drive
Lane         9500
Walnut Hill  10100-   270'W. of Ferndale Road to 160'E. of Lynbrook Drive
Lane         105 00
Walnut       10200-   280'W. to 220'E. of Hornbean Drive
Street       10400
Walton
Walker
Boulevard    800-900  320'S. to 105'N. of Keeneland Parkway
northbound
service road
Walton
Walker
Boulevard    800-900  275'N. to 115'S. of Keeneland Parkway
southbound
service road
Wandt Drive  6700-    425' N. of Camp Wisdom Road to Ridge Center Drive
             7000
N.           1900-
Washington   2300     110' N. of Munger Avenue to 285' S. of Thomas Avenue
Avenue
Waterfall    13600-   130'N. of Brookgreen Drive to 200'N. of Rolling Hill Lane
Way          13700
Wayne Street 900-1000 120'N. to 220'S. of Gurley Avenue
Webb Chapel  9800     30'S. of Park Lane (North Leg) to 20'N. of Manana Drive
Road
Webb Chapel  9900-    50' N. of Lockmoor Lane to 245' N. of Walnut Hill Lane
Road         10000
Welch Road   11600-   230'S. of Hockaday Drive to 100'S. of Allencrest Lane
             118 00
Welch Road   12200-   115'S. of Ridgeside Drive to 200'S. of Rickover Drive
             123 00
Welch Road   12600-   160'S. of Mill Creek Road to 110'N. of Harvest Hill Road
             12700
Wendover     3200-    220'W. of Alexander Drive to 120'N. of Meadow Lake Avenue
Road         3400
Wentwood     7200-    250' E. of Durham Street to 120' E. of Airline Road
Drive        7400
Westmoreland 100 S-   210' S. to 270' N. of West Jefferson Boulevard
Road         100 N
S.                    40'S. of Arnoldell Street to 300'S. of Irwindell
Westmoreland 500-600  Boulevard
Road
S.           1400-    60'N. of Glen Haven Boulevard to 150'S. of Shelly
Westmoreland 1500     Boulevard
Road
S.           3400-
Westmoreland 3900     50' N. of Kimballdale Road to 50' N. of Mapleleaf Lane
Road
N.           3400-
Westmoreland 3600     450'S. of Morris Street to 250'N. of Bickers Street
Road
Wheatland    1700-    300'E. of McKissick Lane to 50'E. of Fellowship Drive
Road         2000
Wheatland    7100-    325'E. to 500'W. of County View Road
Road         7200
W. Wheatland 400-500  620'E. to 420'W. of Willoughby Boulevard
Road
Whispering   12700-   125'N. of Laingtree Drive to Sunridge Trail
Hills Drive  129 00
Whitehurst   9200     320'W. to 300'E. of Club Meadows Drive
Drive
Whitehurst   9300-    660'W. of Echo Valley Drive to 55'E. of Spring Hollow
Drive        9400     Drive
Whitehurst   9400-    75'W. of Branch Hollow Drive to 60'E. of Glen Springs
Drive        9600     Drive
Whitehurst   9700-    275' E. of Arbor Park Drive to 120' E. of Ferris Branch
Drive        9800     Boulevard
White Rock   9400-    70' S. of Crestedge Drive to 550' N. of Kingsley Road
Trail        9700
White Rock   9900-    350'S. of White Rock Place to 330'S. of Church Road
Trail        10000
Whitewing    8800-    25' S. of Quail Run to Pelican Drive
Lane         8900
Willoughby   8500-    40' S. to 650' N. of Adjective Street
Boulevard    8700
Willowdell   12200    250'W. of Schroeder Road to Schroeder Road
Drive
Winedale     7100     Abrams Road to Walnut Hill Lane
Drive
N. Winnetka  3100-    50'S. of McBroom Street to 200'S. of Pueblo Street
Avenue       3300
Woodall
Rodgers      2400-
(South       2600     50' W. of Jack Evans Street to 100' E. of Routh Street
Service
Road)
E. Woodin    500-600  150'W. of Alaska Avenue to 90'W. of S. Marsalis Avenue
Boulevard
Worth Street 4500     N. Carroll Avenue to 670' E. of N. Carroll Avenue
Worth Street 5700-    300'W. of Lowell Street to 400'E. of Ridgeway Street
             5900
Wozencraft   5700     45'E of Nuestra Drive to 300'W of Jamestown Road
Drive
Wright       2800-    150'W. to 220'E. of Ravinia Drive
Street       2900
Wycliff      2100-    260'S. to 360'N. of Rosewood Avenue
Avenue       2300
 
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 18409; 18483; 18983; 19749; 20196; 21237; 21564; 22763;
22926; 23078; 23158; 23294; 23556; 23917; 24492; 25833; 26500; 27294; 27700;
28871; 28940; 29071; 29246; 29395; 29613; 30022; 30217; 31552 ; 31770; 32069;
32291; 32488; 32597; 32710; 32960; 33071; 33152)
SEC. 28-51.   SPEED IN PARKING LOT OF DALLAS CONVENTION CENTER.
   A person commits an offense if he drives or operates a vehicle upon a
parking lot of the Dallas Convention Center at a speed in excess of 10 miles
per hour. Any speed in excess of 10 miles per hour shall be prima facie
evidence that the speed is not reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-52.   SPEED IN THE DALLAS CITY HALL PARKING GARAGE.
   A person commits an offense if he drives or operates a vehicle in the
parking garage, as designated in Section
28-128.1 of this chapter, at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour. Any speed
in excess of 10 miles per hour is prima facie evidence that the speed is not
reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful. (Ord. 14911)
SEC. 28-52.1.   SPEED IN THE BULLINGTON STREET TRUCK TERMINAL.
   A person commits an offense if he drives or operates a vehicle in the
terminal, as designated in Section
28-128.8 of this chapter, at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour. Any speed
in excess of 10 miles per hour is prima facie evidence that the speed is not
reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful. (Ord. 18408)
Division 3. Turning Movements.
SEC. 28-53.   OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U
turn is permitted, the driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the
sign. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-54.   LIMITATION ON U TURNS.
   A person commits an offense, if as the operator of a vehicle, he turns the
vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a
business district unless a U turn sign permitting such a turn has been
installed in the area, or in any other district unless the movement can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-55.   LEFT TURNS RESTRICTED WHEN EMERGING FROM OR ENTERING ALLEYS OR
PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle commits an offense if, on any weekday between
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., he:
      (1)   emerges from an alley or private driveway within the central
business district by making a left turn onto a public street; or
      (2)   enters an alley or private driveway within the central business
district by making a left turn from a public street.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2)
that the left turn was necessitated by a one-way street regulation.
   (c)   In this section:
      (1)   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT means “central business district” as
defined in Section
28-56 of this division.
      (2)   WEEKDAY means any day of the week from Monday through Friday. (Ord.
Nos. 14584; 24867)
SEC. 28-56.   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this division, the central business district shall be
that area bounded by the following street lines:
      The south line of Young Street from Houston Street to Central Expressway;
      The east line of Central Expressway from Young Street to Pacific Avenue;
      The north line of Pacific Avenue from Central Expressway to Pearl Street;
      The east line of Pearl Street from Pacific Avenue to Ross Avenue;
      The north line of Ross Avenue from Pearl Street to Houston Street;
      The west line of Houston Street from Ross Avenue to Young Street. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-57.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 24867)
Division 4. Stops.
SEC. 28-58.   VEHICLES TO STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
   The driver of a vehicle commits an offense if he enters an intersection or
marked crosswalk when there is not sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle being operated, without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians in the intersection or
crosswalk, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
(Ord. 14584)
Division 5. Operation of Vehicles near Vulnerable Road Users.
SEC. 28-58.1.   DEFINITION.
   In this division, VULNERABLE ROAD USER means a person operating a bicycle,
hand cycle, unicycle, or other human-powered wheeled vehicle on a street or
highway. (Ord. 28870)
SEC. 28-58.2.   PROTECTION OF VULNERABLE ROAD USERS.
   (a)   An operator of a motor vehicle and a vulnerable road user shall comply
with all laws governing the operation of their respective vehicles on a street
or highway.
   (b)   The operator of a motor vehicle commits an offense if, while passing a
vulnerable road user on a street or highway, he:
      (1)   fails to entirely vacate the lane occupied by the vulnerable road
user; or
      (2)   re-enters the lane occupied by the vulnerable road user before
having passed the vulnerable road user at a safe distance.
   (c)   The operator or passenger of a motor vehicle commits an offense if he
throws or projects any object or substance at or against a vulnerable road
user.
   (d)   The operator of a motor vehicle commits an offense if he overtakes a
vulnerable road user traveling in the same direction and subsequently makes a
right- hand turn in front of the vulnerable road user unless the operator is
safely clear of the vulnerable road user, taking into account the speed at
which the vulnerable road user is traveling and the braking requirements of the
vehicle making the right-hand turn.
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (b) and (d) that, at
the time of the offense, the vulnerable road user was acting in violation of a
city ordinance or state or federal law regulating the operation of the
vulnerable road user’s vehicle on the street or highway.
   (f)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(1) if the operator
of the motor vehicle:
      (1)   was unable to move into an adjacent lane of the street or highway
due to a physical barrier or obstruction or because the change of lanes would
have violated a city ordinance or state or federal law; and
      (2)   passed the vulnerable road user at a safe speed and distance.
   (g)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$300, except that, if the vulnerable road user sustained a bodily injury from
the commission of the offense, the offense is punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500. (Ord. 28870)
ARTICLE VII.
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
SEC. 28-59.   ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   The operator of a vehicle shall move only in the direction indicated, when
signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected at each intersection upon
the following streets or portions of streets:
STREET EXTENT DIRECTION
STREET                         EXTENT                         DIRECTION
Adams Avenue                   Melba Street to Ninth Street   South
Akard Street                   Jackson Street to Young Street South
Akard Street                   Ross Avenue to Elm Street      South
Akard Street                   Harry Hines Boulevard to Cedar South
                               Springs Road
Allen Street                   Carlisle Street to McKinney    South-east
                               Avenue
Alley (north of Blair Road and Central Expressway east
east of Central Expressway     service road to a point 420'   East
east service road)             east of Central Expressway
                               east service road
Alley (between Insurance Lane  Knox Street to Hester Avenue   North-east
and McKinney Avenue)
Alley (between Jefferson       Madison Avenue to Bishop       West
Boulevard and Sunset Avenue)   Avenue
Alley (between Tenth Street    Tyler Street to Polk Street    West
and Ninth Street)
Alley (between Routh Street    Hood Street to Enid Street     South
and Brown Street)
Alley (north of Ledbetter      Rugged Drive to a point
Drive and west of Rugged       approximately 751 feet west    West
Drive)                         thereof
Alley (paralleling Airline     Briarmeadow Drive to the alley
Road to the west)              paralleling Walnut Hill Lane   North
                               to the north
Alley (paralleling Illinois    Corinth Street Road to Denley  West
Avenue to the north)           Drive
Alley (150 feet west of        Alta Avenue to Sears Avenue    North
Greenville Avenue)
Alonzo Place                   Carver Place to McCoy Place    West
Anthony Street                 Eighth Street to Ninth Street  North
Ashland Street                 Griffin Street to Summer       East
                               Street
Ashland Street                 Cedar Springs Road to Harry    West
                               Hines Boulevard
Atlanta Street                 Eugene Street to Romine Avenue North
Avondale Street                Fitzhugh Avenue to Oak Lawn    East
                               Avenue
Beacon Street                  Samuell Boulevard to Santa Fe  North
                               Avenue
Beacon Street Cut-Off          Santa Fe Avenue to Terry       South
                               Street
Berkshire Lane                 Kate Street to Westchester     West
                               Drive
Bird Street                    Haskell Avenue to Hill Avenue  West
Bisbee Drive                   Glover Pass to Hollis Street   South
                               Central Expressway (west
Blackburn Street               service road) to the Haskell-  South
                               Blackburn Connection
Broom Street                   Field Street to Laws Street    West
Browder Street                 Jackson Street to Wood Street  South
Buckner Boulevard (West        From a point 1,340 feet north
Service Road)                  of Peavy Road to a point 800   South
                               feet south of Peavy Road
Buckner Boulevard (East        From a point 830 feet south of
Service Road)                  Peavy Road to a point 2,090    North
                               feet north of Peavy Road
Bullington Street              Patterson Avenue to Bryan      South
                               Street
Cadiz Street                   Lamar Street to Central        East
                               Expressway
Canton Street                  Harwood Street to R. L.        West
                               Thornton Freeway
Carlisle Street                Allen Street to Lemmon Avenue  South
Cedar Springs Road             Akard Street to Olive Street   North-east
Central Expressway             Beaumont Street to Pearl       North
                               Expressway
Central Expressway (East       Live Oak Street to the north   North
Service Road)                  city limits at Floyd Road
Central Expressway (East       Scott Street to Martin Luther  North
Service Road)                  King Jr. Boulevard
Central Expressway (West       Forest Lane to Live Oak Street South
Service Road)
Central Expressway (West       North city limits to Coit Road South
Service Road)
Central Expressway (West       Grand Avenue to Haven Street   South
Service Road)
Centre Street                  Vernon Avenue to Polk Street   West
C. F. Hawn Freeway (East       South city limits to Lake June North
Service Road)                  Road
C. F. Hawn Freeway (West       Pemberton Hill Road to the     South
Service Road)                  south city limits
Clyde Lane                     Hallsville Street to Woodall   South
                               Rodgers north service road
Clyde Lane                     McKinney Avenue to Woodside    South
                               Street
Cole Avenue                    Lemmon Avenue to Harvard       South
                               Avenue
Colonial Avenue                Martin Luther King Jr.         North
                               Boulevard to South Boulevard
                               From a point 300 feet west of
Commerce Street                the Triple Underpass to        East
                               Exposition Avenue
Congo Street                   Bank Street to S. Carroll      West
                               Avenue
Continental Avenue             Stemmons Freeway to McKinney   East
                               Avenue
Corbin Street                  N. Griffin Street to N. Lamar  West
                               Street
Corbin Street                  Market Street to N. Lamar      East
                               Street
Corinth Street (North Service  Cockrell Avenue to Austin      West
Road)                          Street
Cotton Belt Avenue             From a point 160 feet north of North
                               Hondo Avenue to Arroyo Avenue
N. Crawford Street             Ninth Street to Eighth Street  North
Cridelle Place                 Cridelle Drive to Hargrove     East
                               Drive
Crockett Street                Pacific Avenue to Live Oak     North-west
                               Street
Dallas Parkway (East Leg)      All portions within the city   North
                               limits
Dallas Parkway (West Leg)      All portions within the city   South
                               limits
N. Denley Drive                E. 8th Street to E. 9th Street South
Dennison Street                Fish Trap Road to N. Hampton   East
                               Road
Dickason Avenue                Knight Street to Throckmorton  South
                               Street
Dirk Street                    Martel Avenue to McMillan      North
                               Avenue
Douglas Avenue                 Douglas-Wycliff Connection to  North-east
                               Lemmon Avenue
Douglas-Wycliff Connection     Dickason Avenue to Douglas     East
                               Avenue
East Grand Avenue (North       Tenison Memorial Road to       West
roadway)                       Cameron Avenue
East Service Drive (Dallas     Young Street to Canton Street  South
City Hall)
Eastern Avenue                 Forest Lane to Northmoor Drive South
Edgewood Street                Park Row to Good-Latimer       North
                               Expressway
W. Eighth Street               Bishop Avenue to Madison       East
                               Avenue
                               Exposition Avenue to a point
Elm Street                     300 feet west of the Triple    West
                               Underpass
Ervay Street                   St. Paul Street to Ross Avenue North
Ervay Street                   South Boulevard to Martin      South
                               Luther King Jr. Boulevard
N. Ewing Avenue                Colorado Boulevard to Comal    South
                               Street
Exposition Avenue              Main Street to Elm Street      North-west
Federal Street                 St. Paul Street to Olive       South-west
                               Street
First Avenue                   Parry Avenue to Canton Street  North-west
                               Avondale Street to the
Fitzhugh Avenue                Highland Park, Texas city      West
                               limits
Fitzhugh Avenue                Haskell Avenue to Crosstown    South
                               Expressway at Fargo Street
Five Mile Drive                Yewpon Avenue to Frio Drive    East
Forest Meadow Trail            Goldwood Drive to Brook        North
                               Terrace Trail
Four Way Place                 Main Street to Elm Street      North
Goldwood Drive                 Indian Ridge Trail to Forest   East
                               Meadow Trail
Good-Latimer Expressway (East  Bryan Street to Live Oak       North
Roadway)                       Street
Good-Latimer Expressway (West  Live Oak Street to Bryan       South
Roadway)                       Street
Gordon Street                  Junius Street to Gaston Avenue North
Graham Avenue                  Terry Street to East Grand     South
                               Avenue
Griffin Street                 Broom Street to Ashland Street North
Griffin Street East            Cadiz Street to St. Paul       East
                               Street
Griffin Street West            St. Paul Street to Cadiz       West
                               Street
N. Griffin Street              Ross Avenue to McKinney Avenue North
Harry Hines Boulevard          McKinnon Street to Akard       South
                               Street
                               McKinney Avenue to the
Harvard Avenue                 Highland Park, Texas city      North-west
                               limits
Harwood Street                 Cedar Springs Road to Harry    South-east
                               Hines Boulevard
Harwood Street                 Woodall Rodgers Freeway to     South-east
                               Pacific Avenue
Haskell Avenue                 Lemmon Avenue to Parry Avenue  South
Haskell Avenue                 Parry Avenue to Stonewall      East
                               Street
Hawkins Street                 Live Oak Street to Good-       South
                               Latimer Expressway
Hord Street                    Lamar Street to N. Griffin     West
                               Street
Houston Street Viaduct         Houston Street to the          South-west
                               southwest end of the viaduct
Houston Street                 Young Street to the north end  South
                               of the Houston Street Viaduct
                               Lyndon B. Johnson north
Inwood Road (East Leg)         service road to 1250 feet      North
                               south of Harvest Hill Road
Inwood Road (West Leg)         North city limits to 1230 feet South
                               south of Harvest Hill Road
Jackson Street                 Pearl Expressway to Houston    West
                               Street
Jefferson Boule- vard (North   Westmoreland Road to Meredith  West
Service Road)                  Avenue
John W. Carpenter Freeway      All portions within the city   North-west
(North Service Road)           limits
John W. Carpenter Freeway      All portions within the city   South-east
(South Service Road)           limits
Julius Schepps Freeway (East   All portions within the city   North
Service Road)                  limits
Julius Schepps Freeway (West   All portions within the city   South
Service Road)                  limits
                               Henderson Avenue to Dumas
Junius Street                  Street (south side of the      East
                               park)
Kate Street                    Luther Lane to Berkshire Lane  North
Kimble Avenue                  Peabody Avenue to Martin       North
                               Luther King Jr. Boulevard
Lakehurst Avenue               Hillcrest Road to Airline Road East
Lamar Street                   McKinney Avenue to Stemmons    West
                               Freeway
LaVista Court                  Matilda Street to Hubert       East
                               Street
Laws Street                    McKinney Avenue to Hord Street South
Lemmon Avenue                  Lemmon Avenue East to Turtle   South
                               Creek Boulevard
Lemmon Avenue East             Lemmon Avenue to Turtle Creek  North
                               Boulevard
Lemmon Avenue                  Peak Street to Haskell Avenue  West
Live Oak Street                St. Paul Street to Central     South-west
                               Expressway
Lomo Alto Drive                From the alley south of Luther North
                               Lane to Northwest Highway
Luther Lane                    Westchester Drive to Kate      East
                               Street
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway      All portions within the city   West
(North Service Road)           limits
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway      All portions within the city   East
(South Service Road)           limits
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway      All portions within the city   North
(East Service Road)            limits
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway      All portions within the city   South
(West Service Road)            limits
N. Madison Avenue              Neches Street to Ballard       North
                               Avenue
Market Street                  Jefferson Boulevard Viaduct to North
                               Munger Avenue
Marvin D. Love Freeway (East   All portions within the city   North
Service Road)                  limits
Marvin D. Love Freeway (West   All portions within the city   South
Service Road)                  limits
McCallum Boulevard (North Leg) Davenport Road to McCallum     West
                               Boulevard
McCallum Boulevard (South Leg) McCallum Boulevard to          East
                               Davenport Road)
                               Cedar Springs Road to Harry
McKinnon Street                Hines Boulevard at Dallas      North
                               North Tollway
McKinney Avenue                Allen Street to Harvard Avenue North
McKinney Avenue                Laws Street to Field Street    East
Merrifield Avenue              Winfield Avenue to Owenwood    West
                               Avenue
Moody Street                   McKinnon Street to Harry Hines East
                               Boulevard
Munger Avenue                  Lamar Street to Record Street  West
Ninth Street                   Patton Avenue to N. Crawford   West
                               Street
Oak Lane                       Third Avenue to Ash Lane       South-east
Olive Street                   Elm Street to Cedar Springs    North
                               Road
Olive Street Cut-off           Harwood Street to Olive Street North
Pacific Avenue                 St. Paul Street to Central     East
                               Expressway
Parnell Street                 Peabody Avenue to Pennsylvania South
                               Avenue
Parnell Street                 Lamar Street to Pennsylvania   North
                               Avenue
Parry Avenue                   Second Avenue to Third Avenue  South-west
Patterson Avenue               Field Street to Griffin Street West
Peak Street                    Parry Avenue to Lemmon Avenue  North
Pearl Expressway               Central Expressway to Beaumont South
                               Street
Pearl Street                   Pacific Avenue to Live Oak     North-west
                               Street
Polk Street                    Tyler Street at Canty Street   South
                               to Twelfth Street
Poydras Street                 Commerce Street to Jackson     South
                               Street
Quincy Lane                    Royal Lane to Northaven Road   North
Ranger Circle                  Martin Luther King Jr.         North
                               Boulevard to First Avenue
Reunion Boulevard East         Reunion Boulevard to Houston   East
                               Street
Reunion Boulevard West         Houston Street to Reunion      West
                               Boulevard
River Street                   Field Street to Laws Street    West
Riverside Road                 Bonnie View Road to J. J.      East
                               Lemmon Road
Rosine Avenue                  Slow Street to Hasting Road    North
R. L. Thornton Freeway (North  All portions within the city   West
Service Road)                  limits
R. L. Thornton Freeway (West   All portions within the city   South
Service Road)                  limits
R. L. Thornton Freeway (South  All portions within the city   East
Service Road)                  limits
R. L. Thornton Freeway (East   All portions within the city   North
Service Road)                  limits
                               St. Germain Road (east
St. Germain Road (west         roadway) to north of the Texas South
roadway)                       and Pacific Railroad north of
                               La Reunion Parkway
                               From north of the Texas and
St. Germain Road (east         Pacific Railroad north of La   North
roadway)                       Reunion Parkway to St. Germain
                               Road (west roadway)
St Paul Street                 Cedar Springs Road to Ervay    South
                               Street
San Jacinto Place              St. Paul Street to 140 feet    East
                               east of St. Paul Street
San Jacinto Street             Lamar Street to the Central    East
                               Expressway south service road
Second Avenue                  Commerce Street to Parry       South-east
                               Avenue
Seventh Street                 Bishop Avenue to Madison       East
                               Avenue
Seventh Street                 Zang Boulevard to Davis Street East
Seventh Street                 Davis Street to Montclair      East
                               Avenue
Slow Street                    Oakland Avenue to Rosine       East
                               Avenue
S. M. Wright Freeway (west     Linfield Road to Illinois      South
service road)                  Avenue
Stemmons Freeway (North        All portions within the city   West
Service Road)                  limits
Stemmons Freeway (West Service All portions within the city   South
Road)                          limits
Stemmons Freeway (South        All portions within the city   East
Service Road)                  limits
Stemmons Freeway (East Service All portions within the city   North
Road)                          limits
Summer Street                  Ashland Street to Broom Street South
Texas Street                   Central Expressway east        North
                               service road to Bryan Street
Thomas Avenue                  McKinney Avenue to Pearl       East
                               Street
Timbergrove Circle             1700 Block through the 2000    Counter-clockwise
                               Block
Tyler Street                   Pembroke Avenue to Polk Street North
                               at Canty Street
Tyler Street Connection        Twelfth Street to Pembroke     South
                               Avenue
Valor Place                    Wichita Street to 200' N. of   North
                               Wichita Street
Vann Court                     Hall Street to Pavillion       East
                               Street
Villars Street                 San Jacinto Street to Ross     North
                               Avenue
Walmsley Avenue                Montclair Avenue to Edgefield  East
                               Avenue
Westchester Drive              Berkshire Lane to Luther Lane  South
White Rock Trail               Lanshire Drive to Duran Circle South
Wichita Street                 Cedar Springs Road to Alamo    West
                               Street
Windomere Avenue               W. Page Street to Twelfth      North
                               Street
Wood Street                    Griffin Street to Pearl        East
                               Expressway
Wood Street                    Lamar Street to Houston Street West
Wood Street Connection         Griffin Street to Lamar Street West
Woodall Rodgers Freeway (North All portions within the city   West
Service Road)                  limits
Woodall Rodgers Freeway (South All portions within the city   East
Service Road)                  limits
Wycliff Avenue                 Lemmon Avenue to Dickason      South-west
                               Avenue
Young Street                   Houston Street to Griffin      East
                               Street
 
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 14696; 14818; 14869; 14922; 14974; 15194; 15455; 15541;
15699; 15760; 15835; 15936; 16018; 16166; 16411; 16475; 16524; 16577; 16821;
16901; 16986; 17031; 17063; 17166; 17345; 17456; 17576; 17677; 17725; 17767;
17872; 17875; 17944; 18265; 18483; 18484; 18685; 18982; 18983; 19081; 19502;
19749; 20196; 21237; 22763; 22926; 23158; 23556; 23917; 24492; 25833; 27294;
28871; 28940; 29071; 29246; 29491; 30022; 31552; 32710; 32960)
SEC. 28-60.   ONE-WAY STREETS IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a vehicle on a one-way
street in a school traffic zone in a direction other than the direction
indicated by the one- way sign during hours in which the one-way regulation is
in effect as indicated on the sign.
   (b)   The following streets or portions of streets are designated as one-way
streets in school traffic zones when marked by the traffic engineer with
conspicuous signs indicating the appropriate direction of travel and the hours
during which the one-way regulation is in effect:
STREET EXTENT DIRECTION
STREET                           EXTENT                               DIRECTION
Aberdeen Avenue                  Hillcrest Road to Thackery Street    West
Alley (760 feet north of Goodman Morocco Avenue to N. Justin Avenue   West
Street)
Amity Lane                       Checota Drive to Cradlerock Drive    North
Anita Street                     Delmar Avenue to Matilda Street      West
Balboa Drive                     Edgefield Avenue to Berkley Avenue   East
Berkley Avenue                   Balboa Drive to Clinton Avenue       East
Bertrand Avenue                  2nd Avenue to Spring Garden Avenue   West
Blanton Street                   Riverway Drive to Greenmound Avenue  South
Bluffcreek Drive                 Aspen Street to St. Augustine Drive  West
Brierfield Drive                 Greenspan Avenue to Cherry Point     East
                                 Drive
Brookhurst Drive                 Waterview Road to Northcliff Drive   South
Caddo Street                     Thomas Avenue to Lafayette Street    South
Carlson Street                   Vandelia Street to Cedar Springs     South
                                 Road
Classen Drive                    Northcliff Drive to North Lake Drive North
Columbia Avenue                  Glasgow Drive to Juliette Fowler     West
                                 Street
Cradlerock Drive                 Amity Lane to Cheyenne Road          East
Crenshaw Drive                   Grady Lane to Old Seagoville Road    North
Delmar Avenue                    Mockingbird Lane to Anita Street     South
Delmar Avenue                    Vanderbilt Avenue to Goodwin Avenue  South
Dennison Street                  Fish Trap Road to N. Hampton Road    East
Dickason Avenue                  Knight Street to Throckmorton Street South
Drury Drive                      Polk Street to Regatta Drive         East
                                 From a point approximately 400 feet
Dunloe Drive                     west of Joaquin Drive to Joaquin     East
                                 Drive
Edgeworth Drive                  20'S. of Turnbow Drive to Rylie      South
                                 Crest Drive
Forrestal Drive                  Wyoming Street to Larkhill Drive     North
S. Franklin Street               Gladstone Drive to Twelfth Street    North
Gayglen Drive                    Oklaunion Drive to Longbranch Lane   East
Gladstone Drive                  Hampton Road to Franklin Street      West
Goodwin Avenue                   Delmar Avenue to Matilda Street      West
Green Cove Lane                  Oak Trail to Lone Oak Drive          Northeast
Greendale Drive                  Bruton Road to Milverton Drive       North
Greenmeadow Drive                Forestcliff Drive to John West Road  South
Greenmound Avenue                Blanton Street to McKim Drive        West
Grigsby Avenue                   Bryan Street to Live Oak Street      North
Harwood Street                   Pennsylvania Avenue to Warren Avenue South
Hawthorne Avenue                 Production Drive to Afton Street     East
Haymarket Road                   Zurich Drive to Turnbow Drive        North
Hazelhurst Lane                  Everglade Road to Hovenkamp Drive    South
Healey Drive                     Shiloh Road to Casa Oaks Drive       West
Highfield Drive                  St. Augustine Drive to Aspen Street  East
Hillbrook Street                 Lake Circle Drive to Sondra Drive    North
Hodde Street                     Woodmont Drive to Jim Miller Road    East
Hoke Smith Drive                 Navajo Drive to Polk Street          East
Hollis Avenue                    LaVerne Avenue to Lawnview Avenue    East
Hovenkamp Drive                  Hazelhurst Lane to Ashbrook Road     West
Juliette Fowler Street           Reiger Avenue to Columbia Avenue     North
Junius Street                    Lowell Street to Ridgeway Street     East
N. Justin Avenue                 The alley 760 feet north of Goodman  South
                                 Street to Goodman Street
Knight Street                    Congress Avenue to Dickason Avenue   East
Lancaster Avenue                 Seventh Street to Eighth Street      South
Larkhill Drive                   Forrestal Drive to Knoxville Street  East
Linnet Lane                      Tyree Street to Victoria Street      East
Lowell Street                    Worth Street to Junius Street        North
Maryland Avenue                  Corning Avenue to McVey Avenue       North
McKissick Lane                   Egyptian Drive to Algebra Drive      South
Melba Street                     N. Llewellyn Avenue to N. Adams      East
                                 Avenue
Melbourne Avenue                 Clinton Avenue to Edgefield Avenue   West
Mercer Drive                     Mariposa Drive to Ash Creek Drive    West
Military Parkway (North Service  Jim Miller Road to Wilkes Avenue     West
Road)
Mimosa Lane                      Hillcrest Road to Thackery Street    West
Mixon Drive                      Clover Lane to Highgrove Drive       South
Montana Avenue                   Marsalis Avenue to Alaska Avenue     West
Montclair Avenue                 Taft Street to Ranier Street         South
Morocco Avenue                   Goodman Street to the alley 760 feet North
                                 north of Goodman Street
Mouser Street                    Bonnie View Road to Signet Street    East
W. Ninth Street                  N. Adams Avenue to N. Llewellyn      West
                                 Avenue
Nomas Street                     Clymer Street to Tumalo Trail        East
Odom Drive                       Holcomb Road to Odeneal Street       East
Ouida Avenue                     Schooldell Drive to Barnett Avenue   East
Paducah Avenue                   Denley Drive to Lancaster Road       East
Palisade Drive                   Greendale Drive to Prairie Creek     East
                                 Road
Philip Avenue                    Fitzhugh Avenue to Munger Avenue     East
Pomona Road                      Catawba Road to Cherokee Trail       East
N. Prairie Avenue                Ross Avenue to San Jacinto Street    Northwest
Racine Drive                     Kirwood Drive to Cleardale Drive     North
Rangeway Drive                   Telegraph Avenue to El Cerrito Drive South
Raydell Place                    Westmoreland Road to Barnett Avenue  West
Reiger Avenue                    Glasgow Drive to Paulus Avenue       East
Ridgeway Street                  Worth Street to Junius Street        South
Rolling Hills Lane               Waterfall Way to Esperanza Road      East
Rosewood Avenue                  Lucas Drive to Arroyo Avenue         South
San Jacinto Street               Fitzhugh Avenue to Prairie Avenue    West
San Leandro Drive                St. Francis Avenue to Whittier       East
                                 Avenue
Scottsboro Lane                  Grassy Ridge Trail to Marsalis       West
                                 Avenue
Silver Springs Drive             Knoxville Street to Sage Valley Lane East
Sprague Drive                    Boulder Drive to Westmoreland Road   West
Stichter Avenue                  Tibbs Street to Edgemere Road        East
Sunset Street                    Van Buren Avenue to Polk Street      East
Taft Street                      Mary Cliff Road to Montclair Avenue  East
Telegraph Avenue                 Claremont Drive to Rangeway Drive    East
Tennant Street                   Oak Cliff Boulevard to Jefferson     North
                                 Boulevard
Tenth Street                     Oak Cliff Boulevard to Tennant       West
                                 Street
Throckmorton Street              Dickason Avenue to Congress Avenue   West
Tosca Lane                       Rugged Drive to Ovid Avenue          West
Towns Street                     Schroeder Road to Oberlin Drive      West
Tufts Street                     Rylie Road to Cade Road              South
Tyree Street                     Thedford Avenue to Linnet Lane       North
Vanderbilt Avenue                Hillbrook Street to Oakhurst Street  West
Vanderbilt Avenue                Matilda Street to Delmar Avenue      East
Victoria Avenue                  Linnet Lane to Thedford Avenue       South
Waterfall Way                    Rolling Hills Lane to Brookgreen     South
                                 Drive
Waterview Road                   Peavy Road to Brookhurst Drive       East
Winton Street                    Concho Street to Delmar Avenue       West
Worth Street                     Ridgeway Street to Lowell Street     West
Wyoming Street                   Knoxville Street to Forrestal Drive  West
Zurich Drive                     Edgeworth Drive to Haymarket Road    West
 
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 18409; 19749; 21237; 21564; 22926; 23078; 24492; 25833;
26500; 27294; 27700; 28871; 28940; 29071; 29246; 29395; 30022; 30217; 31552;
32291; 32488; 33071)
ARTICLE VIII.
PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHTS AND DUTIES.
SEC. 28-61.   DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS WHILE ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   Pedestrians shall stand on sidewalks or islands while waiting for a
bus.
   (b)   Pedestrians, while waiting for a bus, shall stand on the side of a
sidewalk either at or near the curb or the property line, in a manner which
will not interfere with other pedestrians using the sidewalk.
   (c)   A pedestrian, except one wholly or partially blind, shall accord full
right-of-way on a sidewalk or in a crosswalk, to all persons carrying a cane or
walking stick which is white or white with the lower end red. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-61.1.   STANDING AND WALKING IN CERTAIN AREAS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person stands or walks on a median
that measures six feet or less in width, in areas where no median exists for
roadways designated as divided roadways, or in an area designated as a clear
zone.
   (b)   For purposes of this section,
      (1)   CLEAR ZONE means the unobstructed, traversable area provided beyond
the edge of the through travelled way for the recovery of errant vehicles. On a
curbed street, the clear zone is the area four feet from the face of the curb.
On an uncurbed street, the clear zone is 10 feet from the edge of the travel
lane. A clear zone includes shoulders, bicycle lanes, and auxiliary lanes,
except auxiliary lanes that function like through lanes. However, a clear zone
does not include areas adjacent to the back of the curb where a paved sidewalk
exists.
      (2)   MEDIAN means the intervening space, physical barrier, or clearly
indicated dividing section between the two roadways of opposing traffic on a
public divided roadway.
      (3)   RAISED SPLITTER ISLAND (also known as separator islands) means a
median that slows, directs, and separates conflicting traffic and may provide
refuge for pedestrians who are crossing a road.
      (4)   ROADWAY means streets classified in the city's thoroughfare plan as
major/principal or minor arterials, frontage roads or parkways along controlled
access freeways and tollways, non-controlled access state roadway facilities
and associated intersections with city's major or minor arterials.
   (c)   This section does not apply if the person:
      (1)   is crossing a divided roadway in the most direct route possible
inclusive of roadways that have provisions for dedicated bicycle lane
facilities or curb bump outs;
      (2)   is the victim of or rendering aid in an emergency situation or in
compliance with the directions of a peace officer;
      (3)   is performing work in the right-of-way in accordance with a permit
issued under
Chapter 43 of this code;
      (4)   is erecting or dismantling a barricade in the right-of-way in
accordance with a permit issued under
Chapter 52 of this code;
      (5)   has prior authorization from the city or is otherwise in compliance
with applicable laws and regulations;
      (6)   is standing in a raised splitter island that is not less than four
feet in width while attempting to cross a divided roadway in the most direct
route possible; or
      (7)   is walking or standing on a paved sidewalk if the sidewalk is
adjacent to the back of the curb on a curbed roadway.
   (d)   This section must be reviewed at least once a year by the city
council. (Ord. 32333)
SEC. 28-62.   ENTERING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE; LOADING AND UNLOADING SO NOT
TO INTERFERE WITH TRAFFIC.
   (a)   A person shall not enter or alight from a vehicle on the side of the
vehicle adjacent to lanes of moving traffic unless reasonably safe to do so and
unless it will cause no interference with the movement of other traffic.
   (b)   A person shall not load or unload goods or merchandise in or on a
vehicle in a manner which will interfere with moving traffic, except where
other provisions of this chapter apply.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he enters or alights from a vehicle
while the vehicle is moving. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-63.   USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   A person commits an offense if while upon roller skates, or riding in or by
means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, he goes upon any roadway
except while crossing a street on a cross-walk, and when so crossing the person
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-63.1.   PROHIBITING CROSSING IN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT OTHER THAN AT
CROSSWALK.
   (a)   A pedestrian commits an offense if, in the central business district,
he crosses a roadway at a place other than a crosswalk.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, central business district is defined in
Section
28-56 of this chapter. (Ord. 15686)
SEC. 28-63.2.   DESIGNATION OF ONE-WAY PEDESTRIAN ZONES.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT is defined in Section
28-56 of this chapter.
      (2)   ONE-WAY PEDESTRIAN ZONE means a sidewalk or other pedestrian
walkway, or portion of a sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway, designated by
the chief of police to be used for one-way pedestrian traffic. A sign or signs
must be posted conspicuously within or at the entrance to a one-way pedestrian
zone indicating the designated direction of travel in the zone.
   (b)   The chief of police may, from time to time, temporarily designate one-
way pedestrian zones within the central business district if he determines
that, because of a certain condition or event, the one-way designation is in
the interest of the public order and safety.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he walks in a one-way pedestrian zone
in a direction other than the designated direction of travel after he was
ordered by a police officer to walk in the direction of travel designated for
the zone. (Ord. 18891)
SEC. 28-63.3.   SOLICITATIONS TO OCCUPANTS OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC ROADWAYS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   GOODS means property of every kind.
      (2)   PUBLIC PROPERTY means:
         (A)   any property open or devoted to public use or owned by the city;
and
         (B)   any area dedicated to the public use for sidewalk, street,
highway, or other transportation purposes, including, but not limited to, any
curb, median, parkway, shoulder, sidewalk, alley, drive, or public right-of-
way.
      (3)   ROADWAY has the meaning given that term in Chapter 541, Texas
Transportation Code.
      (4)   SERVICES means any work done for the benefit of another person.
      (5)   SOLICITATION means any conduct or act whereby a person:
         (A)   either orally or in writing, asks for a ride, employment, goods,
services, financial aid, monetary gifts, or any article representing monetary
value, for any purpose;
         (B)   either orally or in writing, sells or offers for sale goods,
services, or publications;
         (C)   distributes without remuneration goods, services, or
publications; or
         (D)   solicits signatures on a petition or opinions for a survey.
      (6)   VEHICLE has the meaning given that term in Chapter 541, Texas
Transportation Code.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if, while occupying any public property
adjacent to any public roadway in the city, he knowingly conducts a
solicitation directed to, or intended to attract the attention of, the occupant
of any vehicle stopped or traveling on the roadway. An offense occurs when the
solicitation is made, whether or not an actual employment relationship is
created, a transaction is completed, or an exchange of money, goods, or
services takes place.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the person
was:
      (1)   summoning aid or requesting assistance in an emergency situation;
or
      (2)   a law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties.
   (d)   In addition to any enforcement action by a peace officer for a
violation of this section, any person who is a victim of a solicitation
prohibited under Subsection (b), or who witnesses a violation of Subsection
(b), may file a complaint with the city attorney. Evidence to support a
conviction for a violation of this section may include, but is not limited to,
testimony of witnesses, videotape evidence of the violation, and other
admissible evidence. (Ord. 25213)
ARTICLE IX.
SIZE AND WEIGHT OF VEHICLES.
SEC. 28-64.   WEIGHT OF LOAD ON ENUMERATED BRIDGES, PER AXLE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a motor vehicle, truck-
tractor, trailer or semitrailer, or a combination of such vehicles over or upon
the bridges designated below, when the motor vehicle, truck- tractor, trailer
or semitrailer, or combination of such vehicles has an actual load in excess of
5000 pounds per axle:
      Custer Street 260 feet east of Easter Avenue
      Dickerson Street 250 feet south of Hidden Creek
      J. J. Lemmon Road 800 feet south of Cedardale Road
      Parkdale Street 1400 feet northeast of James Street
      Simpson Stuart Road 470 feet west of Locust Drive
      Wagon Wheels Trail 440 feet northwest of Lancaster Road
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he operates a motor vehicle, truck-
tractor, trailer, or semitrailer, or combination of such vehicles, over or upon
the bridges designated below when the motor vehicle, truck- tractor, trailer,
or semitrailer, or combination of such vehicles has an actual load in excess of
3000 pounds per axle:
      Glenda Lane 200 feet east of Ables Drive
   (c)   A police officer, having reason to believe that the axle load or gross
weight of a loaded vehicle is unlawful, is authorized to weigh the vehicle by
means of portable or stationary scales, or cause it to be weighed by a public
weigher, and to require that the vehicle be driven to the nearest available
scales for the purpose of weighing. If the axle load or gross weight of a
vehicle exceeds the axle load or maximum gross weight authorized by this
article or state law, the police officer shall demand and require the operator
or owner of the vehicle to unload that portion of the load necessary to
decrease the axle load or gross weight of the vehicle to the maximum axle load
or gross weight authorized by law; provided, however, that if the load consists
of livestock, perishable merchandise, or merchandise that may be damaged or
destroyed by the weather, then the operator shall be permitted to proceed to
the nearest practical unloading point before discharging the excess cargo.
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 19749)
SEC. 28-65.   VEHICLES CARRYING GREATER LOADS THAN AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 28-
64.
   Motor vehicles carrying greater loads than permitted by Section
28-64, and within the maximum limits as provided by Article 6701d-11, Vernon’s
Texas Civil Statutes, may travel over streets, highways, roadways, and bridges
designated as state or federal highways, or bus or truck routes, as designated
by the federal government and the highway department of the state or by city
ordinance; provided, that an oversized motor vehicle shall not travel or move
over any street, state or federal highway, roadway, bridge, or park road where
the city has an ordinance prohibiting such travel. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-66.   CIVIL LIABILITY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.
   A person violating any provision of this article shall be civilly liable to
the city for damages to any street, highway, park road, or bridge located
within the city, resulting from such violation. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-67.   SIGNS WARNING OF MAXIMUM LOAD LIMIT ON BRIDGES.
   The traffic engineer shall post appropriate warning signs on the right-hand
side of the street, roadway, highway, or parkway leading to the entrance of
each of the bridges designated in this article. These signs shall contain a
warning of the maximum load limit for the designated bridge. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-68.   ROUTES FOR OVER-SIZE EQUIPMENT; DAMAGE CAUSED BY OVER-SIZE
EQUIPMENT.
   Pursuant to Article 6701a, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, all state or
federal highways within the city are designated as routes for over-size
equipment; provided, that any person damaging a state or federal highway within
the city shall be civilly liable to the city for the damages. (Ord. 14584)
ARTICLE X.
TRUCK ROUTES.
SEC. 28-69.   OPERATION WITHIN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT; BOUNDARIES OF CENTRAL
BUSINESS DISTRICT DEFINED.
   A person commits an offense if he drives or operates a transit-mix truck,
truck tractor, semitrailer, pole trailer, or trailer upon a street within the
central business district, except for expeditious delivery or pickup of
material within the business district. For the purpose of this article the
boundary of the central business district is that area and those streets being
bounded by the following streets:
      Young Street from Market Street to Harwood Street;
      Harwood Street from Young Street to Canton Street;
      Canton Street from Harwood Street to Good-Latimer Expressway;
      Good-Latimer Expressway from Canton Street to Ross Avenue;
      Ross Avenue from Good-Latimer Expressway to Lamar Street;
      Lamar Street from Ross Avenue to Pacific Avenue;
      Pacific Avenue from Lamar Street to Market Street; and
      Market Street from Pacific Avenue to Young Street;
   except for the Central Expressway (Elevated Bypass) included within these
boundaries. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-70.   OPERATION IN PUBLIC PARKS.
   A person commits an offense if he drives or operates a truck tractor,
semitrailer, pole trailer, or trailer upon any street running in and through
the various public parks within the city, except when making deliveries in the
park. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 21186)
SEC. 28-71.   DESIGNATED FOR TRAILERS, SEMITRAILERS OR POLE TRAILERS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a truck tractor,
semitrailer, pole trailer, or trailer upon a street or roadway within the city,
except those truck routes enumerated below:
STREET EXTENT
STREET                                  EXTENT
Airdrome Drive                          Mockingbird Lane to Lemmon Avenue
Akard Street                            Ross Avenue to Harry Hines Boulevard
Alamo Street                            Cedar Springs Road to Wichita Street
Bachman Boulevard                       Harry Hines Boulevard to Northwest
                                        Highway
Barry Avenue                            Crosstown Expressway to R. L. Thornton
                                        Freeway
Beckley Avenue                          Singleton Boulevard to Overton Road
                                        From the west city limits east of Noel
Belt Line Road                          Road to the east city limits at Coit
                                        Road
Buckner Boulevard                       C. F. Hawn Freeway to Northwest Highway
Cadiz Street                            Industrial Boulevard to Central
                                        Expressway
Canton Street                           Exposition Avenue to R. L. Thornton
                                        Freeway
Cedar Crest Boulevard                   Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard to
                                        Kiest Boulevard
Cedar Springs Road                      Field Street to McKinnon Street
Central Expressway (north)              Ross Avenue to the north city limits
Central Expressway (south)              Canton Street to the south city limits
Central Expressway (Service Roads)      Ross Avenue to Bryan Street
C. F. Hawn Freeway                      All portions within the city limits
Clarendon Drive                         Zang Boulevard to Corinth Street
Commerce Street                         Lamar Street to the Trinity River
Commerce Street                         Good-Latimer Expressway to Parry Avenue
Continental Avenue                      Beckley Avenue to Stemmons Freeway
                                        (East Service Road)
Corinth Street                          Industrial Boulevard to Central
                                        Expressway
Corinth Street                          Industrial Boulevard to Lancaster Road
Crosstown Expressway                    Haskell Avenue to Barry Avenue
Dallas-Ft. Worth Turnpike               All portions within the city limits
Davis Street                            Patton Avenue to the west city limits
Dolphin Road                            Spring Avenue to R. L. Thornton Freeway
East Grand Avenue                       Haskell Avenue to Gaston Avenue
Easton Road                             Garland Road to Gus Thomasson Road
Eighth Street                           R. L. Thornton Freeway to Patton Avenue
Elm Street                              Good-Latimer Expressway to Exposition
                                        Avenue
Empire Central                          Harry Hines Boulevard to Stemmons
                                        Freeway
Exposition Avenue                       Commerce Street to Parry Avenue
Exposition Avenue                       Elm Street to Parry Avenue
Ferguson Road                           R. L. Thornton Freeway to Lyndon B.
                                        Johnson Freeway
Field Street                            Ross Avenue to Cedar Springs Road
First Avenue                            Parry Avenue to Exposition Avenue
Fort Worth Avenue                       West Commerce Street to Davis Street
Garland Road                            Gaston Avenue to the northeast city
                                        limits
Good-Latimer Expressway                 Bryan Street to Central Expressway
                                        (south)
Grand Avenue                            Lamar Street to Second Avenue
Greenville Avenue                       Ross Avenue to the north city limits
Gus Thomasson Road                      Easton Road to the city limits of
                                        Mesquite, Texas
Hampton Road                            Inwood Road to the south city limits
Harry Hines Boulevard                   Akard Street to the north city limits
Harwood Street                          Canton Street to Young Street
Haskell Avenue                          Parry Avenue to Dolphin Road
Hatcher Street                          Lamar Street to Spring Avenue
Houston Street                          Young Street to Ross Avenue
Houston Street Viaduct                  Young Street to Zang Boulevard
Illinois Avenue                         Central Expressway (south) to Walton
                                        Walker Boulevard
Industrial Boulevard                    Irving Boulevard to Corinth Street
Inwood Road                             Hampton Road to Lemmon Avenue
Irving Boulevard                        Industrial Boulevard to the west city
                                        limits
John W. Carpenter Freeway               All portions within the city limits
Julius Schepps Freeway                  All portions within the city limits
Julius Schepps Freeway (Service Roads)  All portions within the city limits
Kiest Boulevard                         Cedar Crest Boulevard to Illinois
                                        Avenue
Lamar Street                            Continental Street to Central
                                        Expressway (south)
Lancaster Road                          Corinth Street Road to the south city
                                        limits
Ledbetter Drive                         Walton Walker Boulevard to Loop 12
Lemmon Avenue                           Central Expressway (north) to Northwest
                                        Highway
Lemmon Avenue East                      Lemmon Avenue to Turtle Creek Boulevard
Loop 12                                 Ledbetter Drive to Buckner Boulevard
Lovers Lane                             Central Expressway (north) to Skillman
                                        Street
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway               All portions within the city limits
Market Center Boulevard                 Harry Hines Boulevard to Irving
                                        Boulevard
Market Street                           Ross Avenue to Young Street
Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard        Second Avenue to Cedar Crest Boulevard
Marvin D. Love Freeway                  All portions within the city limits
McKinney Avenue                         Lamar Street to Field Street
McKinnon Street                         Cedar Springs Road to Harry Hines
                                        Boulevard at Dallas North Tollway
Military Parkway                        Dolphin Road to the east city limits
Mockingbird Lane                        Lemmon Avenue to Irving Boulevard
Mockingbird Lane                        Central Expressway (north) to Skillman
                                        Street
Moody Street                            Wichita Street to McKinnon Street
Northwest Highway                       All portions within the city limits
Oak Lawn Avenue                         Market Center Boulevard to Lemmon
                                        Avenue
Olive Street                            Ross Avenue to Cedar Springs Road
Parry Avenue                            Second Avenue to Haskell Avenue
Pearl Street                            Ross Avenue to Cedar Springs Road
Pearl Expressway                        Canton Street to Central Expressway
Record Crossing Road                    Stemmons Freeway to Harry Hines
                                        Boulevard
R. L. Thornton Freeway                  All portions within the city limits
R. L. Thornton Freeway (North Service   Akard Street to Lamar Street
Road)
Ross Avenue                             Houston Street to Greenville Avenue
Samuell Boulevard                       R. L. Thornton Freeway to East Grand
                                        Avenue
Scyene Road                             Second Avenue to the east city limits
Second Avenue                           Commerce Street to C.F. Hawn Freeway
Singleton Boulevard                     Beckley Avenue to Walton Walker
                                        Boulevard
Skillman Street                         Mockingbird Lane to Forest Lane
Stemmons Freeway                        All portions within the city limits
Spur 482 (Storey Lane)                  West city limits to Harry Hines
                                        Boulevard
Walnut Hill Lane                        Harry Hines Boulevard to Stemmons
                                        Freeway
Walton Walker Boulevard                 Ledbetter Drive to the south city
                                        limits of Irving, Texas
Walton Walker Boulevard                 The north city limits of Irving, Texas
                                        to Stemmons Freeway
Westmoreland Road                       Ledbetter Drive to Camp Wisdom Road
Woodall Rodgers Freeway (Service Roads) Central Expressway to Field Street
Young Street                            Harwood Street to Houston Street
Zang Boulevard                          Houston Street Viaduct to Marvin D.
                                        Love Freeway
 
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the person:
      (1)   was moving a structure on a street or roadway or portion of a
street or roadway, other than a designated truck route, pursuant to a valid
permit issued by the building official under Subchapter 62 of the Dallas
Building Code; and
      (2)   had specific written authorization from the building official to
use that portion of the street or roadway while moving the structure. (Ord.
Nos. 14584; 15194; 15699; 16986; 17063; 18484; 19749)
SEC. 28-72.   DEPARTURE FROM DESIGNATED ROUTES; HOURS ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS.
   (a)   The operator of a semitrailer, pole trailer, or trailer restricted to
the streets designated as “truck routes” by this article may depart from the
truck routes when it is necessary to reach a truck terminal or to load or
unload merchandise at locations situated off designated truck routes. The
operator of a trailer, semitrailer, or pole trailer shall not leave a
designated truck route until he has reached a turning off point leading to the
ultimate destination of the vehicle by the shortest practical route which is
consistent with the reasonable operation of the vehicle.
   (b)   A person operating a semitrailer, pole trailer, or trailer commits an
offense if, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day, he leaves
a designated truck route and operates the semitrailer, pole trailer, or trailer
on a street that is adjacent to single-family or duplex residential dwellings.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the person:
      (1)   was moving a structure on a street or roadway or portion of a
street or roadway, other than a designated truck route, pursuant to a valid
permit issued by the building official under Subchapter 62 of the Dallas
Building Code; and
      (2)   had specific written authorization from the building official to
use that portion of the street or roadway while moving the structure. (Ord.
Nos. 14584; 17792; 19749)
SEC. 28-73.   SAME - JUSTIFICATION OF DEPARTURE.
   A person operating a semitrailer, pole trailer, or trailer upon a street or
roadway which is not designated a truck route by this article, shall have in
his possession for the inspection of police officers, his log book, delivery
slips, or other evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the
presence of the vehicle on a street or roadway other than a designated truck
route. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-74.   SIGNS.
   The traffic engineer shall erect appropriate signs and markings advising
motorists of the truck routes established by this article. (Ord. Nos. 14584;
19749)
SEC. 28-75.   ALTERNATE ROUTES.
   When a street or roadway designated as a truck route is under repair or
otherwise temporarily out of use, the traffic engineer is authorized to
designate alternate truck routes. (Ord. 14584)
ARTICLE XI.
STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING GENERALLY.
Division 1. Generally.
SEC. 28-76.   OBEDIENCE TO SIGNS.
   A person commits an offense, if as the operator of a vehicle, he parks,
stops, or stands the vehicle in violation of an official sign, curb marking, or
street marking prohibiting, regulating, or restricting the parking, stopping,
or standing of a vehicle. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-76.1.   UNATTENDED VEHICLES PRESUMED LEFT BY OWNER.
   (a)   When a vehicle is found unattended or unoccupied upon a street,
highway, alley, or other place in violation of any provision of this chapter
regulating the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles, it shall be presumed
that the owner unlawfully stopped, stood, or parked the vehicle.
   (b)   Proof of ownership of a vehicle may be made by a computer-generated
record of the registration of the vehicle with the State Department of Highways
and Public Transportation showing the name of the person to whom state license
plates were issued. This proof is prima facie evidence of the ownership of the
vehicle by the person to whom the certificate of registration was issued. (Ord.
20012)
SEC. 28-76.2.   ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES; MAY BE REQUIRED TO MOVE.
   When a police officer or parking enforcement officer finds a vehicle
standing upon a street or highway in violation of a provision of this article,
the police officer or parking enforcement officer is authorized to move the
vehicle, or to require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to
move the vehicle, to a location off the paved or main part of the street or
highway. (Ord. Nos. 20012; 32470)
SEC. 28-76.3.   PARKING BAN.
   A person commits an offense if, during a parking ban, he stops, stands, or
parks a vehicle along a curb of a street posted conspicuously with signs
indicating the parking ban. (Ord. 20012)
SEC. 28-76.4.   PARKING DEFENSES FOR CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICERS.
   (a)   City council members. It is a defense to prosecution under Sections
28-106,
28-107,
28-108, and
28-109 of this chapter that a vehicle in violation of any of those sections:
      (1)   was stopped, stood, or parking by a city council member of the city
of Dallas while on official city business; and
      (2)   had city council parking authorization, in a form approved by the
chief of police, placed so as to be clearly visible from the front windshield
of the vehicle.
   (b)   Law enforcement officers.
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under any provision of this chapter
or Chapter 32 governing the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle that
the vehicle was:
         (A)   owned or operated by a law enforcement agency; and
         (B)   stopped, stood, or parked by a sworn law enforcement officer
while responding to an emergency situation in the performance of official
duties.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under Sections
28-76,
28-94,
28-95,
28-96,
28-106,
28-107,
28-108, and
28-109 of this chapter that a vehicle in violation of any of those sections
was:
         (A)   owned or operated by a law enforcement agency; and
         (B)   stopped, stood, or parked by a sworn law enforcement officer
while actively engaged in the enforcement of a specific city, state, or federal
law, such law to be disclosed by the law enforcement officer. (Ord. Nos. 20168;
21612; 22026; 27697)
SEC. 28-76.5.   UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a motor vehicle
and leaves it unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the
ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the brake on
the vehicle, and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the
curb or side of the highway. (Ord. 20269)
SEC. 28-76.6   VALID VEHICLE REGISTRATION AND TEMPORARY LICENSE PLATE REQUIRED;
DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person parks a motor vehicle on a
public street, highway, or alley that does not display a vehicle registration
or displays a vehicle registration that has been expired for two months or
longer. This subsection applies to a vehicle registration issued by any county,
state, or country.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person parks a motor vehicle on a
public street, highway, or alley that displays a temporary license plate that
has been expired for 30 days or longer.
   (c)   Except for digital license plates governed by Subchapter B-1, Chapter
504, Texas Transportation Code, as amended, a person commits an offense if the
person parks a motor vehicle on a public street, highway, or alley that does
not display a rear license plate. This subsection also applies to a damaged
vehicle that prevents the display of a rear license plate. (Ord. 32797)
SEC. 28-77.   UNAUTHORIZED RESERVING OF PARKING SPACES.
   (a)   On street for adjoining property owners and customers. A person
commits an offense if without lawful authority, he places, maintains, or
displays upon or in view of a public sidewalk, curb, or street, a sign, signal,
marking, or device which indicates reserved parking space for adjoining owners
or for customers of the adjoining owners upon the street or in areas recessed
from the street which require use of the street for maneuvering.
   (b)   Verbal statement or gesture. A person commits an offense if without
lawful authority, he attempts to reserve a parking space upon a street for an
adjoining owner by statement or gesture. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 15194)
SEC. 28-78.   ANIMAL-DRAWN WAGONS, PUSHCARTS OR BICYCLES.
   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks in a public
street, sidewalk, or alley, an animal- drawn wagon, pushcart, bicycle,
tricycle, or unicycle, except where allowed by other provisions of this code.
(Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-79.   VEHICLE TO BE PARKED WITHIN LIMIT LINES.
   The driver of a vehicle who parks the vehicle on a street upon which parking
spaces are delineated by limit lines, shall park the entire vehicle within the
limit lines marked on the curb or street designating the parking stall. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-80.   PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   A person commits an offense if he stops, parks, or stands a truck-tractor,
road tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, bus, or any commercial motor
vehicle upon a public street, alley, parkway, boulevard, or public place. This
section shall not apply to street construction, maintenance, and repair
equipment; trucks, equipment, trailers, and vehicles used by public service
utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities;
motor busses when taking on or discharging passengers at customary bus stops;
other vehicles when actually parked at a designated loading zone, or where it
is lawful to park a commercial motor vehicle for the purpose of accepting or
delivering transportable goods; or a vehicle with a mechanical defect, making
it unsafe to proceed further, in which event, it shall be lawful to stand or
park the vehicle during the time necessary to make emergency repairs. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-81.   PARKING OF VEHICLES WITH CAPACITY OF MORE THAN ONE AND ONE-HALF
TONS IN CERTAIN DISTRICTS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he stops, parks, or stands a truck-
tractor, road tractor, semitrailer, bus, trailer, or truck with a rated
capacity in excess of one and one-half tons, according to the manufacturer’s
classification, upon property within a residential area. This subsection shall
not apply to the parking or standing of a vehicle for the purpose of
expeditiously loading or unloading passengers, freight, or merchandise.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he stops, parks, or stands a motor
home, house trailer, or recreational vehicle with a rated capacity in excess of
one and one-half tons, according to the manufacturer’s classification, upon any
public right-of-way abutting a residential area. This subsection shall not
apply to the parking or standing of a vehicle for the purpose of expeditiously
loading or unloading passengers or property.
   (c)   In this section, RESIDENTIAL AREA means any block face containing a
single family, duplex, or multi-family dwelling. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 19455;
20269)
SEC. 28-81.1.   STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (a)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to be in
compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer, city marshal, a
parking enforcement officer, or an official traffic-control device, a person
commits an offense if he:
      (1)   stops, stands, or parks a vehicle:
         (A)   on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (B)   on a sidewalk;
         (C)   within an intersection;
         (D)   on a crosswalk;
         (E)   between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         (F)   alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (G)   upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
         (H)   on any railroad track;
         (I)   on the roadway of any street, when the vehicle constitutes a
hazard to itself or to persons or other vehicles; or
         (J)   in violation of a sign prohibiting the stopping of vehicles;
         (K)   in designated bike lanes; or
      (2)   stands or parks a vehicle:
         (A)   in front of a public or private driveway;
         (B)   within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (C)   within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (D)   within 30 feet of the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
         (E)   when properly posted with signs, within 20 feet of the driveway
entrance to any fire station and, on the side of the street opposite the
entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of an entrance;
         (F)   in violation of a sign prohibiting the standing of vehicles; or
         (G)   in a fire lane.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he moves a vehicle not lawfully under
his control:
      (1)   an unlawful distance away from a curb; or
      (2)   into any area prohibited by this section.
   (c)   Notwithstanding Subsection (a)(1)(B), a person may stop, stand, or
park a bicycle on a sidewalk if the bicycle does not impede the normal and
reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic on the sidewalk. (Ord. Nos.
20012; 20269; 32291; 32470)
Division 2. Prohibited in Specified Places.
SEC. 28-82.   PARKING NEAR RAILROAD TRACKS; PROHIBITED GENERALLY; PERMITTED FOR
LOADING.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he parks a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he stops, parks, or stands a vehicle,
at a location other than a railroad crossing, so that any portion of the
vehicle is closer than six feet to the nearest rail of the track of a railroad
company. This subsection does not apply to the parking or standing of vehicles
for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, freight, or merchandise to
or from a railroad car or building adjoining the track. (Ord. Nos. 14584;
20012)
SEC. 28-83.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 20012)
SEC. 28-84.   PARKING FOR MORE THAN 24 HOURS PROHIBITED.
   A person commits an offense if he leaves standing or parked in a public
street, alley, or other public place, an unattended vehicle or other private
property for a continuous period of time longer than 24 hours. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-85.   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES AND PARKING ON HIGHWAYS AND PARKWAYS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he parks a vehicle upon a street or
highway for the purpose of:
      (1)   displaying the vehicle for sale; or
      (2)   washing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle, except when repairs
are necessitated by an emergency.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he stops, parks, or stands a vehicle,
whether attended or unattended:
      (1)   on a parkway; or
      (2)   upon the main-traveled part of a highway outside of a business or
residence district unless:
         (A)   it is not practicable to stop, park, or stand the vehicle off
that part of the highway;
         (B)   an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing vehicle
is left for the free passage of other vehicles; and
         (C)   a clear view of the stopped vehicle is available from a distance
of 200 feet in each direction upon the highway.
   (c)   Subsection (b) does not apply to a vehicle that develops a mechanical
defect making it impossible or unsafe to proceed further, and in this case it
is lawful to stop, park, or stand the vehicle for the time necessary to make
emergency repairs. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 20012)
SEC. 28-86.   PARKING BY PARKING LOT OWNERS.
   A person commits an offense if as the owner or attendant of a parking lot,
who receives a fee for parking or storing a vehicle, he parks a vehicle within
a metered or unmetered parking zone, sidewalk, parkway space, or on the streets
or highways of the city. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-87.   PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he parks or stands a passenger car or
light truck in an alley so that any portion of the vehicle:
      (1)   obstructs a driveway; or
      (2)   limits the width of the alley to less than 10 feet.
   (b)   This section does not apply to a vehicle when it is used for
construction, maintenance, or repair work in an alley or when it has a defect
which immobilizes the vehicle. (Ord. Nos. 14818; 15455)
SEC. 28-88.   STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS, TWO-WAY ROADWAYS, AND
CUL-DE-SACS.
   (a)   If a highway includes one or more separate roadways, and traffic is
restricted to one direction on one or more of the separate roadways, a person
commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle:
      (1)   upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway, unless signs are
erected to permit such stopping, standing, or parking;
      (2)   with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle more than 18 inches from
the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway, if stopping, standing, or parking is
permitted on the left-hand side of the one-way roadway;
      (3)   with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle more than 18 inches from
the right- hand curb or edge of the roadway; or
      (4)   in a direction other than the direction of authorized traffic
movement.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle
upon a two-way roadway:
      (1)   on the left-hand side of the roadway; or
      (2)   with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle more than 18 inches from
the right- hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle
upon a cul-de-sac:
      (1)   With the right-hand wheels of the vehicle more than 18 inches from
the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway; or
      (2)   In the center portion of the cul-de-sac unless the center is
clearly marked for parking. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 20012; 20269; 32470)
Division 3. Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only.
SEC. 28-89.   CURB LOADING ZONES - AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE; TIMES OPERATIVE.
   (a)   The traffic engineer, on the basis of engineering and traffic surveys,
is authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading
zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating these
locations. A loading zone shall be designated by upright signs or painted curb
markings of a distinctive color imprinted with the words “Loading Zone” or
“Passenger Loading Zone”.
   (b)   Freight loading zones shall be effective between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., except Sundays and meter holidays, unless signs or markings specify other
effective hours and days. Passenger loading zones shall be effective at all
times. If the zone lies within a section of curb designated for parking ban
purposes, the loading zone shall not be effective during the time when the
parking ban is in effect. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 17413; 20269)
SEC. 28-90.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ordinance No. 17413)
SEC. 28-91.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ordinance No. 17413)
SEC. 28-92.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ordinance No. 17413)
SEC. 28-93.   SAME - USE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   Loading zones shall be available to anyone who may have loading or unloading
in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-94.   USE OF PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONES.
   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle for any
purpose other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger loading zone during hours when the regulations
applicable to the loading zones are in effect. In no event may a person stop,
stand, or park a vehicle in a passenger loading zone longer than the period of
time allowed by the sign or marking designating the loading zone. (Ord. Nos.
14584; 21194)
SEC. 28-95.   USE OF FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONES BY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a commercial
vehicle for any purpose other than for the expeditious unloading or loading of
materials in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when the
provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the
stopping for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes, except on
written permission from the chief of police or the director and then only for a
period necessary to complete one undertaking. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 17413; 20269;
21194)
SEC. 28-96.   USE OF FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONES BY NON- COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle
other than a commercial vehicle in a freight curb loading zone.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   materials were being expeditiously unloaded from or loaded into the
vehicle; and
      (2)   a valid loading zone permit issued under Section
28-96.1 was conspicuously displayed on the vehicle, in a manner and location
approved by the director, such that all information on the face of the permit,
including, but not limited to, the permit number and expiration date, could be
easily read from outside the vehicle.
   (c)   In no case shall the stopping for loading and unloading of materials
exceed 30 minutes, except on written permission from the chief of police or the
director and then only for a period necessary to complete one undertaking.
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 17413; 20269; 21194)
SEC. 28-96.1.   LOADING ZONE PERMIT - APPLICATION; FEE; EXPIRATION;
TRANSFERABILITY.
   (a)   To obtain an annual loading zone permit for a vehicle other than a
commercial vehicle, a person must submit a completed written application to the
director on a form provided for that purpose. The application must include the
following information:
      (1)   the name, address, and signature of the applicant;
      (2)   the name and address of the commercial enterprise for which the
vehicle is operated;
      (3)   the state license plate number of each vehicle to be permitted; and
      (4)   any other information the director determines necessary to the
administration and enforcement of this section.
   (b)   The holder of an annual loading zone permit for a vehicle may apply
for a temporary loading zone permit for another vehicle by submitting a
completed written application to the director on a form provided for that
purpose.
   (c)   Before any loading zone permit may be issued for a vehicle pursuant to
this section, all outstanding parking citations issued by the city on the
vehicle must be paid or otherwise resolved.
   (d)   The fee for an annual loading zone permit is $50 for each vehicle. The
fee for a temporary loading zone permit is $12.50 for each vehicle. The fee for
issuing a duplicate annual loading zone permit for one lost, destroyed, or
mutilated is $25. A permit fee is payable to the director upon issuance of the
permit. No refund of a permit fee will be made.
   (e)   An annual loading zone permit expires one year from the last day of
the month in which the permit was issued.
   (f)   A temporary loading zone permit expires 15 days after the date of
issuance.
   (g)   Any loading zone permit assigned to one vehicle is not transferable.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   forges, alters, or counterfeits an annual or temporary loading zone
permit; or
      (2)   possesses a forged, altered, or counterfeited annual or temporary
loading zone permit. (Ord. Nos. 20269; 20736; 21194; 21819; 27553)
SEC. 28-97.   VEHICLES BACKED TO CURB FOR LOADING.
   The driver of a vehicle used to transport merchandise or materials may load
and unload while the vehicle is backed against the curb, in areas and at times
designated by the chief of police so long as it does not seriously interfere
with the flow of traffic. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-98.   POSITION OF VEHICLES BACKED TO CURB FOR LOADING, ETC.
   When a vehicle having six or more wheels is backed to the curb for the
purpose of unloading or loading, the front or tractor portion shall, to the
extent physically possible, be turned parallel to the curb and headed in the
direction of traffic. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-99.   AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE PUBLIC CARRIER STANDS.
   The traffic engineer, based upon engineering and traffic surveys, is
authorized and required to establish bus stops, taxicab stands, and stands for
other passenger common carrier motor vehicles such as rideshare vehicles on the
public streets in such places as he determines to be of the greatest benefit
and convenience to the public, and every bus stop, taxicab stand, or other
stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 32710)
SEC. 28-100.   PARKING OF BUSSES AND TAXICABS REGULATED.
   (a)   The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stop, stand, or park upon a
street in a business district at any place other than at a bus stop or a
taxicab stand, respectively; except that this provision shall not prevent the
driver of a bus or taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other
stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of loading or
unloading passengers.
   (b)   While using a taxicab stand, a driver shall not go beyond 25 feet of
the taxicab except to assist a passenger as reasonably necessary after being
engaged. A taxicab left unattended in violation of this subsection is illegally
parked and may be removed from the taxicab stand and impounded as provided in
Section
28-4 of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 20269)
SEC. 28-101.   RESTRICTED USE OF BUS STOPS, TAXICAB STANDS, AND STANDS
DESIGNATED FOR OTHER PASSENGER COMMON CARRIER MOTOR VEHICLES.
   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle other
than a bus in a bus stop zone, other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, or at a
stand designated for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles such as
rideshare vehicles when the stop zone or stand has been appropriately
designated by signs, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may
temporarily stop therein while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers when stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab about to
enter the zone. (Ord. Nos. 14584, 32710)
SEC. 28-102.   STOPPING OF BUSSES WITHIN INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
   The operator of a bus shall not stop within an intersection or crosswalk for
the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. (Ord. 14584)
Division 4. Paid Parking Payment Devices.
SEC. 28-103.   AUTHORITY TO INSTALL AND OPERATE PAID PARKING PAYMENT DEVICES.
   For parking in city rights-of-way and other city controlled parking areas
under the control of the department of transportation and public works, the
director or his designee is authorized to:
      (1)   Make recommendations to city council to establish or modify the
boundaries of paid parking areas. In making these recommendations, the director
may consider the factors in Section
28-103.1(b).
      (2)   Establish or modify the hours when paid parking is in effect in
accordance with Section
28-103.2(e) and (f).
      (3)   Establish rates to be charged at paid parking payment devices,
within the limits established by this division.
      (4)   Vary rates and hours that may be charged at paid parking payment
devices to achieve approximately one to two parking spaces available on each
block face in accordance with this division. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 22762; 24882;
25756; 27210; 28831; 30654; 32735; 32864)
SEC. 28-103.1.   PAID PARKING AREA.
   (a)   The paid parking area is established in the following areas:
PAID PARKING AREA BOUNDARIES
PAID PARKING AREA                      BOUNDARIES
                                       Gaston Avenue to Washington Avenue to
                                       Swiss Avenue on the north; Haskell
Baylor                                 Avenue on the east; Elm Street to Hall
                                       Street to Indiana Boulevard on the
                                       south; and Malcolm X Boulevard to Junius
                                       Street to Oak Street on the west.
                                       Woodall Rodgers Freeway on the north;
                                       Julius Schepps Freeway on the east; R.
                                       L. Thornton Freeway on the south; and
                                       Stemmons Freeway on the west. (West End
                                       is bounded by Woodall Rodgers Freeway on
Central Business District (includes    the north; Field Street on the east; Elm
West End Historical District and Klyde Street on the south; and Stemmons
Warren Park)                           Freeway on the west.) (Klyde Warren Park
                                       is bounded by the Woodall Rodgers
                                       Freeway westbound service road on the
                                       north; Pearl Street on the east; the
                                       Woodall Rodgers Freeway eastbound
                                       service road on the south; and St. Paul
                                       Street on the west.)
                                       Indiana Boulevard on the north;
Deep Ellum                             Exposition Avenue on the east; Canton
                                       Street on the south; and Good-Latimer
                                       Expressway on the west.
                                       Stemmons Freeway north service road on
                                       the north; Oak Lawn Avenue on the east;
Infomart                               Stemmons Freeway south service road on
                                       the south; and Market Center Boulevard
                                       on the west.
                                       Sunset Avenue on the north; Crawford
Jefferson                              Street on the east; Twelfth Street on
                                       the south; and Willomet Avenue on the
                                       west.
                                       Merit Drive on the north; the east side
Park Central                           of Park Central Drive on the east;
                                       Forest Lane on the south; and the west
                                       side of Park Central Drive on the west.
                                       Harry Hines Boulevard on the north;
Parkland                               Medical District Drive on the east;
                                       Stemmons Freeway on the south; and
                                       Inwood Road on the west.
                                       R. L. Thornton Freeway on the north;
Cedars                                 Ervay Street on the east; Corinth Street
                                       on the south; and Botham Jean Boulevard
                                       on the west.
                                       Stemmons Freeway from Woodall Rodgers
                                       Freeway to the Dallas North Tollway;
                                       McKinnon Street from the Dallas North
Uptown/Victory                         Tollway to Pearl Street; Pearl Street
                                       from McKinnon Street to Woodall Rodgers
                                       Freeway; and Woodall Rodgers Freeway
                                       from Pearl Street to Stemmons Freeway.
 
   (b)   The director may consider the following factors in making a
recommendation to city council on the establishment of new paid parking areas
or in making modifications to the boundaries of existing paid parking areas:
      (1)   Adjacent property owner and property tenant interest in having
parking management using paid parking payment devices.
      (2)   Need for increased turnover of parking spaces.
      (3)   Need to assist in the enforcement of parking time restrictions.
      (4)   Impact on existing paid parking area enforcement.
   (c)   All parking meters installed in the city before May 22, 1996 are
considered to have been installed with city council authorization and approval.
(Ord. No. 32735)
SEC. 28-103.2.   PAID PARKING SPACES.
   (a)   Paid parking space may only be designated or paid parking payment
device may only be installed in the public right-of-way in the paid parking
area.
   (b)   Paid parking spaces may be established on the basis of parking
studies, with the policy goal of having one to two parking spaces available
throughout the day on block faces in commercial and mixed-use areas, and to aid
in the regulation, control, and inspection of the parking of vehicles.
   (c)   At least 10 days before installing any paid parking payment device or
designating a paid parking space, the traffic engineer shall give written
notice to all property owners within 500 feet of the location where paid
parking spaces will be designated.
   (d)   Paid parking payment devices must be placed on the curb alongside paid
parking spaces or in an area that is central to several paid parking spaces. On
either the paid parking payment device or pay-to-park signage located on the
blockface, adjacent to the paid parking spaces, information must be provided
regarding the days and hours when payment is required, the cost to park, the
methods of payment accepted, and the maximum time for which parking is lawfully
permitted.
   (e)   Except as provided in this section, where paid parking payment devices
have been installed or paid parking spaces designated, payment between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday is required unless it
is a paid parking holiday, or the director has modified the paid parking hours.
   (f)   The director shall consider the following factors when modifying the
paid parking hours
      (1)   The operating hours of nearby businesses.
      (2)   The measured occupancy on a set of blocks to achieve approximately
one to two parking spaces available on each block face. (Ord. No. 32735)
SEC. 28-103.3.   RATE SETTING FOR PAID PARKING.
   (a)   Except as provided in this division, parking rates for paid parking
spaces may be set up to $6.00 per hour (“Maximum Hourly Rate”). When parking
rates are in effect, parking rates may be set no lower than $1.00 per hour
(“Minimum Hourly Rate”).
   (b)   The director shall adjust rates based on the measured occupancy on a
set of blocks with a policy goal of achieving approximately one to two parking
spaces available on each block face throughout the day. (Ord. No. 32735)
SEC. 28-104.   INDICATION OF EXPIRATION OF PARKING TIME.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b) of this section, each paid
parking payment device shall display an indicator showing legal parking upon
the deposit of an appropriate payment. The parking time allowed by the payment
amount must be clearly indicated on the paid parking payment device. Each paid
parking payment device shall continue operation from the time payment is made
until expiration of the appropriate parking time. At the end of that parking
time, the paid parking payment device shall indicate by the display of a signal
that the lawful parking period has expired.
   (b)   Parking time is not required to be displayed on the paid parking
payment device if payment has been made by telephone or the Internet. A person
who pays for parking by telephone or the Internet will receive an electronic
receipt or other form of confirmation of the transaction indicating the parking
time allowed by the payment. The owner, operator, manager, or driver of the
vehicle parked in the paid parking space is responsible for knowing when the
allowed parking time will expire. Parking time allowed through a payment
transaction by telephone or the Internet may also be accessed and displayed on
a handheld device carried by a police officer or other person authorized to
issue parking citations. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 27210; 28792; 32735)
SEC. 28-105.   VEHICLE TO BE PARKED WITHIN LIMIT LINES OF PAID PARKING SPACES.
   In addition to complying with other parking regulations in this chapter, the
driver of a vehicle shall park the vehicle in a paid parking space so that the
entire vehicle is within the limit lines marked on the curb or street
designating the parking space. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 27210; 32735)
SEC. 28-106.   PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   During the hours when paid parking is in effect and payment at a paid
parking payment device is required, the driver of a vehicle shall, upon
entering a paid parking space, immediately pay the parking rate for the amount
of time the driver intends to park in the space using the paid parking payment
device assigned to the parking space. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 27210; 28792; 32735)
SEC. 28-107.   PARKING WHERE PAID PARKING PAYMENT DEVICE HAS EXPIRED.
   A vehicle is illegally parked if it is found parked or standing in a paid
parking space, and:
      (1)    sufficient payment for the use of the paid parking space was not
paid using a paid parking payment device; or
      (2)   the allowed parking time paid for the paid parking space. (Ord.
Nos. 14584; 15890; 20269; 27210; 28792; 32735)
SEC. 28-108.   PARKING WHERE PAID PARKING PAYMENT DEVICE IS DISPLAYING A
VIOLATION SIGNAL.
   (a)   During the hours when paid parking is in effect, a person shall not
permit a vehicle under the person’s control to remain in any paid parking space
while the paid parking payment device assigned to the parking space is
displaying a signal indicating that all parking time has expired.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the person
paid for the paid parking space using a telephone or the Internet and the
parking time purchased by the payment transaction had not expired. (Ord. Nos.
14584; 20269; 27210; 28792; 32735)
SEC. 28-109.   STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING BEYOND MAXIMUM LEGAL TIME LIMIT
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   In this section, MAXIMUM LEGAL TIME LIMIT means the amount of
continuous time that a person may park a vehicle in paid parking space,
regardless of whether payment is actually made.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle in
a paid parking space for a period of time longer than the maximum legal time
limit posted on the paid parking payment device or sign assigned to that
parking space. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 27210; 28792; 32735)
SEC. 28-110.   USE OF PAID PARKING SPACES FOR LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   The use of a paid parking space for loading and unloading merchandise from a
commercial vehicle, or from a passenger-type vehicle displaying a valid loading
zone permit, will be permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
without the deposit of a payment in the paid parking payment device assigned to
the parking space, except for paid parking spaces with defined no parking time
limits. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 17413; 20269; 27210; 32735)
SEC. 28-111.   TAMPERING WITH PAID PARKING PAYMENT DEVICES.
   A person commits an offense if he defaces, tampers with, opens, destroys, or
impairs a paid parking payment device installed under the provisions of this
chapter, unless authorized by the traffic engineer. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 27210;
32735)
SEC. 28-112.   DEPOSIT OF SLUGS AND NON-AUTHORIZED PAYMENT DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   A person commits an offense if he deposits or causes to be deposited in a
paid parking payment device a slug or device other than a coin of the United
States or other payment device posted as being accepted by the paid parking
payment device. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 27210; 32735)
SEC. 28-113.   COLLECTION AND DISPOSITION OF MONEY DEPOSITED.
   The director shall designate persons to make regular collections of the
money deposited in paid parking payment device, which must be deposited to the
credit of the city the same as funds that are collected through the municipal
courts. The deposits must be made in a special account called “parking meter
funds,” which must be disbursed on order of the city council. The persons
designated by the director to make the collections shall furnish a good and
sufficient bond to the city to ensure the city the collection and safe handling
of the funds arising from the operation of paid parking payment devices. (Ord.
Nos. 14584; 15626; 17964; 22026; 27210; 27697; 30654; 32735)
SEC. 28-114.   CONVENIENCE FEE FOR PAID PARKING PAYMENTS BY TELEPHONE OR THE
INTERNET.
   A convenience fee of $0.35 will be assessed, in addition to the paid parking
fee, for payment of paid parking by use of a telephone or the Internet. (Ord.
28792; 32735)
SEC. 28-114.1.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 32735)
SEC. 28-114.2.   INTERIM HOURLY RATES FOR PAID PARKING IN THE DEEP ELLUM PAID
PARKING AREA.
   (a)   Fifty cents an hour zone. A person shall pay an hourly rate of 50
cents for the use of a paid parking space upon the following streets or
portions of streets in the Deep Ellum paid parking area Monday through Sunday
from 6:00 p.m. until 12 midnight only.
STREET BLOCK (S) SIDE( S) EXTENT
STREET                   BLOCK (S)  SIDE( S) EXTENT
Canton Street            2700- 3000 Both     N. Good Latimer Expressway to Hall
                                             Street
Commerce Street          2600- 3200 Both     N. Good Latimer Expressway to
                                             Trunk Avenue
Crowdus Street           100-200    Both     Indiana Avenue to Canton Street
Elm Street               2500- 3200 Both     Hawkins Street to Trunk Avenue
Good Latimer Expresswa y 100        Both     Elm Street to Commerce Street
Hall Street              100-200 N. Both     Indiana Avenue to Main Street
Hall Street              100-200 S. Both     Main Street to Canton Street
Henry Street             200-300 S. Both     Commerce Street to Canton Street
Indiana Avenue           2800       Both     Crowdus Street to Malcolm X
                                             Boulevard
Main Street              2500- 3200 Both     Julius Schepps Freeway to Trunk
                                             Avenue
Malcolm X Boulevard      100-200    Both     Indiana Avenue to Canton Street
Walton Street            200-400    Both     Elm Street to Junius Street
 
   (b)   Thirty cents an hour zones. A person shall pay an hourly rate of 30
cents on Monday through Sunday, from 7:00 a.m. until 12 midnight only, for the
use of a paid parking space upon all streets or portions of streets in the Deep
Ellum paid parking area except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   Ten cents an hour zones. A person shall pay an hourly rate of 10 cents
for the use of a paid parking space upon the following streets or portions of
streets in the Deep Ellum paid parking area Monday through Sunday from 7:00
a.m. until 12 midnight only.
 
STREET            BLOCK (S) SIDE( S) EXTENT
Indiana Boulevard 3000      Both     Walton Street to Hall Street
 
   (d)   Expiration of interim hourly rates. This section expires on May 8,
2026. On or after May 8, 2026, the hourly rates for the area described in
Subsection (a) is determined by Sections
28-103.2 and
28-103.3.
(Ord. Nos. 17964; 19173; 21194; 24411; 24483; 24882; 25756; 27210; 27553;
28792; 32488; 32735)
SECS. 28-114.3 THRU 28-114.11.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. Nos. 19173; 27210; 32735)
SEC. 28-114.12.   RESTRICTED ACCESS TO PAID PARKING SPACES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   A person requiring the hooding or temporary removal of a paid parking
payment device shall pay to the director a daily charge, excluding official
parking holidays, of 70 percent of the maximum hourly capacity of each paid
parking payment device hooded times the prevailing rate on the paid parking
payment device.
   (b)   In addition to the fee required in Subsection (a), a person requiring
the hooding of a paid parking payment device shall pay a labor charge of $40,
plus one dollar for each paid parking payment device hooded.
   (c)   In addition to the fee required in Subsection (a), a person requiring
the temporary removal of a paid parking payment device shall pay a labor charge
of $145 for each paid parking payment device removed. A person requiring
temporary removal of a paid parking payment device shall also pay the costs of
labor and materials incurred in reinstalling the meter after temporary removal.
The minimum reinstallation charge is $145 per meter.
   (d)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   a utility company engaged in construction or repair activities for
any city, county, state, or federal agency;
      (2)   a contractor performing work under a city, county, state, or
federal contract; or
      (3)   any city, county, state, or federal agency requiring the hooding or
temporary removal of a paid parking payment device in the performance of its
governmental functions.
   (e)   The fees required by Subsection (a) of this section will not be
assessed against a person requiring the hooding or temporary removal of paid
parking payment device to reconstruct, repair, or replace an existing street,
sidewalk, curb, or other city infrastructure in the public right-of-way if:
      (1)   the reconstruction, repair, or replacement of the infrastructure is
performed in compliance with all applicable city ordinances and state and
federal laws; and
      (2)   the infrastructure is, in the opinion of the city, restored to
better than its former condition.
   (f)   Fees will only be waived under Subsection (e) for the period of time
reasonably necessary to complete the reconstruction, repair, or replacement of
the infrastructure, not to exceed 30 days. (Ord. Nos. 17964; 19521; 21612;
21789; 22026; 27210; 27553; 27697; 30654; 32735; 32863)
SEC. 28-114.13.   PAID PARKING RATES IN CITY OWNED OR OPERATED PARKING LOTS.
   A person shall pay an hourly or daily rate for the use of a paid parking
space in the following city owned or operated parking lots:
PARKING LOT BOUNDARIES RATE EFFECTIVE DAYS RATE EFFECTIVE HOURS RATE
PARKING LOT       BOUNDARIES        RATE EFFECTIVE RATE EFFECTIVE   RATE
                                    DAYS           HOURS
                  Marilla Street to
                  the north, Ervay
                  Street to the
City Hall surface east, Canton      Monday through 7:00 a.m. until  $1.00/hour
parking           Street to the     Sunday         6:00 p.m.
                  south, and Akard
                  Street to the
                  west
Julius Schepps    IH 30 to the
Freeway           north and Botham  Monday through
(located in the   Jean Boulevard to Sunday         24 hours per day $1.00/hour
IH 45 right of    the south
way)
                  Woodall Rodgers
                  Freeway westbound
                  service road to
                  the north, North
                  Central
Woodall Rodgers   Expressway
Freeway           southbound        Monday through
(located in the   service road to   Sunday         24 hours per day $1.00/hour
Spur 366 right of the east, Woodall
way)              Rodgers Freeway
                  eastbound service
                  road to the
                  south, and Routh
                  Street to the
                  west
                  St. Paul Street                  7:00 a.m. until
                  to the west,                     9:00 a.m.        $1.50/hour
                  Woodall Rodgers   Monday through 9:00 a.m. until  $2.00/hour
                  Freeway eastbound Friday         6:00 p.m.        $2.50/hour
                  service road to                  6:00 p.m. until
Klyde Warren Park the south, Pearl                 12 midnight
                  Street to the
                  east, Woodall     Saturday and   7:00 a.m. until
                  Rodgers Freeway   Sunday         12 midnight      $2.00/hour
                  westbound service
                  road to the north
                  Record Street to                 5:00 a.m. until
                  the east, and     Monday through 5:00 p.m.        $2.00/day
                  Dallas Area Rapid Friday         5:00 p.m. until  $5.00/day
                  Transit rail                     5:00 a.m.
Brewery Parking   tracks to the
Lot               west Woodall
(located in the   Rodgers Freeway
Spur 366 right of westbound service Saturday and
way)              road to the       Sunday         24 hours per day $5.00/day
                  north, Woodall
                  Rodgers Freeway
                  eastbound service
                  road to the south
                  Elm Street to the                5:00 a.m. until
                  north and Main    Monday through 5:00 p.m.        $2.00/day
Deep Ellum        Street to the     Friday         5:00 p.m. until   
Parking Lot A     south Good-                      5:00 a.m.
(located in the   Latimer
Interstate 345    Expressway to the Saturday and
right of way)     east, and Ceasar  Sunday         24 hours per day $5.00/day
                  Chavez Boulevard
                  to the west
                  Main Street to                   5:00 a.m. until
                  the north, Good-  Monday through 5:00 p.m.        $2.00/day
Deep Ellum        Latimer           Friday         5:00 p.m. until  $5.00/day
Parking Lot B     Expressway to the                5:00 a.m.
(located in the   east, Commerce
Interstate 345    Street to the     Saturday and
right of way)     south, and Ceasar Sunday         24 hours per day $5.00/day
                  Chavez Boulevard
                  to the west
                  Commerce Street                  5:00 a.m. until
                  to the north,     Monday through 5:00 p.m.        $2.00/day
Deep Ellum        Canton Street to  Friday         5:00 p.m. until  $5.00/day
Parking Lot C     the south, Good-                 5:00 a.m.
(located in the   Latimer
Interstate 345    Expressway to the Saturday and
right of way)     west, and Henry   Sunday         24 hours per day $5.00/day
                  Street to the
                  east
                  Broom Street to                  5:00 a.m. until
West End Parking  the north, Field  Monday through 5:00 p.m.        $2.00/day
Lot No. 1         Street to the     Friday         5:00 a.m. until  $5.00/day
(located in the   east, McKinney                   5:00 p.m.
Spur 366 right of Avenue to the
way)              south, and Laws   Monday through 5:00 p.m. until  $5.00/day
                  Street to the     Sunday         5:00 a.m.
                  west
                  Broom Street to                  5:00 a.m. until
West End Parking  the north, Laws   Monday through 5:00 p.m.        $1.00/hour
Lot No. 2         Street to the     Friday         5:00 p.m. until  $1.25/hour
(located          east, McKinney                   12 midnight
partially in the  Avenue to the
Spur 366 right of south, and Lamar  Saturday and   5:00 a.m. until  $1.25/hour
way)              Street to the     Sunday         12 midnight
                  west
 
(Ord. No. 32735)
Division 5. Restricted or Prohibited in Certain Areas.
SEC. 28-115.   PARKING, STOPPING, AND STANDING VEHICLES IN PRIVATE PARKING
AREAS - AUTHORITY TO REGULATE; APPLICATION OF SECTION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he parks, stops or stands a vehicle in
violation of an official sign, curb marking, or street marking that prohibits,
regulates, or restricts the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle in a
private parking area located within a shopping center, office center,
industrial center, or medical center in the city.
   (b)   The owner or operator of a shopping center, office center, industrial
center, or medical center shall have the authority to designate by appropriate
signs and markings that have been approved by the traffic engineer:
      (1)   restrictions on the stopping, standing, and parking of vehicles;
      (2)   the areas in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles
is permitted;
      (3)   times when the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles is
prohibited to facilitate clean-up operations; and
      (4)   the areas in which freight loading is permitted.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to head-in parking from the street on
private property. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 21194)
SEC. 28-116.   PRIVATE PARKING AREAS - APPROVAL OF TIME LIMIT, PARKING BAN AND
PARKING PLAN; SECTIONS 28-115 to 28-119 NOT MANDATORY.
   (a)   No parking regulation established under Sections
28-115 through
28-119 is effective until the owner or operator of a shopping center, office
center, industrial center, or medical center submits plans for the proposed
parking restrictions, time limit, parking ban, if any, and the parking plan to
the traffic engineer for approval. Amendments to a business center parking plan
must be submitted and approved in the same manner.
   (b)   Sections
28-115 through
28-119 are not mandatory upon the owner or operator of a shopping center,
office center, industrial center, or medical center. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 21194)
SEC. 28-117.   PRIVATE PARKING AREAS - ERECTION OF SIGNS; CONTENT OF SIGNS;
MARKING OF PARKING SPACES.
   (a)   The owner or operator of a shopping center, office center, industrial
center, or medical center is authorized to erect suitable signs of uniform size
and design upon approval of the traffic engineer, which shall be placed in the
parking areas advising the public of the limits and conditions of the parking
regulations. A sign must be erected containing the following words in legible
lettering on a contrasting background:
“Parking in this area is limited to customers for the time and under the
restrictions indicated by signs, as provided by Sections
28-115 through
28-119 of the Dallas City Code.”
   (b)   The owner or operator of a shopping center, office center, industrial
center, or medical center shall mark off by painting on the parking areas the
most suitable manner in which cars may be parked. A person who parks a vehicle
on the parking lot of the shopping center, office center, industrial center, or
medical center, shall park the vehicle within the limit lines so marked. (Ord.
Nos. 14584; 21194)
SEC. 28-118.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 20012)
SEC. 28-119.   SAME - ENFORCEMENT.
   The owner or operator of a parking area in a shopping center, office center,
industrial center, or medical center shall designate a person to enforce the
provisions of Sections
28-115 through
28-119. The designated person must be registered as a private security officer
as provided by state law and, when approved by the director, shall have
authority to issue citations upon premises designated in the registration for
violation of parking regulations authorized by this division. (Ord. Nos. 14584;
20269)
SEC. 28-120.   PARKING ON VACANT PROPERTY IN RESIDENTIAL OR APARTMENT DISTRICTS
- ERECTION OF SIGNS.
   Owners of unimproved or vacant real estate located within a residential
district, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance, which is located adjacent to or
separated by a public street or areaway from a business district, are
authorized to post a wood or metal sign visible from the public street or
areaway, containing the words “parking prohibited”, in letters at least eight
inches high. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-121.   SAME - PROHIBITED WHEN SIGNS ERECTED.
   A person commits an offense if he parks a vehicle on vacant real estate
located in a residential district, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance, when the
real estate contains a “parking prohibited” sign as provided in Section
28-120. (Ord. 14584)
Division 5A. Parking for Disabled Persons.
SEC. 28-121.1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   DISABLED PARKING PLACARD means the placard issued by the state
under Section 681.002 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
      (2)   DISABLED PERSON means a person who has a permanent or temporary
disability within the meaning of Section 681.001 of the Texas Transportation
Code, as amended, and who has applied for and received:
         (A)   a disabled person or disabled veteran license plate from the
state;
         (B)   a disabled parking placard from the state; or
         (C)   a license plate or placard bearing the international symbol of
access issued by a U.S. state or by a state or province of a foreign country.
      (3)   DISABLED PERSON LICENSE PLATE means the specially designed license
plate of a vehicle, issued by the state to a permanently disabled person under
Section 504.201 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
      (4)   DISABLED VETERAN LICENSE PLATE means the specially designed license
plate of a vehicle, issued by the state to a disabled veteran under Section
504.202 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
      (5)   INTERNATIONAL SYMBOL OF ACCESS has the meaning assigned in Section
681.001 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 16671; 17499;
27210)
SEC. 28-121.2.   OFFENSES.
   Violations of disabled parking regulations on public or private property are
governed by, and may be enforced pursuant to, Chapter 681, Texas Transportation
Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 16671; 17499; 27210)
SEC. 28-121.3.   VOLUNTARY DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES OR AREAS FOR DISABLED
PERSONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   A person who owns or controls property used for parking may designate
one or more parking spaces or a parking area for the exclusive use of vehicles
transporting disabled persons in accordance with Section 681.009 of the Texas
Transportation Code, as amended.
   (b)   The offenses set forth in Section 681.011 of the Texas Transportation
Code, as amended, apply to violations of disabled parking regulations occurring
in a parking space or area designated for disabled persons under Subsection (a)
of this section when the space or area is identified in conformance with the
identification standards adopted by the Texas Department of Licensing and
Regulation and described in Section 681.009(b) of the Texas Transportation
Code, as amended (which identification standards are codified in Rule Section
68.100 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended). (Ord. Nos. 16671; 17499;
27210)
SEC. 28-121.4.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 27210)
SEC. 28-121.5.   REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES.
   (a)   An unauthorized vehicle, whether on public or private property, may be
removed and stored at the expense of the owner or operator of the vehicle in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2308 of the Texas Occupations Code,
as amended, and this code.
   (b)   A vehicle is an unauthorized vehicle for purposes of this section if
the vehicle:
      (1)   does not display a disabled person or disabled veteran license
plate, a disabled parking placard, or a license plate or placard bearing the
international symbol of access, and the vehicle is parked, stopped, or standing
in a parking space or area designated specifically for the disabled; or
      (2)   is blocking an access ramp or any other architectural improvement
designed to aid disabled persons. (Ord. Nos. 17499; 27210)
SEC. 28-121.6.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. Nos. 20012; 27210)
Division 5B. Residential Permit Parking Program.
SEC. 28-121.7.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to promote the health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens of the Deep Ellum District of the city of Dallas by addressing
the problems that arise where streets are used for the parking of motor
vehicles by persons using adjacent commercial, industrial, or commuter
facilities, but who do not reside in the neighborhood. The establishment of
residential permit parking zones would reduce these problems, which include,
but are not limited to, hazardous traffic conditions, air and noise pollution,
and inability of residents of the Deep Ellum District to obtain easy access to
and adequate parking near their residences. (Ord. 21598)
SEC. 28-121.8.   DEFINITIONS.
   (1)   DEEP ELLUM DISTRICT means the Deep Ellum/Near East Side District of
the city of Dallas, the boundaries of which are described in City of Dallas
Ordinance No. 19532, as amended.
   (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the city
manager to enforce and administer this division, or the director’s authorized
representative.
   (3)   RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING ZONE means any designated on-street space
within the Deep Ellum District where only resident motor vehicles displaying a
valid permit may stop, stand, or park.
   (4)   PERMIT means a residential parking permit issued by the director under
this division. (Ord. 21598)
SEC. 28-121.9.   DESIGNATION OF RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING ZONES.
   The director may, from time to time, designate a number of residential
permit parking zones within the Deep Ellum District as the director determines
necessary to provide for the parking needs of the residents of that district.
The director shall conspicuously post signs within each zone indicating the
times and conditions for which parking is by permit only. A residential permit
parking zone becomes effective five working days after signs are in place in
the zone, during which time, courtesy notices will be given to all motor
vehicles parking in the zone. (Ord. 21598)
SEC. 28-121.10.   RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT.
   (a)   The director shall, upon application and payment of the permit fee,
issue a residential parking permit to any person who is eligible for the
permit. A person is eligible for a residential parking permit if the person:
      (1)   owns a motor vehicle;
      (2)   resides within the Deep Ellum District; and
      (3)   has no unresolved parking citations issued by the city.
   (b)   The application for a permit must contain:
      (1)   the name, home address, and Texas driver’s license number of the
owner of the motor vehicle to be parked in a residential permit parking zone;
      (2)   the make, model, registration, and license plate numbers of the
motor vehicle to be parked in a residential permit parking zone; and
      (3)   any other information the director determines necessary to the
enforcement and administration of this division.
   (c)   To prove residency and to verify the contents of the application, the
applicant shall present at the time of application:
      (1)   a valid Texas motor vehicle registration for the motor vehicle to
be parked in a residential permit parking zone, showing the applicant’s current
home address;
      (2)   a valid Texas driver’s license of the applicant, showing the
applicant’s current home address;
      (3)   a residential utility bill acceptable to the director, showing the
applicant’s current home address; and
      (4)   proof of automobile liability insurance in at least the minimum
amount required by the Texas Safety Responsibility Act.
   (d)   The annual fee for a residential parking permit is:
      (1)   $25 for the first permit issued for a motor vehicle in a household;
and
      (2)   $50 for each additional permit issued for a motor vehicle in a
household.
   (e)   When a motor vehicle is parked in a residential permit parking zone,
the permit must be conspicuously displayed in a manner and location approved by
the director.
   (f)   A permit authorizes the holder to stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle
at any time in a residential permit parking zone, unless such stopping,
standing, or parking is prohibited or restricted by regulations other than
those established under this division.
   (g)   A permit is not transferable from one vehicle to another.
   (h)   A permit expires one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed
by applying in accordance with this section.
   (i)   A lost or stolen permit may be replaced for a $15 fee. The permit
holder must submit a signed affidavit stating that the permit was lost or
stolen and not transferred to another vehicle. (Ord. 21598)
SEC. 28-121.11.   OFFENSES; PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   stops, stands, or parks a motor vehicle in a residential permit
parking zone without displaying a valid permit on the vehicle as required by
this division;
      (2)   displays a permit on a motor vehicle other than the one for which
the permit was issued; or
      (3)   falsely represents himself as being eligible for a residential
parking permit, submits false documents, or otherwise makes a false statement
of a material fact on an application for a permit.
   (b)   The director may revoke the residential parking permit of any person
who:
      (1)   violates Subsection (a) of this section;
      (2)   has an unresolved parking citation issued by the city; or
      (3)   stops, stands, or parks a motor vehicle in a residential permit
parking zone without:
         (A)   a valid Texas license plate;
         (B)   a valid inspection sticker; or
         (C)   automobile liability insurance coverage in at least the minimum
amounts required by the Texas Safety Responsibility Act.
   (c)   The city council may, at any time, unconditionally revoke a
residential parking permit issued under this division. (Ord. 21598)
Division 5C. Resident-parking-only Program.
SEC. 28-121.12.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to promote the health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens of certain neighborhoods in the city of Dallas by addressing
the problems that arise when residential streets are used for the parking of
motor vehicles by persons using adjacent nonresidential parking generators, but
who do not reside in the neighborhood. The establishment of resident-parking-
only zones would reduce these problems, which include, but are not limited to,
hazardous traffic conditions, air and noise pollution, litter, and inability of
residents of these neighborhoods to obtain easy access to and adequate parking
near their residences. (Ord. 23863)
SEC. 28-121.13.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this division and may by written
order establish such rules or regulations, not inconsistent with this division,
as the director determines are necessary to discharge any duty under or to
effect the policy of this division. (Ord. 23863)
SEC. 28-121.14.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   AVAILABLE PARKING SPACE means the total number of spaces determined
by the director to be available for on-street parking by motor vehicles in a
resident-parking-only zone or proposed resident- parking-only zone.
      (2)   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT means a building that contains one or more
uses other than a single-family or duplex use. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a building that contains apartments, condominiums, or businesses.
      (3)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this division, or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (4)   DUPLEX USE has the meaning given that term in Section
51A-4.209 of the Dallas Development Code.
      (5)   NONRESIDENTIAL PARKING GENERATOR means any facility, other than a
structure used for a single-family or duplex use, that generates more parking
needs than the facility can fully accommodate. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a commercial, industrial, institutional, or commuter facility, such
as a restaurant, a bar, a store, an industrial plant, a church, a school, a
hospital, a medical facility, a day care facility, or a transit facility.
      (6)   PERMIT means a resident-parking-only permit issued by the director
under this division.
      (7)   RESIDENCE means each dwelling unit of a single-family or duplex
use.
      (8)   RESIDENTIAL STREET means any street or portion of a street abutting
a lot limited to a single- family or duplex use.
      (9)   RESIDENT-PARKING-ONLY ZONE means one or more blocks of a
residential street, designated by the director under this division, upon which
on-street stopping, standing, or parking is limited to resident motor vehicles
properly displaying a valid permit.
      (10)   SINGLE-FAMILY USE has the meaning given that term in Section
51A-4.209 of the Dallas Development Code. (Ord. 23863)
SEC. 28-121.15.   DESIGNATION OF RESIDENT- PARKING-ONLY ZONES; ELIMINATION OR
MODIFICATION OF ZONES.
   (a)   The director may designate a number of resident-parking-only zones on
residential streets within the city as the director determines necessary to
provide for the parking needs of the residents of that zone, if all of the
following requirements are met:
      (1)   A petition for designation of a resident- parking-only zone must be
filed, on a form provided by the director, by owners or occupants of residences
and any business establishments located within the proposed zone. The petition
must be signed by owners or occupants of two-thirds of the residences and any
business establishments abutting the side or sides of the street block or
blocks for which the zone is requested. Only one signature per residence or
business establishment is allowed on the petition.
      (2)   Only complete blocks of a residential street may be designated as a
resident-parking-only zone. A resident-parking-only zone may be designated on
one or both sides of a street. If a zone is designated on both sides of a
street, the days, times, conditions, and signage of the zone must be the same
on both sides. Each street block or side of a block designated as a resident-
parking-only zone must abut two or more lots limited to a single-family or
duplex use, and the majority of the lots abutted by each street block or side
of a block designated as a resident-parking-only zone must be limited to a
single-family or duplex use.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a petition and a nonrefundable $350 application
fee, the director shall conduct a parking study at the location requested in
the petition. The results of the study must indicate that, during the days and
times proposed for the resident- parking-only zone, more than 60 percent of the
available parking space is in use and 20 percent or more of the vehicles using
the parking space are not owned or operated by owners or occupants of
residences or business establishments within the area requested to be
designated as a resident-parking-only zone.
      (4)   The proposed resident-parking-only zone may not eliminate ingress
to or egress from any residence or business establishment located within the
zone.
      (5)   Before a resident-parking-only zone may become effective, the
applicants must pay to the director a $70 charge for each resident-parking-only
sign required to be installed in accordance with rules and regulations
promulgated by the director.
   (b)   After the application for a resident-parking- only zone is approved,
the director shall conspicuously post signs within each zone indicating the
days, times, and conditions for which parking is by permit only. A resident-
parking-only zone becomes effective five working days after signs are in place
in the zone. Courtesy notices will be given to all motor vehicles parking in
the zone during the five working days before the zone becomes effective.
   (c)   The director may eliminate or modify a resident-parking-only zone or
part of a resident- parking-only zone if all of the following requirements are
met:
      (1)   A petition for the elimination or modification of a resident-
parking-only zone or a part of a resident-parking-only zone must be filed, on a
form provided by the director, by owners or occupants of residences and any
business establishments located within the zone or part of the zone. The
petition must be signed by owners or occupants of two-thirds of the residences
and any business establishments abutting the side or sides of the street block
or blocks for which elimination or modification of the zone is requested. Only
one signature per residence or business establishment is allowed on the
petition.
      (2)   Only complete blocks of a residential street may be included in an
elimination or modification of a resident-parking-only zone. A resident-
parking-only zone may be eliminated on one or both sides of a residential
street, but, if modified, must be consistent in days, times, conditions, and
signage on both sides of the street. Each street block or side of a block
designated as a modified resident- parking-only zone must abut two or more lots
limited to a single-family or duplex use, and the majority of the lots abutted
by each street block or side of a block designated as a modified resident-
parking-only zone must be limited to a single-family or duplex use.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a petition to modify a resident-parking-only zone
and a nonrefundable $50 application fee, the director shall conduct a parking
study at the location requested in the petition. The results of the study must
indicate that, during the days and times proposed for the modified resident-
parking- only zone, more than 60 percent of the available parking space is in
use and 20 percent or more of the vehicles using the parking space are not
owned or operated by owners or occupants of residences or business
establishments located within the resident- parking-only zone for which
modification is requested.
      (4)   The proposed modified resident- parking-only zone may not eliminate
ingress to or egress from any residence or business establishment located
within the modified zone.
      (5)   The applicants must pay the following fees to the director before a
resident-parking-only zone may be eliminated or modified:
         (A)   a $10 charge for each resident- parking-only sign required to be
removed;
         (B)   a $35 charge for each resident- parking-only sign required to be
changed to include modified information; and
         (C)   a $42 charge for each new installation of a resident-parking-
only sign.
   (d)   The city council may, at any time, unconditionally eliminate or modify
a resident-parking- only zone designated under this division. (Ord. Nos. 23863;
32863)
SEC. 28-121.16.   RESIDENT-PARKING-ONLY PERMIT.
   (a)   The director shall, upon application and payment of all applicable
permit fees, issue resident- parking-only permits, up to a maximum of six
permits per residence or business establishment, to any person who is eligible
for a permit. An applicant is eligible for a resident-parking-only permit if:
      (1)   the applicant owns or occupies a residence or business
establishment located within the resident-parking-only zone; and
      (2)   the applicant and every other person owning or occupying the same
residence or business establishment as the applicant:
         (A)   has no unresolved parking citations issued by the city;
         (B)   has no outstanding fines or warrants for a violation of this
division; and
         (C)   complies with all other requirements of this division.
   (b)   The application for a permit must contain:
      (1)   the applicant’s name and an identifying number from the applicant’s
Texas driver’s license, military identification card, passport, or personal
identification card issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety;
      (2)   the name of every person 15 years of age or older who owns or
occupies the same residence or business establishment as the applicant and, if
applicable, an identifying number from that person’s Texas driver’s license,
military identification card, passport, or personal identification card issued
by the Texas Department of Public Safety;
      (3)   the address of the applicant’s residence or business establishment
located within the resident- parking-only zone;
      (4)   a statement that neither the applicant nor any other person owning
or occupying the same residence or business establishment as the applicant has
any unresolved parking citations issued by the city or any outstanding fines or
warrants for a violation of this division; and
      (5)   any other information the director determines necessary to the
enforcement and administration of this division.
   (c)   To prove that an applicant owns or occupies a residence or business
establishment located within a resident-parking-only zone and to verify the
contents of the application, the applicant shall present at the time of
application:
      (1)   a valid Texas driver’s license, military identification card,
passport, or personal identification card issued by the Texas Department of
Public Safety, showing the applicant’s current home address; and
      (2)   a recent utility bill, acceptable to the director, that is
addressed to the applicant and shows an address of a residence or business
establishment located within the resident-parking-only zone.
   (d)   The annual fee for a resident-parking-only permit is $20 for each
permit issued to a residence or business establishment located within a
resident- parking-only zone. Each residence or business establishment located
within a zone may apply for up to six permits.
   (e)   When a motor vehicle is parked in a resident- parking-only zone, a
permit must be conspicuously displayed in a manner and location approved by the
director. A permit may only be displayed on a motor vehicle that is either
owned or leased by an owner or occupant of the residence or business
establishment to which the permit is issued or owned or leased by a visitor to
the residence or business establishment to which the permit is issued.
   (f)   A permit authorizes the holder to stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle
at any time in a resident- parking-only zone, unless such stopping, standing,
or parking is prohibited or restricted by regulations other than those
established under this division. A permit does not guarantee or reserve to the
holder a parking space within the zone and does not exempt the holder from
other applicable parking and traffic regulations.
   (g)   A permit is not transferable, except that a permit issued to a
residence or business establishment located within a resident-parking-only zone
may be displayed on a motor vehicle owned or leased by a visitor to that
particular residence or business establishment.
   (h)   A permit expires one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed
by applying in accordance with this section.
   (i)   A lost, destroyed, or stolen permit may be replaced for a $6 fee. The
permit holder must submit a signed affidavit stating that the permit was lost,
destroyed, or stolen. (Ord. Nos. 23863; 32863)
SEC. 28-121.17.   TEMPORARY PARKING PERMITS.
   (a)   A person who lawfully holds one or more resident-parking-only permits
under Section
28-121.16 may be issued additional temporary parking permits for the use of
visitors attending a party or special event at the residence or business
establishment for which the resident-parking-only permit is issued. An
application for one or more temporary parking permits must be made to the
director, on a form provided by the director, not less than 24 hours nor more
than 72 hours before the party or event is scheduled to begin.
   (b)   The fee for a temporary parking permit is $0.10 each. Each residence
or business establishment located within a zone may receive up to 50 temporary
parking permits in any calendar month.
   (c)   A temporary parking permit may only be displayed on a motor vehicle
owned or leased by a visitor to the residence or business establishment to
which the permit is issued. The temporary parking permit must be conspicuously
displayed on the vehicle in a manner and location approved by the director.
   (d)   A temporary parking permit authorizes the holder to stop, stand, or
park a motor vehicle for one day in a resident-parking-only zone, unless such
stopping, standing, or parking is prohibited or restricted by regulations other
than those established under this division. A temporary parking permit does not
guarantee or reserve to the holder a parking space within the zone and does not
exempt the holder from other applicable parking and traffic regulations.
   (e)   A temporary parking permit expires at noon on the day following the
date stamped on the permit. (Ord. 23863)
SEC. 28-121.18.   OFFENSES; PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   stops, stands, or parks a motor vehicle in a resident-parking-only
zone without displaying a valid permit on the vehicle as required by this
division;
      (2)   displays or allows the display of a permit on a motor vehicle that
is not owned or leased by an owner or occupant of the residence or business
establishment to which the permit was issued; or
      (3)   falsely represents himself as being eligible for a resident-
parking-only permit, submits false documents, or otherwise makes a false
statement of a material fact on an application for a permit.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(1) of this section
that the person was:
      (1)   expeditiously loading or unloading passengers or property;
      (2)   providing a maintenance, repair, delivery, or lawn service to a
residence or business establishment located within the resident-parking-only
zone;
      (3)   in the performance of official duties as a law enforcement officer,
a government employee or contractor, or a utility company employee or
contractor; or
      (4)   operating an authorized emergency vehicle in the performance of
official duties.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(2) of this section
that the vehicle was owned or leased by a visitor to the residence or business
establishment to which the permit was issued.
   (d)   The director may revoke the resident- parking-only permit of any
person who:
      (1)   violates Subsection (a) of this section;
      (2)   has an unresolved parking citation issued by the city; or
      (3)   stops, stands, or parks or allows the stopping, standing, or
parking of a motor vehicle, other than one owned or leased by a visitor to the
residence or business establishment, in a resident-parking-only zone without:
         (A)   a valid Texas license plate;
         (B)   a valid inspection sticker; or
         (C)   automobile liability insurance coverage in at least the minimum
amounts required by the Texas Safety Responsibility Act.
   (e)   A person who has had a resident-parking-only permit revoked under
Subsection (d) of this section may reapply for a permit in accordance with
Section
28-121.16 of this division. The director may reinstate the permit if:
      (1)   the applicant pays all fees required by this division; and
      (2)   the director determines that the applicant and every other person
owning or occupying the same residence or business establishment as the
applicant is in compliance with all requirements of this division.
   (f)   The city council may, at any time, unconditionally revoke a resident-
parking-only permit issued under this division. (Ord. 23863)
Division 6. Dallas Convention Center Parking Facility.
SEC. 28-122.   AREA DESIGNATED.
   Any parking lot which is owned by the city and in the area bounded by Akard
Street from Young Street to Canton Street, Canton Street from Akard Street to
Griffin Street, Griffin Street from Canton Street to Young Street, and Young
Street from Griffin Street to Akard Street is designated as the “Dallas
Convention Center Parking Facility,” referred to in this division as the
“parking facility.” (Ord. Nos. 14584; 15194)
SEC. 28-123.   PURPOSE.
   The parking facility shall be used to provide parking of vehicles operated
by persons attending events at the Dallas Convention Center, by tenants renting
or leasing the facilities of the center, and by the general public. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-124.   CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED FROM STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING.
   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle having a
gross weight in excess of 6,000 pounds, or a vehicle having an overall length
in excess of 21 feet, or any trailer in the parking lot located within the
Dallas Convention Center buildings. This section shall not apply to vehicles or
trailers brought to the Dallas Convention Center buildings for exhibition
purposes at a scheduled event or show. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-125.   PARKING PROHIBITED; ERECTION OF SIGNS REGULATING SAME.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle in
violation of authorized signs which have been erected prohibiting or
restricting stopping, standing or parking within the parking facility.
   (b)   The traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs prohibiting or
restricting stopping, standing or parking of vehicles within the parking
facility as may be deemed necessary to facilitate the flow of traffic. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-126.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 20012)
SEC. 28-127.   AUTHORITY TO REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
   The director of convention and event services shall cause to have removed to
the city pound any vehicle stopped, standing, or parked in violation of this
division within the parking facility where signs have been erected, or any
vehicle stopped, standing, or parked within the parking facility for a period
exceeding 24 hours. The owner of the vehicle may redeem the vehicle in the same
manner as vehicles impounded under other provisions of this code. (Ord. Nos.
14584; 17226; 22026; 23694; 24053)
SEC. 28-128.   AUTHORITY TO ISSUE PARKING CITATIONS TO ILLEGALLY PARKED
VEHICLES.
   The director of convention and event services and any designated agents have
the authority to enforce the provisions of this division and issue citations
for violations of this division. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 17226; 22026; 23694; 24053)
Division 6A. Dallas City Hall Parking Garage.
SEC. 28-128.1.   AREA DESIGNATED.
   The subsurface area bounded approximately by Young Street from Akard Street
to South Ervay Street, South Ervay Street from Young Street to Marilla Street,
Marilla Street from South Ervay Street to Akard Street, Akard Street from
Marilla Street to Young Street, and all vehicle ramps and pedestrian stairways
connecting the subsurface area to ground level is designated as the “Dallas
City Hall Parking Garage,” referred to in this division as the “parking
garage.” (Ord. 14911)
SEC. 28-128.2.   PURPOSE.
   The parking garage will be used to provide parking for vehicles of city
employees and the general public, to store city vehicles, and to accommodate,
by special arrangement, persons attending the Dallas Convention Center and the
Dallas City Hall. (Ord. 14911)
SEC. 28-128.3.   CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED FROM ENTERING.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, as the operator of a vehicle, he
enters a vehicle ramp of the parking garage and the vehicle:
      (1)   has a gross weight in excess of 6,000 pounds;
      (2)   has an overall length in excess of 21 feet;
      (3)   has an overall height in excess of six feet nine inches; or
      (4)   is attached to a trailer.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person is
making an authorized delivery at the loading dock and gained access to the
loading dock through the lower level of the Dallas Convention Center Parking
Facility. (Ord. 14911)
SEC. 28-128.4.   FAILURE TO OBEY SIGNS PROHIBITED: ERECTION OF SIGNS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, as the operator of a vehicle, he
stops, stands, or parks the vehicle in violation of an authorized sign which
prohibits or restricts the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle in the
parking garage, or he fails to obey an authorized sign which regulates the
movement of a vehicle. The law which regulates the movement of vehicles on
public streets by official traffic control devices shall apply to the movement
of vehicles in the parking garage when an authorized sign is erected regulating
vehicular movement.
   (b)   The traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs which prohibit or
restrict the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in the parking garage
and any other signs which may be necessary to regulate vehicular movement.
Signs are to conform to the Manual and Specifications adopted by the State
Highway Commission of the State of Texas, as set forth in Article 6701d,
Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas. (Ord. 14911)
SEC. 28-128.5.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 20012)
SEC. 28-128.6.   ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES - AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND ISSUE
PARKING CITATIONS.
   (a)   The director of the Dallas Marshal’s Office, or a designated agent,
may remove to the city pound any vehicle stopped, standing, or parked in the
parking garage in violation of this division.
   (b)   The director of the Dallas Marshal’s Office, or a designated agent,
have authority to enforce the provisions of this division and to issue
citations for violations of this division and the speed limit designated in
Section
28-52 of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 14911; 19312; 19679; 22026; 23694; 33224)
SEC. 28-128.7.   TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (a)   Designated employees of the department of equipment and building
services shall direct traffic by voice, hand, or signal in the parking garage.
   (b)   If a person fails or refuses to comply with a traffic directive of a
designated employee of the department of equipment and building services, the
employee may remove the person from the parking garage. (Ord. Nos. 14911;
19312; 22026; 23694)
Division 6B. Bullington Street Truck Terminal.
SEC. 28-128.8.   AREA DESIGNATED.
   The subsurface area located two levels below Thanksgiving Square and bounded
approximately by Bryan Street from Ervay Street to Pacific Avenue, Ervay Street
from Pacific Avenue to Bryan Street, and Pacific Avenue from Bryan Street to
Ervay Street, and all vehicle ramps and pedestrian stairways connecting this
subsurface area to upper levels is designated as the “Bullington Street Truck
Terminal,” referred to in this division as the “terminal.” (Ord. Nos. 18408;
22026; 23694)
SEC. 28-128.9.   PURPOSE.
   The terminal will be used for the expeditious unloading and delivery or
pickup and loading of materials to or from businesses located within buildings
opening into the terminal. (Ord. Nos. 18408; 22026; 23694)
SEC. 28-128.10.   OPERATING HOURS.
   The normal operating hours of the terminal are from 6 a.m. to 5 p.m., Monday
through Friday. A person may, upon giving 24 hours’ notice, obtain permission
from the director of equipment and building services, or a designated agent, to
use the terminal outside of normal operating hours. A fee of $28 an hour will
be charged for use of the terminal outside of normal operating hours. (Ord.
Nos. 18408; 19312; 22026; 23694)
SEC. 28-128.11.   CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED DURING NORMAL OPERATING HOURS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, during normal operating hours, he
enters a vehicle ramp of the terminal while operating a truck-tractor, semi-
trailer, pole trailer, or trailer.
   (b)   A person operating a truck-tractor, semi- trailer, pole trailer, or
trailer may use the terminal outside of normal operating hours if permission is
obtained from the director of equipment and building services or a designated
agent in accordance with Section
28-128.10. (Ord. Nos. 18408; 19312; 22026; 23694)
SEC. 28-128.12.   STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, during normal operating hours, he
stops, stands, or parks a vehicle in the terminal for any purpose other than
the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials to or
from a business located within a building opening into the terminal.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if, during normal operating hours, he
stops, stands, or parks a vehicle in the terminal for a period exceeding 30
minutes. (Ord. Nos. 18408; 22026; 23694)
SEC. 28-128.13.   PERMISSION FROM DIRECTOR; DEFENSES.
   (a)   Upon determining that the conduct would not interfere with the orderly
and efficient operation of the terminal, the director of equipment and building
services, or a designated agent, may give a person, in writing, permission to
engage in conduct prohibited by Section
28-128.11(a) or
28-128.12.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Sections
28-128.11(a) and
28-128.12 that the person had written permission to engage in the prohibited
conduct from the director of equipment and building services, or a designated
agent. (Ord. Nos. 18408; 19312; 22026; 23694)
SEC. 28-128.14.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 20012)
SEC. 28-128.15.   AUTHORITY TO REMOVE VEHICLES AND ISSUE CITATIONS.
   (a)   The director of equipment and building services, or a designated
agent, may remove to the city pound any vehicle stopped, standing, or parked in
the terminal in violation of this division.
   (b)   The director of equipment and building services, or a designated
agent, have authority to enforce the provisions of this division and to issue
citations for violations of this division and for violations of the speed limit
designated in Section
28-52.1 of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 18408; 19312; 19679; 22026; 23694)
SEC. 28-128.16.   TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (a)   Designated employees of the department of equipment and building
services shall direct traffic by voice, hand, or signal in the terminal.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he fails or refuses to comply with a
traffic directive of a designated employee of the department of equipment and
building services. A designated employee of the department of equipment and
building services may cause the removal from the terminal of any person
committing an offense under this subsection. (Ord. Nos. 18408; 19312; 19679;
22026; 23694)
Division 7. Administrative Adjudication of Parking Violations.
SEC. 28-129.   PARKING VIOLATIONS MADE CIVIL OFFENSES.
   Every violation of a provision of this chapter, except for Section
28-121.2, or of
Chapter 32 of this code governing the stopping, standing, or parking of a
vehicle is a civil offense. In addition to being subject to the criminal
penalties and procedures established in
Chapter 51A of this code, a violation of Section
51A-4.301(d)(5) governing the parking of a motor vehicle on an unapproved
surface may also be adjudicated as a civil offense under this division. (Ord.
Nos. 14584; 20012; 20269; 21612; 22340; 32470)
SEC. 28-130.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The director of Dallas municipal court shall implement and enforce the
provisions of this division relating to hearing officers, administrative
adjudication hearing procedures, and appeals and may by written order establish
such rules or regulations, not inconsistent with this division, as the director
determines are necessary to discharge the director's duty under or to effect
the policy of this division.
   (b)   The director of transportation and public works shall implement and
enforce the provisions of this division relating to the issuance, service, and
enforcement of parking citations and the collection of fines and costs and may
by written order establish such rules or regulations, not inconsistent with
this division, as the director determines are necessary to discharge the duty
of the director under or to effect the policy of this division. (Ord. Nos.
14584; 20012; 21612; 27697; 30654; 32557; 32864)
SEC. 28-130.1.   HEARING OFFICERS; POWERS, DUTIES, AND FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   Hearing officers shall be appointed by the city manager, or a
designated representative, to administratively adjudicate all parking
violations for which a parking citation has been issued under this chapter or
under
Chapter 32 of this code.
   (b)   Hearing officers shall have the following powers, duties, and
functions:
      (1)   To administer oaths.
      (2)   To accept admissions to, and to hear and determine contests of,
parking violations under this chapter.
      (3)   To issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the
production of documents, which orders may be enforced by a municipal court.
      (4)   To assess fines, penalties, and other costs for a parking violation
in accordance with Section
28-130.9 of this chapter.
      (5)   To waive penalties assessed for a parking violation in accordance
with Section
28-130.9 of this chapter.
      (6)   To preside over, hear evidence, and make findings at
immobilization/impoundment hearings in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. Nos.
20012; 21612)
SEC. 28-130.2.   PARKING CITATIONS; FORM.
   (a)   A parking citation serves as the summons and complaint for purposes of
this division.
   (b)   A parking citation must be on a form prescribed by the director of
transportation and public works and must include the following information:
      (1)   the nature, date, time, and location of the alleged parking
violation and the meter number, if applicable;
      (2)   the state license plate number of the illegally parked vehicle, or
if not visible or legible, the vehicle identification number or the brake
inspection tag number;
      (3)   the make of the illegally parked vehicle;
      (4)   the date, time, and location of the administrative adjudication
hearing, to be set not later than 15 calendar days after the date of issuance
of the parking citation;
   (5)   a notification that the person charged with the parking violation has
the right to an instanter hearing any business day before the scheduled
administrative adjudication hearing; and
   (6)   a notification that failure to timely appear at either an instanter
hearing or a scheduled administrative adjudication hearing is considered an
admission of liability for the parking violation charge and will result in the
assessment of appropriate fines, penalties, and costs and may result in the
immobilization, towing, and impoundment of the vehicle for which the citation
was issued.
   (c)   The original or any copy of a parking citation is a record kept in the
ordinary course of city business and is prima facie evidence of the facts
contained in the parking citation. (Ord. Nos. 20012; 20269; 21612; 27697;
30654; 32864)
SEC. 28-130.3.   SERVICE OF A PARKING CITATION; PRESUMPTION OF SERVICE.
   (a)   A parking citation must be served personally upon the operator of a
vehicle who is present at the time of service. If the operator is not present,
or cannot otherwise be personally served, the parking citation must be served
upon the registered owner of the vehicle by affixing the parking citation to
the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
   (b)   An operator of a vehicle who is not the vehicle’s owner, but who uses
or operates the vehicle with the express or implied permission of the owner,
shall be considered the owner’s agent authorized to receive a parking citation
required to be served upon the registered owner or operator of a vehicle in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (c)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle drives the vehicle away from or
in any manner leaves the site of the parking violation while the issuing
officer is preparing the parking citation, or refuses service of the parking
citation, this fact shall be noted on the original and all copies of the
parking citation.
   (d)   The original parking citation must be signed by the issuing officer
who shall affirm the truth of the facts set forth in the citation.
   (e)   The original and all copies of a parking citation are prima facie
evidence that the parking citation was issued and that an attempt at service
was made in accordance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. Nos. 20012;
21612)
SEC. 28-130.4.   LIABILITY OF THE VEHICLE OWNER AND OPERATOR; PRESUMPTION OF
LIABILITY.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b), the registered owner and the
operator of a vehicle, when not the same, shall both be liable to the city for
a parking violation charge, except that the operator of a vehicle shall be
solely liable if the owner can prove that the vehicle was operated without the
owner’s express or implied consent. A vehicle owner who pays any civil fines,
penalties, or costs pursuant to this division shall have the right to recovery
from the vehicle operator.
   (b)   A vehicle owner who is engaged in the business of renting or leasing
vehicles under written rental or leasing agreements shall not be liable for
parking fines, penalties, and costs imposed by the city on a rented or leased
vehicle if, within 30 days after receiving written notice of a parking
violation, the vehicle owner provides in affidavit form the true name, address,
and driver’s license number and state of issuance of the person in possession
of the vehicle at the time the parking citation was issued, or a true copy of
the lease or rental agreement in effect at the time the parking citation was
issued.
   (c)   A lessor of a vehicle who fails to comply with Subsection (b) shall be
treated as any other vehicle owner and shall be liable with the vehicle
operator for a parking violation charge.
   (d)   It is a defense to any charge of a parking violation that, at the time
of the violation, the illegally parked vehicle was reported to a police
department as having been stolen prior to the time of the violation and had not
yet been recovered.
   (e)   In any hearing to administratively adjudicate a parking citation, it
is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle for which the citation was
issued is the person who stopped, stood, or parked the vehicle at the time and
place of the parking violation. Proof of ownership may be made by a computer-
generated record of the registration of the vehicle with the Texas Department
of Transportation showing the name of the person to whom state license plates
were issued. This proof is prima facie evidence of the ownership of the vehicle
by the person to whom the certificate of registration was issued. (Ord. Nos.
20012; 21612)
SEC. 28-130.5.   ANSWERING A PARKING CITATION.
   (a)   A person who has been issued a parking citation shall answer to the
charge of the parking violation by the date shown on the citation. An answer
may be made in any of the following ways:
      (1)   An admission of liability with payment of the applicable civil
fine, and any additional penalties and costs.
      (2)   A denial of liability made before a hearing officer at an
administrative adjudication hearing on a date specified in the parking citation
or at an instanter hearing before that date.
      (3)   An admission of liability with an explanation made before a hearing
officer at an administrative adjudication hearing on a date specified in the
parking citation or at an instanter hearing before that date.
      (4)   A request for permission from a hearing officer to adjudicate by
mail.
      (5)   A request to reset a scheduled administrative adjudication hearing
from the date shown on the parking citation. A scheduled hearing may not be
reset more than once unless the person charged pays to the director of
transportation and public works an amount equal to the applicable civil fine
for the parking violation, with any additional penalties and costs. The
director of transportation and public works shall issue a receipt for any
amounts paid under this paragraph. After presentation of the receipt, all
amounts paid will be refunded to the person charged if the hearing officer, or
a municipal court on appeal, finds that the person is not liable for the
parking violation.
   (b)   Payment of the civil fine and any additional penalties and costs may
be made in person, by mail, or by other payment options to the director of
transportation and public works. Payment of the civil fine and all penalties
and costs assessed pursuant to this division shall operate as a final
disposition of the parking violation charge, except when payment is made to
reset a scheduled hearing or to file an appeal. (Ord. Nos. 20012; 21612; 27697;
30654; 32864)
SEC. 28-130.6.   ADJUDICATION BY MAIL.
   (a)   If a person charged with a parking violation shows good cause for not
attending a hearing, either personally or through a representative, the hearing
officer may permit the matter to be adjudicated by mail, which adjudication
must be completed within 90 calendar days of the date of the citation.
   (b)   Letters, memoranda, affidavits, photographs, and other documentary
materials shall be admissible as evidence for the purposes of adjudication by
mail. The hearing officer may exclude from consideration any material that is
not relevant to the adjudication of the alleged violation.
   (c)   Failure of the person charged to proceed with an adjudication by mail
after requesting and receiving permission to adjudicate by mail is an admission
by the person charged of liability for the parking violation and shall subject
the person who requested the adjudication by mail to the appropriate civil
fines, penalties, and costs assessed by the hearing officer.
   (d)   If a hearing officer determines that an adjudication cannot proceed by
mail, the hearing officer shall advise the person charged by first class mail
that the person must appear to answer the charge at a hearing. (Ord. Nos.
20012; 21612)
SEC. 28-130.7.   HEARINGS FOR DISPOSITION OF A PARKING CITATION; PARKING
CITATION AS PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   (a)   Every hearing for the adjudication of a parking violation charge under
this chapter shall be held before a hearing officer.
   (b)   At a hearing, the parking citation is prima facie proof of its
contents and the officer or other authorized person who issued the parking
citation is not required to be present; except, that the issuing officer or
other authorized person shall be present at a scheduled administrative
adjudication hearing if requested by the person charged or by the hearing
officer.
   (c)   At a hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider evidence
presented by the city and by the person charged. The formal rules of evidence
do not apply to a hearing under this division, and the hearing officer shall
make a decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the
hearing, after giving due weight to all presumptions and prima facie evidence
established by this division or other applicable law.
   (d)   At the conclusion of an instanter or a scheduled administrative
adjudication hearing, the hearing officer shall immediately render an order or
decision, either by:
      (1)   finding the person charged liable for the parking violation,
assessing the applicable civil fine and any penalties and other costs in
accordance with this division, and notifying the person of the right to appeal
to municipal court; or
      (2)   finding the person charged not liable for the parking violation.
   (e)   An order of a hearing officer must be filed with the city department
of Dallas municipal court, in a separate index and file. The order may be
recorded using computer printouts, microfilm, microfiche, or other digital
retention methods. (Ord. Nos. 20012; 21612; 22026; 28424; 30239; 32557)
SEC. 28-130.8.   FAILURE TO ANSWER A PARKING CITATION OR APPEAR AT A HEARING.
   (a)   The failure of any person charged with a parking violation to answer
to the charge within 15 calendar days after the date of issuance of the parking
citation or to appear at any hearing, including a hearing on appeal, when
required to appear is an admission of liability for the parking violation, and
the hearing officer, or the municipal court in the case of an appeal, shall
issue an order of liability and assess against the person charged with the
violation the appropriate civil fines, penalties, and other costs.
   (b)   Within seven calendar days after filing an order of liability issued
under this section, a hearing officer shall notify the registered owner or
operator of the vehicle in writing of the order. The notice must be sent by
United States mail to the last address of the registered owner on record with
the Texas Department of Transportation, or to the address of the registered
owner or operator last known to the hearing officer. The notice must include a
statement:
      (1)   of the amount of civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed;
      (2)   of the right to appeal to municipal court; and
      (3)   that failure to pay can result in immobilization and impoundment of
the vehicle. (Ord. Nos. 20012; 21612)
SEC. 28-130.9.   FINE SCHEDULE; OTHER FEES.
   (a)   The following is the schedule of civil fines for parking violations
under this chapter,
Chapter 32, and
Chapter 51A of this code that are made civil offenses under this division:
 
VIOLATION                                FINE
(1) Section                              $110
    28-81.1(a)(2)(B) or (G)
(2) Section                              $50
    28-159.1
    Section
    28-76,
    28-76.3,
(3) 28-76.6,                             $40
    28-81.1(a)(1),
    28-81.1(a)(2)(C), (D), (E), or (F),
    28-88, or
    28-96
    Section
    28-80,
    28-81,
    28-81.1(a)(2)(A),
(4) 28-82,                               $35
    28-86,
    28-87,
    28-101, or
    28-102
(5) Section                              $50
    51A-4.301(d)(5)
(6) Any other parking violation          $30
 
   (b)   If a civil fine is assessed under this division, it must be in
accordance with this section. A fine may not be waived or modified by a hearing
officer, or by a municipal court on appeal, except that additional penalties
and other costs may be added in accordance with this section.
   (c)   An additional penalty in an amount equal to the original fine will be
assessed if a vehicle owner or operator, or the agent of the owner or operator,
fails to:
      (1)   answer to a parking violation charge within 15 calendar days after
the date of issuance of the parking citation or fails to appear at any hearing
scheduled after 15 calendar days from the date of the parking citation; or
      (2)   after being found liable, pay all civil fines, fees, and costs
assessed for a parking violation within the time designated by the hearing
officer.
   (d)   An additional penalty of $30 will be assessed if a vehicle owner or
operator, or the agent of the owner or operator, fails to pay all civil fines,
fees, penalties, and costs assessed for a parking violation within 31 calendar
days after the assessment of the additional penalty described in Subsection
(c).
   (e)   A penalty assessed under Subsection (c) or (d) of this section may be
waived by a hearing officer, or by a municipal court on appeal, if the vehicle
owner or operator, or agent of the vehicle owner or operator, can establish
that:
      (1)   through no fault of the vehicle owner or operator, or agent of the
vehicle owner or operator:
         (A)   no notice of the parking violation was received as required by
this article;
         (B)   no notice of the hearing officer’s order was received as
required by this article; or
         (C)   payment of the fine assessed for the parking violation was not
posted in a timely manner;
      (2)   the penalty was assessed in error; or
      (3)   the vehicle was at the time of the violation stopped, stood, or
parked in response to a medical emergency.
   (f)   In addition to all fines, penalties, and other costs assessed under
this division, a person found liable for a parking violation shall pay a court
cost of $5 as required by Article 102.014 of the Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure.
   (g)   The minimum fine established in Subsection (a)(4) of this section must
be doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month
period and trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense
within any 24-month period. (Ord. Nos. 20012; 20269; 21004; 21194; 21612;
22340; 24411; 26309; 27210; 27553; 32797)
SEC. 28-130.10.   ENFORCEMENT OF ORDER.
   A hearing officer’s order may be enforced by:
      (1)   impounding the vehicle that is the subject of the order when it is
found on any public street, right-of-way, easement, or other public or city-
owned property, if the person charged has committed three or more parking
violations in any calendar year that have not been resolved either by a finding
of no liability or by payment of all fines, penalties, and costs assessed by
the hearing officer;
      (2)   placing a boot on the vehicle that is the subject of the order when
it is found on any public street, right-of-way, easement, or other public or
city-owned property, if the person charged has committed three or more parking
violations in any calendar year that have not been resolved either by a finding
of no liability or by payment of all fines, penalties, and costs assessed by
the hearing officer;
      (3)   imposing an additional penalty to a civil fine not paid within the
designated period;
      (4)   denying any parking permit; or
      (5)   refusing to allow the registration of the vehicle that is the
subject of the order as provided by Article 6675a-2, Vernon’s Texas Civil
Statutes. (Ord. Nos. 20012; 20965; 21612)
SEC. 28-130.11.   IMMOBILIZATION/ IMPOUNDMENT HEARING.
   (a)   The registered owner of a vehicle that is immobilized or impounded for
the purpose of enforcing a hearing officer’s order shall have the right to a
prompt immobilization/impoundment hearing before a hearing officer.
   (b)   The request for an immobilization/ impoundment hearing must be made in
writing to the director, on a form provided for that purpose, within three
calendar days from the date the vehicle was immobilized or impounded, whichever
occurred first.
   (c)   An immobilization/impoundment hearing must be held within 48 hours
after the director receives the request for a hearing, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and city holidays, at the parking adjudication office or at such other
convenient and reasonable place as the hearing officer may designate.
   (d)   The issue to be determined at the immobilization/impoundment hearing
is whether the immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle was authorized by
this chapter.
   (e)   The immobilization or impoundment of a vehicle is valid if it complies
with the requirements of this chapter, unless the vehicle owner or operator, or
agent of the vehicle owner or operator, can establish that:
      (1)   the vehicle was registered to and operated by another person at the
time the unresolved parking violations occurred;
      (2)   the vehicle was being operated without the owner’s express or
implied consent at the time the unresolved parking violations occurred;
      (3)   through no fault of the owner, notice of the unresolved parking
violations was never received as required by this article;
      (4)   one or more citations for the unresolved parking violations are
defective and, if dismissed, would leave no more than two unresolved parking
violations within the calendar year; or
      (5)   at the time of immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle, the
registered owner had no more than two unresolved parking violations within the
calendar year.
   (f)   The determination of the hearing officer at the immobilization/
impoundment hearing is final and is not subject to appeal.
   (g)   If the hearing officer determines that immobilization or impoundment
of a vehicle was not valid, all fees paid for immobilization, towage, storage,
and impoundment of the vehicle and any other amount paid to redeem the vehicle
shall be refunded, including any fines, penalties, and costs for any parking
violation that the hearing officer determines should not have been considered
in counting parking violations for the purposes of immobilizing or impounding
the vehicle. Any fines, penalties, and costs paid for a parking violation for
which the registered owner was liable will not be refunded. (Ord. 21612)
SEC. 28-130.12.   APPEAL FROM HEARING.
   (a)   A person determined by a hearing officer, at either an instanter or
scheduled administrative adjudication hearing or by failure to answer a parking
citation or appear at a hearing in the time required, to be liable for a
parking violation may appeal this determination to the municipal court by
filing a petition, along with a filing fee of $15, with the municipal court
clerk or a deputy clerk within 30 calendar days after the hearing officer's
order is filed with the department of Dallas municipal court. If the hearing
officer's order is reversed, the $15 filing fee shall be returned by the city
to the appellant.
   (b)   Upon receipt of an appeal petition, the municipal court clerk or
deputy clerk shall schedule an appeal hearing and notify all parties of the
date, time, and location of the hearing. The officer or other authorized person
who issued the parking citation is not required to be present at the appeal
hearing unless requested by the person charged or by the municipal court.
   (c)   The appeal hearing must be a trial de novo in municipal court and is a
civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the hearing
officer’s order. The person filing the appeal may request that the hearing be
held before a jury. The decision from the municipal court is final.
   (d)   Service of notice of appeal under this section does not stay the
enforcement and collection of any order of a hearing officer, unless the person
filing the appeal pays to the director of transportation and public works an
amount equal to all civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed against the
person charged. The director of transportation and public works shall issue a
receipt for any amounts paid under this subsection. After presentation of the
receipt, all amounts paid will be refunded if the hearing officer's order is
overturned on appeal. (Ord. Nos. 20012; 21194; 21612; 22026; 27697; 28424;
30239; 30654; 32557; 32864)
SEC. 28-130.13.   DISPOSITION OF FINES, PENALTIES, AND COSTS.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b) of this section, all fines,
penalties, and costs assessed under this division must be paid into the city’s
general fund for the use and benefit of the city.
   (b)   All court costs assessed under Section
28-130.9(f) of this chapter must be deposited into the municipal child safety
fund established under Chapter 106 of the Texas Local Government Code. (Ord.
Nos. 20012; 21004; 21612; 26309)
ARTICLE XII.
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR LOVE FIELD AND DALLAS EXECUTIVE AIRPORT.
SEC. 28-131.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   AUTHORIZED VEHICLE means a vehicle approved by the director of
aviation that displays on its windshield, or other conspicuous place, if the
vehicle has no windshield, a permit issued by the director of aviation
designating the vehicle as an authorized vehicle.
      (2)   DALLAS EXECUTIVE AIRPORT means that airport owned and operated by
the city, including terminals, buildings, hangars, shops, roads, entrance
roads, exit roads, perimeter roads, service roads, driveways, ramps, taxiways,
runways, parking areas, loading areas, special use areas, and adjacent grounds,
bounded generally by Hampton Road on the East, Ledbetter Drive on the North,
Paradise Avenue on the West, and Redbird Lane and U. S. Highway 67 on the
South.
      (3)   DIRECTOR OF AVIATION means the director of aviation of the city.
      (4)   LOADING ZONE means a space adjacent to a curb, sidewalk, or
building reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles loading or unloading
materials.
      (5)   LOVE FIELD means the airport owned and operated by the city,
including terminals, buildings, hangars, shops, roads, entrance roads, exit
roads, perimeter roads, service roads, driveways, ramps, taxiways, runways,
parking areas, loading areas, special use areas, and adjacent grounds, bounded
generally by Mockingbird Lane on the Southeast; Lemmon Avenue on the East and
North; Shorecrest Drive and Love Field Drive on the Northwest and West; and
Lipsitz, Brookfield, Denton Drive, Roanoke and Cedar Springs Road on the South.
      (6)   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE means a space adjacent to a curb, sidewalk,
or building for the exclusive use of vehicles loading and unloading passengers
arriving and departing from Love Field or Dallas Executive Airport. (Ord. Nos.
14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-132.   SPEED RESTRICTIONS; REASONABLE AND PRUDENT.
   A person commits an offense if he operates a vehicle upon a road, street,
entrance road, exit road, perimeter road, service road, driveway, ramp,
taxiway, runway, parking area, loading area, or other area restricted by the
traffic engineer to special uses, within Love Field or Dallas Executive Airport
at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then
existing, having regard to special, actual, or potential hazards, and a person
shall control the speed of the vehicle as necessary to avoid colliding with any
person, vehicle, or other object, in compliance with the legal duty of all
persons to use due care. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-133.   DESIGNATION OF ONE-WAY ROADS.
   (a)   The main entrance road leading from Mockingbird Lane to the Love Field
Terminal Building is designated a one-way road, and a person commits an offense
if he operates or drives a vehicle upon this road in any direction except
North, as indicated by signs placed in conspicuous places by the traffic
engineer.
   (b)   The main exit road leading from the Love Field Terminal Building to
Mockingbird Lane is designated a one-way road, and a person commits an offense
if he operates or drives a vehicle upon this road in any direction except
South, as indicated by signs placed in conspicuous places by the traffic
engineer.
   (c)   The traffic engineer may designate any other road, lane, service road,
perimeter road, driveway, ramp, or taxiway at Love Field or Dallas Executive
Airport as one-way for movement of vehicles by posting signs indicating
directions for vehicle movement. A person commits an offense if he operates or
drives a vehicle upon these roads, lanes, driveways, ramps, or taxiways in any
direction except the direction indicated by the signs. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-134.   ERECTION OF “DO NOT ENTER” SIGNS; OBEDIENCE TO “DO NOT ENTER”
SIGNS.
   The traffic engineer may erect signs lettered “do not enter” in prominent
letters at the entrance to any road, street, lane, driveway, ramp, taxiway,
runway, or area at Love Field or Dallas Executive Airport. A person commits an
offense if he operates or drives a vehicle past a “do not enter” sign; except,
this section does not apply to authorized vehicles, designated by the director
of aviation. Pedestrians shall obey the “do not enter” signs the same as
operators of vehicles, and pedestrians shall not enter any area of Love Field
or Dallas Executive Airport except by regularly provided entrances. (Ord. Nos.
14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-135.   ERECTION OF STOP SIGNS; OBEDIENCE TO STOP SIGNS.
   The traffic engineer shall, upon the basis of traffic investigations, erect
stop signs within Love Field and Dallas Executive Airport at intersections of
roads, lanes, driveways, ramps, taxiways, and runways, and at any place along
such roads, lanes, driveways, ramps, taxiways, or runways, where a traffic
investigation indicates a traffic hazard exists. A person commits an offense if
he operates or drives a vehicle past a stop sign without first having brought
the vehicle to a complete stop and ascertaining that forward movement can be
made with safety. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-136.   ERECTION OF TURN SIGNS; OBEDIENCE TO TURN SIGNS.
   The traffic engineer may erect “no turn,” “no right turn,” or “no left turn”
signs within Love Field and Dallas Executive Airport at intersections of roads,
lanes, ramps, driveways, taxiways, or runways. A person commits an offense if
he operates or drives a vehicle in such a manner as to execute a turn
prohibited by these signs. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-137.   AUTHORIZATION TO ESTABLISH NO PARKING, STOPPING, OR STANDING
SIGNS.
   The traffic engineer may establish no parking, no stopping, and no standing
zones within Love Field and Dallas Executive Airport adjacent to curbs,
sidewalks, or buildings, or near entrances to buildings, by posting signs
warning operators of vehicles of the restrictions of no parking, stopping, or
standing zones. A person commits an offense if he parks, stops, or stands a
vehicle in a zone in violation of the posted signs. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-138.   AUTHORIZATION TO ESTABLISH PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.
   The traffic engineer may establish passenger loading zones alongside curbs,
sidewalks, or buildings at Love Field and Dallas Executive Airport by
designating the zones with bright paint and lettering or by posting signs. A
person commits an offense if he parks a vehicle in a passenger loading zone or
stops or stands a vehicle in a passenger loading zone except to load or unload
passengers. A person shall not stop or stand a vehicle in a passenger loading
zone for a period longer than two minutes. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-139.   AUTHORIZATION TO ESTABLISH LOADING ZONES.
   The traffic engineer may establish loading zones for the loading and
unloading of material at Love Field and Dallas Executive Airport. A person
commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a vehicle in a loading zone
other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or for the pick-up and
loading of material. A person may stop or stand in a loading zone for the
purpose of loading or unloading materials for a period not to exceed 15 minutes
except on written permission from the director of aviation for a longer period,
limited to the time necessary to complete one undertaking. (Ord. Nos. 14584;
24859)
SEC. 28-140.   AUTHORIZATION TO ESTABLISH SPECIAL USE ZONES, CALL BOX STANDS,
ETC.
   (a)   The traffic engineer may designate areas or zones at Love Field and
Dallas Executive Airport in which only vehicles of a special kind or type are
authorized to park, stop, stand, or operate, by posting signs to that effect. A
person commits an offense if he operates or drives a vehicle, or parks, stops,
or stands a vehicle, in any such area or zone, unless the vehicle is the
special kind or type authorized to enter, park, stop, or stand in the area or
zone.
   (b)   The traffic engineer is authorized to establish taxicab call box
stands in areas or zones at Love Field and Dallas Executive Airport as the
traffic engineer deems necessary. The traffic engineer shall take into
consideration the need for stands by the holder and the convenience to the
general public. For purposes of this section, the term “holder” means any
person holding a taxicab franchise in the city or operating under an operating
contract. For the purposes of this section, the word “taxicab” includes
“limousine.” A holder desiring to establish a call box stand at Love Field or
Dallas Executive Airport shall make written application to the traffic
engineer. When a call box stand has been established, it shall be used solely
by the holder to whom it was granted and the holder’s agents and servants, and
no other holder shall use it. The signs designating the call box stand area
must indicate the holder for whom the call box stand was established.
   (c)   The director of aviation shall designate the periods of service and
the number of starters or other employees for the purposes of assisting in
loading or unloading passengers from taxicabs, receiving calls and dispatching
taxicabs, and soliciting passengers at call box stands at Love Field and Dallas
Executive Airport. Call box stands consist of that part of the sidewalk
immediately adjacent to, and of equal length with, the designated area and all
other areas specifically assigned for the use.
   (d)   The traffic engineer is authorized to establish public taxicab stands
in areas or zones at Love Field and Dallas Executive Airport as the traffic
engineer deems necessary. For the purposes of this section, the term “public
taxicab stand” means an area designated for the use of any holder who has not
been allocated a call box stand at the airport facility.
   (e)   The traffic engineer shall establish the capacity of the call box
stands and public taxicab stands. The number of taxicabs, limousines, or other
vehicles of the holder located or parked in a stand at any one time shall not
exceed the capacity so established.
   (f)   The chief of police and the director of aviation shall enforce the
provisions of this section. Definitions in Chapter 45 of this code apply to
this section except as specifically modified. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 17226; 19312;
24859)
SEC. 28-141.   DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC PARKING AREAS.
   The traffic engineer, upon approval of the director of aviation, shall
designate areas at Love Field and Dallas Executive Airport for the parking of
vehicles by the public and may post signs regulating the entrance, departure,
and manner of parking of vehicles. A person commits an offense if he operates,
parks, stops, or stands a vehicle in violation of the posted signs. (Ord. Nos.
14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-142.   VEHICLES NOT TO BLOCK ROADS, DRIVEWAYS, RAMPS, TAXIWAYS, OR
ENTRANCES.
   A person commits an offense if he parks, stops, or stands a vehicle in a
road, driveway, ramp, taxiway, parking area, or loading area or in front of the
entrance of any building at Love Field or Dallas Executive Airport in a manner
that blocks, obstructs, or impedes the free passage of vehicles or pedestrians.
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-143.   RESTRICTED AREAS.
   A person commits an offense if he operates, drives, parks, stops, or stands
a vehicle on a service road, ramp, perimeter road, taxiway, or runway at Love
Field or Dallas Executive Airport. This section does not apply to operators of
authorized vehicles. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-144.   REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
   Vehicles illegally parked or stopped in violation of this article shall be
removed or impounded in the same manner as provided for removal of illegally
parked or stopped vehicles on the public streets. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-145.   THROWING OF BOTTLES, ETC., ON STREETS, ROADS, ETC.
   A person commits an offense if he throws, deposits, or drops a bottle, can,
trash, debris, junk, or other object upon any of the parking areas, streets,
roads, or driveways at Love Field or Dallas Executive Airport. (Ord. Nos.
14584; 24859)
SEC. 28-146.   ISSUANCE OF TRAFFIC TICKETS OR NOTICES TO VIOLATORS OF THIS
ARTICLE.
   Officers of the police department shall issue traffic tickets or notices to
answer charges to violators of the provisions of this article in the same
manner as tickets and notices are issued for other offenses. (Ord. Nos. 14584;
24859)
ARTICLE XIII.
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
SEC. 28-147.   PROCEDURE UPON ARREST FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.
   When a person is arrested for violating a provision of this chapter and is
not immediately taken before a magistrate, the arresting officer shall take the
person’s name, address, the driver’s license number and registration of his
vehicle, if any, and issue to the person, in writing, on a form provided by the
city, a notice specifying the offense charged and commanding the person to
answer to the charge against him in not less than 10 days at the time and place
specified in the notice. The arresting officer shall have the arrested person
give his written promise to answer as specified in the notice, and upon
securing such written promise, shall release such person from custody. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-148.   GIVING FALSE NAME UPON ARREST FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATION.
   A person, upon being arrested by a police officer for a violation of a
traffic law or ordinance, shall give the arresting officer, as his name, his
true and correct name. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-149.   GIVING FALSE ADDRESS UPON ARREST FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATION.
   A person, upon being arrested by a police officer for a violation of a
traffic law or ordinance, shall give the arresting officer, as his address, his
true and correct address. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-150.   VIOLATION OF WRITTEN PROMISE TO APPEAR.
   (a)   Any person intentionally violating his written promise to appear in
court, given as provided in this article, is guilty of an offense regardless of
the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested.
   (b)   A written promise to appear in court, given as provided in this
article, may be complied with by an appearance of counsel. (Ord. Nos. 14584;
19963)
SEC. 28-151.   PROCEDURE UPON FAILURE OF TRAFFIC VIOLATOR TO APPEAR.
   If the violator fails to appear within the time designated in the notice,
the clerk of the municipal court shall proceed to arrest the violator and bring
him before the municipal court. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-152.   PAYMENT OF FINES; WHEN PLEADING GUILTY.
   A person who has received a notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge
under this chapter may within the time specified in the notice appear at the
office of the clerk of the municipal court and answer the charge set forth in
such notice by paying a prescribed fine, and in writing, pleading guilty to the
charge, waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to the clerk of
the municipal court to make the plea and pay the fine in court. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-153.   DISPOSITION OF FINES AND FORFEITURES.
   All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of
bond of any person charged with a violation of a provision of this chapter
shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general fund. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-154.   AUTHORITY TO ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT FOR VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER.
   Any police officer is authorized to arrest without warrant any person found
committing a violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-155.   RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIV.
FREEWAY REGULATIONS.
SEC. 28-156.   VEHICULAR ACCESS TO ENUMERATED STREETS TO BE DESIGNATED.
   Vehicular access to and from the main traveled portion of the following
described streets or freeways must be designated by the traffic engineer in
accordance with the approved traffic and safety patterns of the city:
STREET EXTENT
STREET                               EXTENT
Central Expressway                   Live Oak Street, north to the city limits,
                                     and Park Row to Overton Road
                                     Central Expressway (north) at
Central Expressway (Elevated Bypass) approximately Woodall Rodgers Freeway to
                                     Central Expressway (south) at
                                     approximately Grand Avenue
C. F. Hawn Freeway                   All portions within the city
John W. Carpenter Freeway            All portions within the city
Julius Schepps Freeway               All portions within the city
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway            All portions within the city
Marvin D. Love Freeway               All portions within the city
R. L. Thornton Freeway               All portions within the city
Stemmons Freeway                     All portions within the city
Walton Walker Boulevard              Stemmons Freeway to Irving, Texas, city
                                     limits
 
(Ord. Nos. 14585; 15194; 22026; 28424)
SEC. 28-157.   PEDESTRIANS PROHIBITED FROM CROSSING OR WALKING ON OR ALONG
CERTAIN STREETS OR FREEWAYS.
   (a)   A pedestrian shall not cross or walk on or along the following streets
or freeways except at those locations where overpasses and underpasses are
provided for pedestrian crossing:
STREET EXTENT
STREET                               EXTENT
Central Expressway                   Live Oak Street, north to the city limits;
                                     and Park Row to Overton Road
Central Expressway (Elevated Bypass) All portions within the city
C. F. Hawn Freeway                   All portions within the city
Interstate Highway 30                All portions within the city
John W. Carpenter Freeway            All portions within the city
Julius Schepps Freeway               All portions within the city
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway            All portions within the city
Marvin D. Love Freeway               All portions within the city
R. L. Thornton Freeway               All portions within the city
Stemmons Freeway                     All portions within the city
                                     State Highway Spur 408, north to the city
Walker Boulevard                     limits; and Stemmons Freeway, south to the
                                     city limits
 
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the
pedestrian was walking on or along the street or freeway due to an emergency
and only until he could safely leave that street or freeway. (Ord. Nos. 14585;
15194; 17135)
SEC. 28-158.   HITCHHIKING PROHIBITED ON FREEWAYS.
   A person commits an offense if he requests or solicits, by gesture or
otherwise, a ride from the operator of any vehicle traveling on any of the
following streets or highways, or if, as the operator of a vehicle traveling on
any of the following streets or highways, he stops to give a ride to another
person:
STREET EXTENT
STREET                               EXTENT
Central Expressway                   Live Oak Street, north to the city limits,
                                     and Park Row to Overton Road
                                     Central Expressway (north) at
Central Expressway (Elevated Bypass) approximately Woodall Rodgers Freeway to
                                     Central Expressway (south) at
                                     approximately Grand Avenue
C. F. Hawn Freeway                   All portions within the city
John W. Carpenter Freeway            All portions within the city
Julius Schepps Freeway               All portions within the city
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway            All portions within the city
Marvin D. Love Freeway               All portions within the city
R. L. Thornton Freeway               All portions within the city
Stemmons Freeway                     All portions within the city
Walton Walker Boulevard              Stemmons Freeway to Irving, Texas, city
                                     limits
 
(Ord. Nos. 14585; 15194)
SEC. 28-158.1.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 29543)
SEC. 28-159.   ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE, AND PUSHCARTS
PROHIBITED FROM USING ENUMERATED STREETS.
   A person commits an offense if he operates, drives, or permits to be driven
an animal-drawn vehicle, bicycle, other device propelled wholly or in part by
human power, or a motor driven cycle, other than an electric bicycle, as
defined in Section 664.001 of the Texas Transportation Code, on any of the
following described streets or freeways:
STREET EXTENT
STREET                               EXTENT
Central Expressway                   Live Oak Street, north to the city limits,
                                     and Park Row to Overton Road
                                     Central Expressway (north) at
Central Expressway (Elevated Bypass) approximately Woodall Rodgers Freeway to
                                     Central Expressway (south) at
                                     approximately Grand Avenue
C. F. Hawn Freeway                   All portions within the city
John W. Carpenter Freeway            All portions within the city
Julius Schepps Freeway               All portions within the city
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway            All portions within the city
Marvin D. Love Freeway               All portions within the city
R. L. Thornton Freeway               All portions within the city
Stemmons Freeway                     All portions within the city
Walton Walker Boulevard              Stemmons Freeway to Irving, Texas, city
                                     limits
 
(Ord. Nos. 14585; 15194; 31403)
SEC. 28-159.1.   DRIVERS PROHIBITED FROM STOPPING ON ENUMERATED STREETS;
DEFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he stops, parks or stands a vehicle on
the main traveled portion of the roadway of the following described streets or
freeways:
STREET EXTENT
STREET                               EXTENT
Central Expressway                   Live Oak Street, north to the city limits,
                                     and Park Row to Overton Road
                                     Central Expressway (north) at
Central Expressway (Elevated Bypass) approximately Woodall Rodgers Freeway to
                                     Central Expressway (south) at
                                     approximately Grand Avenue
C. F. Hawn Freeway                   All portions within the city
John W. Carpenter Freeway            All portions within the city
Julius Schepps Freeway               All portions within the city
Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway            All portions within the city
Marvin D. Love Freeway               All portions within the city
R. L. Thornton Freeway               All portions within the city
Stemmons Freeway                     All portions within the city
Walton Walker Boulevard              Stemmons Freeway to Irving, Texas, city
                                     limits
 
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if such stopping,
parking or standing is necessary for safe operation, or for compliance with
law, or the vehicle is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it
is impossible to avoid stopping on the main traveled portion of the roadway.
(Ord. Nos. 14585; 15194)
ARTICLE XV.
MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORTS FOR HIRE.
SEC. 28-160.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   (a)   MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORT GUIDE means a person engaged in the business of
furnishing a private motor vehicle escort for hire who personally escorts or
guides a funeral cortege or overwidth, overlength, or overheight motor vehicle
or an employee of a person engaged in the business of furnishing private motor
vehicle escort service for hire.
   (b)   OFFICIAL POLICE OFFICER’S BADGE means a badge of the size, type and
design approved by Section
37-15 for the use of regular police officers.
   (c)   PRIVATE MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORT AGENCY means a person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business of furnishing private motor vehicle escorts
for hire, which employs one or more persons as employees, assistants, clerks or
motor vehicle escort guides. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-161.   ESCORT LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A person commits an offense if he engages in the business of furnishing a
private motor vehicle escort for hire within the city, without first obtaining
an escort license; provided, that persons engaged in the business who are
employed by a duly licensed private motor vehicle escort agency shall not be
required to be individually licensed. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-162.   SAME - MINIMUM AGE OF PERSON OBTAINING.
   A person must be 18 years of age to be eligible for an escort license to
engage in the business of furnishing private motor vehicle escorts. A person
licensed to engage in the business of furnishing motor vehicle escort service
for hire shall not employ as an escort guide, a person under 18 years of age.
(Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-163.   SAME - APPLICATION; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   A person desiring to conduct a private motor vehicle escort agency or
business in the city shall file with the chief of police a written application
on a form provided for the purpose, duly signed and verified, which shall state
the full name, age, and residence of the licensee, shall specify the trade name
and address or location from which the business or agency will operate and for
which the escort license is desired, and other relevant facts as may be
required by the chief of police. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-164.   SAME - INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE.
   The chief of police shall make or cause to be made an investigation to
determine the qualifications of each applicant for an escort license, and based
upon those findings, the chief of police shall approve or disapprove issuance
of an escort license to engage in the business of conducting private motor
vehicle escorts. Upon the approval of issuance of an escort license, the
applicant shall present the approved application to the special collections
division of the water utilities department and, upon the payment of the proper
license fee, the special collections division shall issue the proper license
certificate. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 22026; 27697)
SEC. 28-165.   SAME - REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW.
   The chief of police shall refuse to approve issuance or renewal of an escort
license for any one or more of the following reasons:
   (a)   conviction of applicant or licensee for a violation of this article or
for a felony within the preceding five years;
   (b)   the making of a false statement as to a material matter in an
application for an escort license or renewal;
   (c)   revocation of a license, pursuant to this article, of the applicant or
any proprietor, partner or corporate officer therein, within one year preceding
application;
   (d)   failure of applicant to comply with the insurance requirements of this
article. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-166.   SAME - REVOCATION.
   (a)   An escort license shall be revoked by the chief of police for any one
or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   the making of a false statement as to a material matter in an
application for a license, renewal, or a hearing concerning the license;
      (2)   conviction of the licensee of a violation of this article or for a
felony;
      (3)   failure of licensee to comply with the insurance requirements of
this article.
   (b)   Written notice of revocation shall be sent by the chief of police to
the licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the
reasons for the revocation. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-167.   SAME - APPEAL.
   If the chief of police refuses to issue a license to an applicant or revokes
the license of a licensee, the action of the chief of police shall be final
unless the applicant or licensee files an appeal with a permit and license
appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 18200)
SEC. 28-168.   SAME - INSURANCE.
   (a)   Before an escort license is issued to the owner or operator of a
private motor vehicle escort agency, or before the renewal of an escort license
is granted, the applicant shall file with the city secretary a standard policy
of public liability and property damage insurance, to be executed by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state and performable in the
county, which is approved by the city manager, insuring the general public
against loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the
operation of the motor vehicle escort service.
   (b)   The insurance policy shall insure each vehicle operated by the motor
vehicle escort agency and shall have limits of not less than $100,000 for
injury to one person, $300,000 for injuries to two or more persons resulting
from one accident, and $50,000 for damage to property resulting from one
accident. The insurance shall be for the protection of passengers riding in a
funeral cortege being escorted and for protection of the public, but not for
personal injuries sustained by the servants, agents or employees of the motor
vehicle escort agency. The policy of insurance shall be for a period of one
year and the date of the policy shall coincide with the date of the license
issued under this article and shall contain a provision for a continuing
liability up to the full amount, notwithstanding any recovery thereon.
   (c)   If the chief of police determines after a hearing, that a licensee’s
policy of insurance provides less protection to the public than when originally
filed, he shall require a new or an additional policy to bring the protection
of the insurance to its original amount, and the licensee shall, within 10 days
after receiving written notice of this requirement, provide the required new or
additional policy. The license of a licensee shall be revoked by the chief of
police upon the licensee’s failure to provide the required policy.
   (d)   If an insurer desires to be released from a policy required by this
section, he may give written notice to the chief of police by filing the notice
with the city secretary at least 30 days before liability is to be released,
and the chief of police shall authorize the city secretary by personal
delivery, or by mail, to give written notice to the licensee with the demand
that the licensee shall furnish new insurance by the expiration of a 10 day
period.
   (e)   If a policy is cancelled upon the request of the insurer and no new
policy is filed by the licensee before the cancellation of the original
insurance, then the license to operate a motor vehicle escort service issued to
the licensee shall be revoked. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-169.   SAME - ONE YEAR TERM.
   An escort license is valid for a term of one year unless revoked. (Ord.
14584)
SEC. 28-170.   ESCORT LICENSE - FEE; TRANSFERABILITY.
   The annual fee for an escort license is $160, to be paid before the license
is issued. An escort license is not transferable or assignable. No refund of
fees will be made. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 18411; 22206)
SEC. 28-171.   SAME - POSTING.
   Immediately upon the receipt of an escort license issued by the city, the
licensee named shall post the license and at all times display the license in a
conspicuous place in the office or location given as the business address in
the application. A licensee shall not post the license or permit the license to
be posted upon premises other than those described in the application. A person
commits an offense if he alters, defaces or destroys a valid escort license.
(Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-172.   FUNCTIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The police department shall have the following functions, powers and duties:
   (a)   To investigate qualifications of all applicants.
   (b)   To investigate and aid in the prosecution of all violations of this
article.
   (c)   To inspect and approve or disapprove motor vehicle equipment used as
escort vehicles.
   (d)   To inspect and approve or disapprove the equipment and uniform worn by
escort officers. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-173.   CHAUFFEUR’S LICENSE - REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   A person commits an offense if he operates a motor vehicle as an escort for
hire upon the streets of the city without obtaining an escort chauffeur’s
license issued by the chief of police. Application for an escort chauffeur’s
license shall be made to the chief of police upon blanks to be furnished by the
chief of police, giving the name, age, present address, place and address of
employment during the past two years, with the reasons for leaving employment,
if any. The applicant shall submit a recent photograph of himself with the
application and shall possess and show a valid Texas motor vehicle operator’s
license with motorcycle endorsement. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-174.   SAME - ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
   (a)   When an application for an escort chauffeur’s license or renewal has
been filed with the chief of police in proper form, the chief of police shall,
within a period of 30 days from the date of filing, approve or deny the
application. If the application is denied, the chief of police shall send to
the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement
setting forth the reasons for denial.
   (b)   The chief of police shall refuse to approve issuance or renewal of an
escort chauffeur’s license for any one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   the making of a false statement as to a material matter in an
application for a license, license renewal, or in a hearing concerning the
license;
      (2)   conviction of applicant or licensee for a violation of a provision
of this article or for a felony or an offense involving theft, fraud, or
unlawfully carrying a weapon within the preceding five years;
      (3)   revocation of an escort chauffeur’s license of the applicant within
five years preceding application;
      (4)   conviction of the licensee or applicant of four moving traffic
violations within a 12 month period or of driving while intoxicated within the
preceding five years;
      (5)   failure of applicant to present a valid Texas motor vehicle
operator’s license with motorcycle endorsement. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-175.   SAME - REVOCATION.
   (a)   The chief of police shall revoke an escort chauffeur’s license for one
or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   the making of a false statement as to a material matter in an
application for a license, license renewal, or in a hearing concerning the
license;
      (2)   conviction of the licensee for a violation of a provision of this
article or for a felony or an offense involving violence, theft, fraud,
deception, dishonesty, or unlawfully carrying a weapon;
      (3)   conviction, during the term, of the licensee of four moving traffic
violations, or of driving while intoxicated;
      (4)   failure of licensee to maintain a valid Texas motor vehicle
operator’s license with motorcycle endorsement.
   (b)   Written notice of revocation shall be sent by the chief of police to
the licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the
reasons for the revocation. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-176.   SAME - APPEAL FROM REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW; FROM DECISION TO
REVOKE.
   If the chief of police refuses to issue a license to an applicant or revokes
the license of a licensee, this action shall be final unless the licensee files
an appeal with a permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 18200)
SEC. 28-177.   SAME - FEE, FINGERPRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPH; NONTRANSFERABLE.
   After the application for an escort chauffeur’s license has been approved,
and the applicant has submitted to fingerprinting by the police department, the
director of finance of the city shall issue an escort chauffeur’s license to
the applicant upon payment of a fee of $50. An escort chauffeur’s license shall
expire one year from the date of issuance and shall not be transferable;
however, the holder may use the same license if he changes employment from one
motor vehicle escort agency to another. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 18411)
SEC. 28-178.   SAME - TO BE CARRIED ON PERSON.
   A person engaged in furnishing private motor vehicle escort service for hire
shall carry his escort chauffeur’s license on his person and shall show it to
any city police officer upon demand. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-179.   EMPLOYMENT OF QUALIFIED OPERATORS RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   The owner of a private motor vehicle escort agency shall employ as escort
guides only those persons who are physically and mentally capable to operate a
motorcycle for hire and who are 18 years of age or over. It shall be the
responsibility of the private motor vehicle escort agency to select competent
operators for escort vehicles. An owner of an escort agency shall not employ
any person as a motor vehicle escort guide who does not hold a valid Texas
operator’s license with motorcycle endorsement and an escort chauffeur’s
license. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-180.   POLICE OFFICERS MAY FURNISH ESCORTS.
   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit regularly
employed officers or deputies of the department of public safety, county
sheriff, or police department from escorting funeral corteges or oversized,
overlength, or overwidth vehicles upon the streets and roadways of the city,
when assigned as an official duty by their respective departments. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-181.   ESCORTS FOR FUNERAL CORTEGE NOT REQUIRED.
   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as requiring funeral
directors or any other person conducting funerals to contract, hire, or employ
a private motor vehicle escort service to guide or escort a funeral cortege in
the city. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-182.   REQUIREMENTS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN ESCORT SERVICE.
   A funeral escort guide, engaged in furnishing an escort, must use either a
two-wheel or three-wheel motorcycle which is in good mechanical condition and
equipped with two lamps that display an amber or a blue light visible from
directly in front of the center of the motorcycle. These lamps shall be in
addition to those required by state law. An escort vehicle shall not be
equipped with a siren. Decals, placards, signs, and insignias which resemble
official police officer’s badges or which bear the words “Police”, “Official”,
or “Officer” shall not be used on the motorcycles nor shall the motorcycles be
painted a color resembling the color of motorcycles used by the city police
department. No additional equipment may be added after inspection by the police
department unless the motorcycle is reinspected and approved before use. A
motor vehicle used in performing escort services shall be subject to inspection
at any time by the chief of police or his authorized representative. (Ord. Nos.
14584; 17640; 17817)
SEC. 28-183.   FUNERAL ESCORT GUIDES; UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   A funeral escort guide shall wear a uniform approved by the chief of police.
The uniform shall not resemble in pattern, design, or color that worn by the
regular police officers of the city. Funeral escort guides may wear a badge and
cap wreath if they desire; provided, that the badge or wreath does not resemble
the official police officer’s badge or bear the words “Police” or “Officer”.
Noncommissioned officers’ stripes or commissioned officers’ bars or insignia
denoting a rank shall not be worn on the uniform. Funeral escort guides shall
not wear a holster, handcuff case or cartridge case. A whistle or flash light
baton may be used at the discretion of the escort guide. An escort guide shall
not have on his person or on or about his escort vehicle any weapon declared to
be unlawful by the statutes of the state; provided, however, that peace
officers of the city, county, and the state, who may be licensed as escort
guides may carry authorized weapons concealed on or about their person or
escort vehicle while engaged as a motor vehicle escort guide. (Ord. 14584)
SEC. 28-184.   OPERATING PROCEDURES.
   (a)   A motor vehicle escort guide shall not engage in a funeral escort
service other than that of escorting a funeral procession, consisting of the
hearse and cortege from the funeral home, the home of the deceased, or the home
of the deceased’s family to the place of service and from the place of service
to the place of interment. If a funeral procession enters a roadway,
expressway, or freeway which has a minimum posted speed limit, the motor
vehicle escort guide shall cease the escort before the procession enters the
roadway, expressway or freeway and resume the escort after the procession exits
the roadway, expressway, or freeway.
   (b)   A motor vehicle escort guide may escort overheight, overlength, or
overwidth vehicles or loads as defined in the State Traffic Code, but only
after the chief of police has been notified of each individual escort. The
chief of police shall have the authority to designate the route and time of the
escort.
   (c)   A licensed motor vehicle escort guide is authorized to lead funeral
processions within the city when the procession has been properly identified by
the display of a pennant upon the outside of the lead vehicle and the hearse,
and all other vehicles have their headlights turned on.
   (d)   All motor vehicles in an escorted funeral procession which have been
properly designated shall have the right of way over all other vehicles, except
fire apparatus, ambulances, and police vehicles at any roadway intersection
within the city, and the procession may be escorted through stop signs or
signalized intersections without stopping, but the drivers of the motor
vehicles shall exercise due regard for the safety of all approaching vehicles,
and funeral processions being escorted shall be subject at all times to the
control of police officers of the city. This subsection shall not apply to
overheight, overlength, or overwidth vehicles or loads as defined in the State
Traffic Code, which shall obey all traffic laws and traffic control devices.
   (e)   Funeral processions shall travel as closely to the right edge of the
roadway as practical and at a safe and prudent speed.
   (f)   A funeral procession shall not enter or travel upon any roadway,
expressway, or freeway which has a minimum posted speed limit between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. This subsection does not apply on a legal holiday. The
funeral procession shall obey all traffic laws while on a roadway, expressway,
or freeway which has a minimum posted speed limit.
   (g)   Funeral processions shall not proceed through the downtown business
district bordered by San Jacinto Street on the north, Wood Street on the south,
Hawkins Street on the east and Market Street on the west.
   (h)   Funeral escort guides shall not stop traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or force or direct traffic to move off the roadway; however,
oncoming traffic may be stopped at intersections and other places to assist the
cortege in making left turns. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 15648)
SEC. 28-185.   ADVERTISEMENTS; LIMITATIONS.
   A person engaged in the business of furnishing private motor vehicle escorts
for hire or an employee of a private motor vehicle escort agency shall not
distribute, present, or give away cards, handbills, or printed matter of any
kind which bear the words “Police”, “Official,” or “Officer” in conjunction
with advertising an escort service. Nor shall any advertisement state, imply,
or misrepresent that a private motor vehicle escort service is required by the
police department, the city or by any of its ordinances. (Ord. 14584)
ARTICLE XVI.
PARADES.
SEC. 28-186.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   APPLICANT means a person who has filed a written application for a
parade permit.
      (2)   CHIEF OF POLICE means the chief of police for the city of Dallas,
and his designated agent.
      (3)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (4)   PARADE means the assembly of three or more persons whose gathering
is for the common design and purpose of travelling or marching in procession
from one location to any other location to express feelings and beliefs on
current political, religious, or social issues.
      (5)   PARADE PERMIT means written approval from the chief of police for a
parade or procession.
      (6)   PERMITTEE means the person to whom a parade permit is granted
pursuant to this article.
      (7)   PERSON means any individual, assumed named entity, partnership,
association, corporation or organization.
      (8)   SIDEWALK means that portion of a street intended for the use of
pedestrians that is located between the curb lines, or lateral lines of a
roadway, and the adjacent property lines.
      (9)   STREET means the entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained, when any part is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 19869)
SEC. 28-187.   PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he engages in, participates in, aids,
or commences a pedestrian parade or vehicular parade, or a combination of both,
upon the streets of the city without making written application for and
receiving a parade permit from the chief of police.
   (b)   Application for a parade permit for a parade of more than 25 persons
or more than three motor vehicles shall be made not less than five days,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, prior to the date and time of
the commencement of the parade. Application for a parade permit for a parade of
25 persons or less and three motor vehicles or less shall be made not less than
48 hours prior to the time of the commencement of the parade.
   (c)   No parade permit shall be required under this article for the
following:
      (1)   The armed forces of the United States of America, the military
forces of the State of Texas, and the forces of the police and fire departments
acting within the scope of their duties.
      (2)   A funeral procession proceeding by vehicle under the most
reasonable route from a funeral home, church, or residence of a deceased to the
place of service or place of interment.
      (3)   A peaceful demonstration at a fixed location which is not a street.
      (4)   A sidewalk procession which observes and complies with traffic
regulations and traffic control devices, using that portion of a sidewalk
nearest the street, but at no time using more than one-half of the sidewalk.
      (5)   A special event parade, as defined in Section
42A-1(7) of this code, for which a special event permit has been issued under
Chapter 42A of this code. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 19869)
SEC. 28-188.   APPLICATION FOR PARADE PERMIT; FEE.
   (a)   The application for a parade permit shall contain the following
information and be signed by the applicant and sworn to before an officer
authorized to administer oaths:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and of any
other person, organization, firm, or corporation on whose behalf the
application is made.
      (2)   The date and time of day requested for the parade.
      (3)   The parade’s commencement time, the specific route to be travelled,
and the starting and termination points.
      (4)   The estimated number of persons to participate in the parade and
the estimated number of animals that will be used.
      (5)   The estimated number, if any, of animals and riders, animal-drawn
vehicles, floats, motor vehicles, motorized displays, and marching units or
organizations such as bands, color guards, and drill teams.
   (b)   An application for a parade permit must be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee of $25. The chief of police may waive the
application fee if he finds, in response to an affidavit by the applicant, that
the applicant is unable to pay the application fee because of indigence. (Ord.
Nos. 14584; 19869)
SEC. 28-189.   ISSUANCE OF PARADE PERMIT.
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a parade permit, the chief of
police shall furnish to the applicant within three days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays, appropriate approval or denial of the permit.
   (b)   Should the application for a parade permit reveal that the parade
route requested will interfere with the orderly flow of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, the chief of police shall have authority to establish a
reasonable alternate route and regulate the width of the parade. (Ord. Nos.
14584; 19869)
SEC. 28-190.   DENIAL OF PARADE PERMIT.
   The chief of police shall deny a parade permit when the parade for which the
permit is requested would:
      (1)   cross or use as a route, or as part of a route, any of the
following:
         (A)   Central Expressway
         (B)   Central Expressway (Elevated Bypass)
         (C)   Pearl Expressway
         (D)   C. F. Hawn Freeway
         (E)   John W. Carpenter Freeway
         (F)   Julius Schepps Freeway
         (G)   Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway
         (H)   Marvin D. Love Freeway
         (I)   R. L. Thornton Freeway
         (J)   Stemmons Freeway
         (K)   Walton Walker Boulevard
         (L)   Any street on which a parking ban is imposed, during the
enumerated hours of the parking ban;
   (2)   begin during, or within two hours after the end of, a parade for which
a permit has been granted and follow a route that passes within one-half mile
of any point of the route of the parade for which a permit has been granted; or
   (3)   unreasonably disrupt the orderly flow of traffic and no reasonable
means of rerouting traffic or otherwise meeting traffic needs is available.
(Ord. Nos. 14584; 15194; 19869)
SEC. 28-191.   REVOCATION OF PARADE PERMIT.
   The chief of police shall revoke a parade permit if:
      (1)   the parade fails to begin within 30 minutes of the appointed time
of commencement; or
      (2)   the information contained in the application for a parade permit is
found to be false in any material detail. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 19869)
SEC. 28-192.   APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PARADE PERMIT.
   If the chief of police denies or revokes a parade permit, this action shall
be final unless the applicant or permittee shall, within two days after the
receipt of notice of the denial or revocation, file with the city manager a
written appeal. The city manager shall, within 24 hours after the appeal is
filed, consider all the evidence in support of or against the action appealed
and render a decision either sustaining or reversing the denial or revocation.
The decision of the city manager shall be final. (Ord. Nos. 14584; 19869)
ARTICLE XVII.
STREETCAR REGULATIONS.
SEC. 28-193.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   (1)   LOADING AND UNLOADING means the transfer of persons or property
between a vehicle or streetcar and the curb, or between a vehicle or streetcar
and a nearby building.
   (2)   MOTORMAN means an employee of a streetcar company who controls the
movement of a streetcar.
   (3)   STREETCAR means a vehicle used for transporting persons or property
that is operated upon rails within a public right-of-way and can be either
self-powered or powered by overhead electrical cables. A trolley is considered
a streetcar for the purposes of this chapter.
   (4)   STREETCAR COMPANY means any person licensed by the city to operate a
streetcar within the city.
   (5)   STREETCAR STOP means an area in the public right-of-way reserved for
the exclusive use of streetcars during the loading or unloading of passengers
or property.
   (6)   STREET RAILROAD means any rail or appurtenance located within a public
right-of-way that is authorized by the city to be used for streetcars. (Ord.
Nos. 20329; 32488)
SEC. 28-194.   AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC WORKS.
   The director of transportation and public works shall administer and enforce
this article and otherwise exercise direction and control over the operation of
all streetcars in the city in accordance with city ordinances, the city
charter, and other applicable law and with any license issued to a streetcar
company by the city. (Ord. Nos. 20329; 22026; 28424; 30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 28-195.   OPERATION OF STREETCARS AND OTHER VEHICLES.
   (a)   When overtaking and passing on the right side of a streetcar that is
approaching or stopped at a designated streetcar stop, a driver of a vehicle
shall stop at least five feet from the rear of the streetcar and proceed only
when safe, allowing pedestrians the right- of-way.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks any vehicle
other than a streetcar at a designated streetcar stop or between the right curb
and a designated streetcar stop.
   (c)   An operator of a streetcar may not stop the streetcar at any location
other than a designated streetcar stop, except in an emergency or when
complying with other traffic regulations. Streetcar passengers shall be loaded
and unloaded only at a designated streetcar stop. (Ord. 20329)
SEC. 28-196.   UNLAWFUL CONDUCT ON OR NEAR A STREETCAR.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   boards, alights, clings to the outside of, or otherwise makes or
attempts to make unsafe contact with a moving streetcar; or
      (2)   rides upon any portion of a streetcar not designated or intended
for the use of passengers.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the person
was an employee of the streetcar company in the performance of official duties.
(Ord. 20329)
SEC. 28-197.   SMOKING, EATING, AND DRINKING PROHIBITED ON A STREETCAR.
   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   smokes or possesses any burning tobacco, weed, or other plant
product on any streetcar;
      (2)   consumes an alcoholic beverage, illegal drug, or other intoxicating
substance, or possesses any open container of such substance, on any streetcar;
      (3)   consumes any food product, either solid or liquid, on any streetcar
while it is being operated in regularly scheduled service to the general
public. (Ord. 20329)
SEC. 28-198.   OBSTRUCTING TRACKS; DEFACING OR DISTURBING PROPERTY.
   A person commits an offense if, without the consent of the owner or
designated agent of a streetcar company, he:
      (1)   encumbers or obstructs, or throws, places, or leaves any impediment
upon, any street railroad within the city; or
      (2)   defaces, displaces, or disturbs in any manner any car, coach,
switch, turntable, track, pole, wire, building, or other property or equipment
of a street railroad or streetcar company. (Ord. 20329)
SEC. 28-199.   POLICE ASSISTANCE REQUIRED.
   Whenever a passenger or other person presents a threat to the safety of the
motorman or any passenger, a streetcar shall be stopped at the next designated
streetcar stop and the police summoned. (Ord. 20329)
ARTICLE XVIII.
LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT SYSTEM.
SEC. 28-200.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   (1)   DART means Dallas Area Rapid Transit.
   (2)   FIXED GUIDEWAY means the supporting physical structure in or upon
which light rail vehicles travel, including, but not limited to, the trackway
and associated structures and equipment required for the operation of the light
rail transit system.
   (3)   LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT STATION means an area reserved for the exclusive
use of the light rail transit system for the purpose of loading and unloading
passengers or property.
   (4)   LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT SYSTEM means a public transportation system
operated by DART that consists of conventional rail technology using an
overhead power source and that is capable of running at grade, on an aerial
guideway, or in a subway, as warranted.
   (5)   LIGHT RAIL VEHICLE means an electrically- propelled passenger-carrying
rail vehicle that operates on the fixed guideway of the light rail transit
system.
   (6)   LOADING AND UNLOADING means the transfer of persons or property
between a light rail vehicle and a transit station.
   (7)   TRANSIT CORRIDOR means the light rail transit system alignment known
as the South Oak Cliff Line that operates within the center median of Lancaster
Road from approximately 800 feet north of Illinois Avenue to Ledbetter Drive,
after which point it crosses the southbound lane of Lancaster Road and ends at
the light rail transit station located on the southwest corner of the
intersection of Lancaster Road and Ledbetter Drive.
   (8)   TRANSITWAY MALL means the light rail transit system alignment in the
central business district that is located within the right-of-way lines of the
following described streets:
      (A)   Hawkins Street from approximately 150 feet north of Routh Street to
Bryan Street;
      (B)   Bryan Street from Hawkins Street to Akard Street; and
      (C)   Pacific Avenue from Akard Street to approximately 50 feet west of
Houston Street.
   (9)   SAFETY QUADRANT means that portion of each corner lot located within
or abutting the transitway mall, whether composed of public or private property
or both, that is contained within an area forming a quadrant of a circle having
a 30-foot radius when measured from the point of intersection of adjacent
street curb lines or, if there are not street curbs, what would be the normal
street curb lines. (Ord. 22763)
SEC. 28-201.   OPERATION OF VEHICLES IN THE TRANSITWAY MALL AND TRANSIT
CORRIDOR.
   (a)   The transitway mall and the transit corridor are for the exclusive use
of light rail vehicles. The right-of-way on each side of the transit corridor
will be used for the operation of other vehicles.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   stops, stands, or parks any vehicle, other than a light rail
vehicle, within the transitway mall or transit corridor; or
      (2)   operates any vehicle, other than a light rail transit vehicle, in
any area within the transitway mall or transit corridor.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this
section that the vehicle was:
      (1)   being operated by an employee of the city or DART in the
performance of official duties;
      (2)   an authorized emergency vehicle;
      (3)   a department of transportation and public works, maintenance,
utility, or service vehicle authorized by the city and DART to operate within
the transit mall or transit corridor; or
      (4)   being operated in compliance with a valid permit issued by the city
and approved by DART.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(2) of this section
that the vehicle was:
      (1)   crossing the transitway mall or transit corridor on a street
designated for through traffic; or
      (2)   entering or exiting a private parking area with direct ingress or
egress to or from the transitway mall, if the vehicle:
         (A)   was being operated in compliance with all speed, directional,
and traffic control signs, devices, laws, and regulations applicable to the
transitway mall; and
         (B)   at no time was operated on or across the fixed guideway of the
transitway mall. (Ord. Nos. 22763; 30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 28-202.   TRANSITWAY MALL SAFETY QUADRANTS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, within a safety quadrant, he:
      (1)   erects, places, or maintains any structure, berm, plant life, or
other item; or
      (2)   sells, offers for sale, or distributes any goods or services,
including, but not limited to, food, drinks, flowers, plants, tickets,
souvenirs, or handbills.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(1) that the item
was:
      (1)   a directional, warning, traffic control, or other official sign or
device authorized under city, state, or federal law; or
      (2)   street hardware authorized by the city and DART, including, but not
limited to, street lights, benches, garbage receptacles, and other existing and
planned transitway mall design elements. (Ord. 22763)
ARTICLE XIX.
SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT STREET RACES AND RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITIONS.
Division 1. Definitions.
SEC. 28-203. DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   (1)   DAYS means calendar days including weekends and holidays.
   (2)   IMMEDIATE FAMILY means spouse, father, mother, sister, or brother by
consanguinity or affinity.
   (3)   LEGAL OWNER means a person who has a property interest in or title to
a motor vehicle as defined in Section 541.001 of the Texas Transportation Code,
as amended.
   (4)   OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY means any public or private off-street
parking area open for use by the public for parking vehicles, other than a
private residential property or the parking area of a garage or parking lot for
which a charge is made for the storing or parking of vehicles.
   (5)   PREPARATIONS for a street race or reckless driving exhibition include,
but are not limited to, any of the following acts knowingly done for the
purpose of causing a street race or reckless driving exhibition:
      (A)   one or more motor vehicles and persons at a predetermined location
on a public street, highway, or off-street parking facility;
      (B)   one or more persons gathered on, or adjacent to, a public street or
highway;
      (C)   one or more persons gathered in an off-street parking facility;
      (D)   one or more persons impeding the free public use of a public
street, highway, or off-street parking facility by acts, words, or physical
barriers;
      (E)   one or more motor vehicles lined up on a public street, highway, or
off-street parking facility with motors running, impeding the free public use
of a public street, highway, or off-street parking facility or being a physical
barrier;
      (F)   one or more drivers revving a motor vehicle's engine or causing the
motor vehicle's tires to spin; or
      (G)   a person is standing or sitting in a location to act as a race
starter.
   (6)   RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITION means any exhibition of reckless driving
as defined in Section 545.401 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
   (7)   REGISTERED OWNER means a person registered by the Texas Department of
Motor Vehicles.
   (8)   SPECTATOR means any person who is present at a street race, reckless
driving exhibition, or the site of the preparations for either of these events,
when such presence is the result of an affirmative choice for the purpose of
viewing, observing, watching, betting, gambling, recording, transmitting, or
witnessing the event as it progresses.
   (9)   STREET RACE means any motor vehicle race, speed contest, drag race,
acceleration contest, or test of physical endurance of the operator of a motor
vehicle as defined in Section 545.420 of the Texas Transportation Code, as
amended. (Ord. 31540)
Division 2. Spectators Prohibited at Street Races and Reckless Driving
Exhibitions.
SEC. 28-204. SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT STREET RACES AND RECKLESS DRIVING
EXHIBITIONS.
   (a)   In general. It shall be unlawful for any person to be knowingly
present as a spectator:
      (1)   at a street race conducted on a public street or highway;
      (2)    at a reckless driving exhibition conducted on a public street,
highway, or off-street parking facility;
      (3)   where preparations are being made for a street race conducted on a
public street or highway; or
      (4)   where preparations are being made for a reckless driving exhibition
conducted on a public street, highway, or in an off-street parking facility.
   (b)   Exemption. Nothing in this section prohibits law enforcement officers
or their agents who are acting in the course of their official duties, or media
or news personnel who are reporting on the event from being spectators at a
street race or reckless driving exhibition, or spectators at the location of
preparations for either of these activities. (Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-205. PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of an
offense.
   (b)   An offense under this article is punishable by a criminal fine of not
more than $500.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this article is governed by Section
1-5.1 of the code. (Ord. 31540)
Division 3. Abatement of Nuisance Vehicles Engaged in Street Races
or Reckless Driving Exhibition.
SEC. 28-206. DECLARATION AND ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE VEHICLES.
   A motor vehicle shall be declared a nuisance and abated subject to this
division if:
      (1)   the motor vehicle is used in a street race or exhibition of
reckless driving;
      (2)   the driver or passenger is one of the following:
         (A)   the registered owner of the vehicle at the time of the
violation;
         (B)   a member of the registered owner's immediate family at the time
of the violation; or
         (C)   lives at the same address as the registered owner at the time of
the violation; and
      (3)   the driver or passenger described in Paragraph (2) has:
         (A)   used the motor vehicle in a previous incident for a street race
or reckless driving exhibition;
         (B)   used the motor vehicle in a street race or reckless driving
exhibition that resulted in property damage or bodily injury to another;
         (C)   a previous misdemeanor conviction for fleeing or attempting to
elude a police officer pursuant to Section 545.421 of the Texas Transportation
Code;
         (D)   a previous misdemeanor conviction for reckless driving pursuant
to Section 545.401 of the Texas Transportation Code; or
         (E)   a previous misdemeanor or felony conviction for racing on
highway pursuant to Section 545.420 of the Texas Transportation Code. (Ord.
31540)
SEC. 28-207. NOTICE OF NUISANCE AND ABATEMENT TO LEGAL AND REGISTERED OWNERS
AND LIENHOLDERS.
   (a)   In general. When a street racing or reckless driving exhibition
violation occurs causing a vehicle to be declared a nuisance and subject to
abatement under this division, the chief of police shall ascertain from the
Texas Department of Motor Vehicles the names and addresses of all legal and
registered owners and any lienholder of record of that vehicle.
   (b)   Notice of nuisance and abatement. The chief of police shall send a
notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all legal and registered
owners and any lienholder of record of the vehicle proposed for abatement. The
notice shall be sent to the addresses obtained from the Texas Department of
Motor Vehicles.
   (c)   Personal service of notice of nuisance and abatement. If a legal or
registered owner or lienholder of record was personally served a notice at the
time of the violation which caused a vehicle to be subject to abatement under
this division, and the notice contains all the information required to be
provided by this section, no further notice is required to be sent to that
owner. However, a notice must still be sent to any other current legal or
registered owners or lienholders of record of the vehicle, if any.
   (d)   Contents of the notice. The notice must contain the following:
      (1)   Statement informing legal and registered owners and any lienholder
of record of the vehicle that the vehicle will be declared a nuisance and
abated by the city subject to
Chapter 28, Article XIX, Division 2 of the Dallas City Code, and will be sold
or otherwise disposed of pursuant to this division;
      (2)   A description of the vehicle including, if available, the year,
make, model, license plate number, and vehicle identification number;
      (3)   Instructions for filing a response opposing the nuisance and
abatement with the city attorney and the time limits for filing the response.
(Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-208. ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   If no responses opposing the nuisance and abatement are filed and
served within 15 days of the mailing of the notice pursuant to Section 28-207
(b) or within five days of personal service of the notice pursuant to Section
28-207(c), the city attorney shall submit a motion for default judgment for the
nuisance and abatement of the vehicle by the city.
   (b)   A copy of the motion and order of the nuisance and abatement must be
provided on written request to any person informed of the pending abatement
pursuant to Section 28-207.
   (c)   A response opposing the abatement that is filed and later withdrawn by
the claimant will be deemed to not have been filed. (Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-209. JUDICIAL ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE PROCEEDINGS.
   (a)   If a response opposing abatement is timely filed and served with the
city attorney, then the city attorney shall file a petition for nuisance and
abatement with the appropriate court within 10 days of the receipt of the
response.
   (b)   The city attorney shall request a hearing date and send notice to the
legal or registered owner and any lienholder of record.
   (c)   The court filing fee established by the court, not to exceed $50,
shall be paid by the claimant made payable to the city, but shall be reimbursed
by the city if the claimant prevails.
   (d)   The filing of a response opposing abatement within the time limit
specified in this section is considered a jurisdictional prerequisite for
initiating a nuisance and abatement proceeding. A proceeding in the civil case
is a limited civil case. The city attorney shall have the burden of proof that
the vehicle constituted a nuisance pursuant to this chapter by a preponderance
of the evidence. All questions that may arise must be decided by the court and
all other proceedings must be conducted as in an ordinary civil action. A
judgment of abatement does not require as a condition precedent the conviction
of a defendant for the current violation which gave rise to the nuisance and
caused these abatement proceedings to be initiated. (Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-210. JOINT PROPERTY INTEREST RELEASE.
   If at the time of the violation there is a joint property interest in the
vehicle to be abated, and at the time of the violation the vehicle is the only
vehicle available to the registered owner's immediate family that may be
operated with a valid class C driver's license, the vehicle may not be abated
upon compliance with all of the following requirements:
      (1)   The registered owner or the joint property interest owner requests
release of the vehicle and the owner of the joint property interest submits
proof of that interest;
      (2)   The registered owner or the joint property interest owner submits
proof that the vehicle is properly registered pursuant to the Texas
Transportation Code;
      (3)   All towing and storage charges and any administrative charges
authorized pursuant to Section 2303.155 of the Texas Administrative Code and
Section
48A-43 of the Dallas City Code are paid; and
      (4)   The registered owner and the joint property interest owner sign a
stipulated vehicle release agreement, as described in Section 28-211, in
consideration for the release of the vehicle. (Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-211. STIPULATED VEHICLE RELEASE AGREEMENT.
   (a)   A stipulated vehicle release agreement must provide for the consent of
the signers to the automatic future abatement and transfer of title to the city
of any vehicle registered to that person, if the vehicle is used in a street
race or exhibition of reckless driving. The agreement must be in effect for
five years from the date of signing and must be maintained by the chief of
police.
   (b)   No vehicle may be released pursuant to Section 28-210 if the chief of
police has on file a prior stipulated vehicle release agreement signed by that
person within the previous five years. (Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-212. VEHICLE TITLE VESTING IN THE CITY.
   All right, title, and interest in the vehicle vests in the city upon
commission of the act giving rise to the nuisance under this division. (Ord.
31540)
SEC. 28-213. SALE OF ABATED VEHICLE.
   (a)   Order of nuisance and abatement. Any vehicle declared a nuisance and
subject to abatement pursuant to this division must be sold once an order of
nuisance and abatement is issued by a court pursuant to Sections
28-208 or
28-209 unless the chief of police determines that the vehicle is necessary to
be utilized to further police operations in enforcing street racing or reckless
driving exhibitions violations or for any other law enforcement purposes.
   (b)   Public auction. The city shall offer the abated vehicle for sale at
public auction within 60 days of receiving title to the vehicle. Low value
vehicles must be disposed of pursuant to Section 28-214. (Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-214. DISPOSITION OF LOW- VALUE VEHICLES.
   If the chief of police determines that the abated vehicle to be sold
pursuant to this division is of so little value that it cannot readily be sold
to the public generally, the vehicle must be conveyed to a licensed dismantler
or donated to a charitable organization. License plates must be removed from
any vehicle conveyed to a dismantler pursuant to this section. (Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-215. DISTRIBUTION OF SALE PROCEEDS.
   The proceeds of a sale of an abated vehicle must be disposed of in the
following priority:
      (1)   To satisfy the towing and storage costs following impoundment, the
costs of providing notice pursuant to Section
28-207 the costs of sale, and the costs and fees associated with the judicial
proceedings, if any;
      (2)   To the holder of any subordinate lien or encumbrance on the
vehicle, other than a registered or legal owner, to satisfy any indebtedness so
secured if written notification of demand is received before distribution of
the proceeds is completed. The holder of a subordinate lien or encumbrance, if
requested, shall furnish reasonable proof of its interest and, unless it does
so upon request, is not entitled to distribution; then,
      (3)    The remaining proceeds shall be transferred to the City of Dallas
Police Department for the enforcement of street racing and reckless driving
exhibition violations. (Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-216.      ACCOUNTING OF SALE PROCEEDS.
   The person conducting the sale shall disburse the proceeds of the sale as
provided in Section
28-215 and shall provide a written accounting regarding the disposition to the
chief of police and, on request, to any person entitled to a share of the
proceeds or to any person validly claiming a share of the proceeds, as
determined by the chief of police, within 15 days after the sale is conducted.
(Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-217. STOLEN VEHICLES.
   No vehicle may be sold pursuant to this division if the chief of police
determines that the vehicle was stolen. In this event, the vehicle may be
claimed by the registered owner or lienholder of record at any time after
impoundment, provided the vehicle registration is current and the registered
owner has no outstanding traffic violations or parking penalties on his or her
driving record or on the registration record of any vehicle registered to the
person. If the identity of the legal and registered owners or lienholder of
record of the vehicle cannot be reasonably ascertained, the vehicle may be
sold. (Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-218. INNOCENT OWNER REMEDY.
   Any owner of a vehicle who suffers any loss due to the abatement of any
vehicle pursuant to this division may recover the amount of the loss from the
person who violated Texas Transportation Code Sections 545.401 or 545.420,
which gave rise to the nuisance under this division. (Ord. 31540)
SEC. 28-219. TOWING AND STORAGE FEES.
   Charges for towing and storage for any vehicle impounded pursuant to this
division must not exceed the normal towing and storage rates for other vehicle
towing and storage conducted by the chief of police in the normal course of
business. (Ord. 31540)
Division 4. Aiding Street Racing or Reckless Driving Exhibitions.
SEC. 28-219.1. AIDING STREET RACING AND RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITIONS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows street racing,
reckless driving exhibitions, or preparations for street racing or reckless
driving exhibitions to occur on the premises that the person owns, operates, or
controls.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person who
owns, operates, or controls the premises within 10 days of receiving a citation
pursuant to this section:
      (1)   submits a criminal trespass affidavit; and
      (2)   takes reasonable and appropriate measures to make the property
inaccessible to the public during non-business hours. (Ord. 31540)
ARTICLE XX.
PHOTOGRAPHIC ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM
VIOLATIONS.
Division 1. Generally.
SEC. 28-220.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   AUTOMATED SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM means the
installation of photographic school bus stop arm enforcement systems on school
buses operated within the city for the purpose of reducing school bus stop arm
violations and injuries to students citywide.
      (2)   CAMERA-ENFORCED SCHOOL BUS means a school bus equipped with a
photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system.
      (3)   DATE OF ISSUANCE means the date that a civil school bus stop arm
citation is mailed in accordance with this article.
      (4)   DEPARTMENT means the department of the city designated by the city
manager to enforce and administer this article, or the department’s designated
representative.
      (5)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (6)   OWNER means:
         (A)   the owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle
registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or the analogous
department or agency of another state or country;
         (B)   the person named under Section
28-224(d) or (g) as the lessee of the motor vehicle at the time of a school bus
stop arm violation; or
         (C)   the person named under Section
28-224(h) as holding legal title to the motor vehicle at the time of a school
bus stop arm violation.
      (7)   PHOTOGRAPHIC SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM means a system
that:
         (A)   consists of cameras installed on the exterior of a school bus
that work in conjunction with an automatic stop arm on the school bus, which
stop arm, along with flashing warning lights and other equipment required by
Section 547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, warns drivers
that the school bus is stopped for the purpose of loading or unloading
students; and
         (B)   is capable of producing a recorded image depicting the license
plate attached to the front or the rear of a motor vehicle that passes the
school bus in violation of Section
28-224 of this article.
      (8)   RECORDED IMAGE means a photographic or digital image recorded by a
photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system that depicts the front or
the rear of a motor vehicle.
      (9)   SCHOOL BUS has the meaning given that term in Section 541.201 of
the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
      (10)   SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM VIOLATION or CIVIL SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM
VIOLATION means a violation of Section
28-224 of this article.
      (11)   SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM CITATION or CIVIL SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM CITATION
means a citation for a school bus stop arm violation issued under this article.
(Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-221.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR AND DEPARTMENT.
   The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this
article. The director shall implement and enforce this article and may by
written order establish such rules or regulations, not inconsistent with this
article, as the director determines are necessary to discharge the director’s
duties under or to effect the policy of this article. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-222.   ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS - POWERS, DUTIES, AND FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   The city manager or a designated representative shall appoint
enforcement officers to issue civil school bus stop arm citations.
   (b)   An enforcement officer shall have the following powers, duties, and
functions:
      (1)   To review recorded images from the photographic school bus stop arm
enforcement system to determine whether a school bus stop arm violation has
occurred.
      (2)   To order a school bus stop arm citation to be issued based on
evidence from the recorded images.
      (3)   To void recorded images due to lack of evidence or due to knowledge
that a defense described in Section
28-224 applies.
      (4)   To issue warnings in lieu of citations during acceptance testing of
the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system or at any other time
prescribed by the director. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-223.   HEARING OFFICERS - POWERS, DUTIES, AND FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   The city council shall designate hearing officers from a list of
persons recommended by the city manager, or a designated representative, to
administratively adjudicate all school bus stop arm violations for which a
civil school bus stop arm citation has been issued.
   (b)   A hearing officer shall have the following powers, duties, and
functions:
      (1)   To administer oaths.
      (2)   To accept admissions to, and to hear and determine contests of,
school bus stop arm violations under this article.
      (3)   To issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the
production of documents, which orders may be enforced by a municipal court.
      (4)   To assess civil fines, penalties, and other costs for a school bus
stop arm violation in accordance with Section
28-231 of this article.
      (5)   To waive penalties assessed for a school bus stop arm violation in
accordance with Section
28-231 of this article. (Ord. 28654)
Division 2. Enforcement of School Bus Stop Arm Violations as Civil Offenses.
SEC. 28-224.   SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM VIOLATIONS AS CIVIL OFFENSES; DEFENSES;
PRESUMPTIONS.
   (a)   The owner of a motor vehicle that is operated in violation of Section
545.066 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, by passing a stopped
camera-enforced school bus displaying the visual signals required by Section
547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, commits a civil
offense and is liable for a civil fine under this article.
   (b)   It is a defense to a charge of a school bus stop arm violation under
this section that:
      (1)   the school bus was not operating the visual signals required by
Section 547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended;
      (2)   the operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the
lawful order or direction of a peace officer;
      (3)   the operator of the motor vehicle was in the process of passing the
school bus before the school bus operated a visual signal described by Section
547.701(c) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended;
      (4)   the operator of the motor vehicle passed the stopped school bus so
as to yield the right of way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency
vehicle;
      (5)   the motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency
vehicle under Chapter 546 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, and the
operator was acting in compliance with that chapter;
      (6)   the motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle being operated by a person
other than the vehicle’s owner without the consent of the vehicle owner and
proof is submitted to the hearing officer that the theft of the motor vehicle
had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency;
      (7)   the license plate depicted in the recorded image of the school bus
stop arm violation was a stolen plate being displayed on a motor vehicle other
than the motor vehicle for which the plate had been issued and proof is
submitted to the hearing officer that the theft of the license plate had been
timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency; or
      (8)   the presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain, or other
unusually hazardous road conditions existed that would have made compliance
with this section more dangerous under the circumstances than non-compliance.
   (c)   It is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle depicted in
the recorded image of a school bus stop arm violation for which a school bus
stop arm citation is issued is the person who committed the school bus stop arm
violation. Proof of ownership may be made by a computer-generated record of the
registration of the vehicle with the Texas Department of Transportation showing
the name of the person to whom state license plates were issued. This proof is
prima facie evidence of the ownership of the vehicle by the person to whom the
certificate of registration was issued.
   (d)   A vehicle owner who is in the business of selling, renting, or leasing
vehicles will not be liable for the civil school bus stop arm fines, penalties,
and costs imposed by the city on a vehicle for sale or a rented or leased
vehicle if the vehicle owner presents evidence establishing that the vehicle
depicted in the recorded image was at the time of the alleged violation being
rented, leased, or test driven by another person. Evidence sufficient to
establish that the vehicle was being rented, leased, or test driven includes:
      (1)   the true name, address, and driver’s license number and state of
issuance of the person renting, leasing, or test driving the vehicle at the
time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken; or
      (2)   a true copy of the lease or rental agreement in effect at the time
the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken.
   (e)   Evidence presented under Subsection (d) of this section must be
presented through oral testimony or by affidavit under penalty of perjury.
Evidence through oral testimony must be presented at the administrative
adjudication hearing. Evidence by affidavit under penalty of perjury may be
presented by mail.
   (f)   If the owner of a vehicle presents evidence under Subsections (d) and
(e) of this section establishing that the vehicle depicted in the recorded
image was being rented, leased, or test driven at the time of the violation,
the owner may not be held liable for civil school bus stop arm fines,
penalties, and costs, and the director shall send the school bus stop arm
citation to the test driver or lessee who is presumed to have committed the
school bus stop arm violation. An owner of a vehicle who fails to comply with
Subsections (d) or (e) of this section will be treated as any other vehicle
owner and will be liable for the school bus stop arm violation.
   (g)   If, at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm
violation was taken, the vehicle depicted in the recorded image was owned by a
person in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle was
being rented or leased to an individual, the vehicle owner shall, within 30
calendar days after the date the school bus stop arm citation is received,
provide to the department the name and address of the individual who was
renting or leasing the motor vehicle depicted in the recorded image and a
statement of the period during which that individual was renting or leasing the
vehicle. This information must be provided regardless of whether the person
provides evidence under Subsections (d) and (e) of this section that the
vehicle was being rented, leased, or test driven at the time of the school bus
stop arm violation.
   (h)   A registered owner named in the school bus stop arm citation who did
not hold legal title to the motor vehicle at the time of a school bus stop arm
violation will not be liable for the civil school bus stop arm fines,
penalties, and costs imposed by the city on that vehicle if the registered
owner presents evidence establishing that another person held legal title to
the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation
was taken. Evidence sufficient to establish that the vehicle was owned by
another person at the time of the school bus stop arm violation includes:
      (1)   the true name, address, and driver’s license number and state of
issuance of the person who held legal title to the vehicle at the time the
recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was taken; or
      (2)   a true copy of any purchase or sale documentation (including proof
of transfer of title) showing the name of the person who held title to the
vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus stop arm violation was
taken (that person’s address must also be provided if not contained in the
documentation).
   (i)   Evidence presented under Subsection (h) of this section must be
presented through oral testimony or by affidavit under penalty of perjury.
Evidence through oral testimony must be presented at the administrative
adjudication hearing. Evidence by affidavit under penalty of perjury may be
presented by mail.
   (j)   If the registered owner named in the violation complies with
Subsections (h) and (i) of this section, the registered owner may not be held
liable for civil school bus stop arm fines, penalties, and costs, and the
director shall send the school bus stop arm citation to the person who held
legal title to the vehicle at the time the recorded image of the school bus
stop arm violation was taken. A registered owner named in the school bus stop
arm citation who fails to comply with Subsections (h) and (i) of this section
will be treated as any other vehicle owner and will be liable for the school
bus stop arm violation. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-225.   CIVIL SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM CITATIONS; FORM.
   (a)   A civil school bus stop arm citation serves as the summons and
complaint for purposes of this article.
   (b)   The school bus stop arm citation must be on a form prescribed by the
director and must include the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the
violation.
      (2)   A description of the violation alleged.
      (3)   The date and time of the violation and the location of the school
bus where the violation occurred.
      (4)   The citation issuance date.
      (5)   The registration number displayed on the license plate of the
vehicle involved in the violation.
      (6)   A copy of a recorded image of the violation that includes a
depiction of the registration number displayed on the license plate of the
vehicle involved in the violation.
      (7)   The amount of the civil fine to be imposed for the violation.
      (8)   The date by which the civil fine must be paid or the request for an
administrative adjudication hearing must be made.
      (9)   A statement that, in lieu of requesting an administrative
adjudication hearing, the person named in the school bus stop arm citation may
pay the civil fine in person or by mail at an address designated on the
citation.
      (10)   A notification that the vehicle owner has the right to contest the
imposition of the civil fine in an administrative adjudication hearing by
submitting a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing within
30 calendar days after the date the school bus stop arm citation is issued.
      (11)   A notification that any request by the vehicle owner to have the
enforcement officer, or other authorized person who issued the citation,
present at the hearing must be made in writing as part of the written request
for an administrative adjudication hearing under Paragraph (10) of this
subsection and that failure to timely make this request constitutes a waiver of
the vehicle owner’s right to require the presence of the enforcement officer or
other authorized person at the hearing.
      (12)   A notification that failure to pay the civil fine or to timely
request an administrative adjudication hearing is considered an admission of
liability for the school bus stop arm violation, is a waiver of the person’s
right to appeal the imposition of the civil fine, and will result in the
assessment of appropriate civil fines, penalties, and costs.
      (13)   A statement that the person will incur a late payment penalty if
the person fails to pay the civil fine or request an administrative
adjudication hearing within 30 calendar days after the date of issuance of the
school bus stop arm citation.
      (14)   A notification that an arrest warrant may not be issued for
failure to timely pay the civil fines, penalties, and costs and that the
imposition of the civil penalty may not be recorded on the vehicle owner’s
driving record.
   (c)   The original or any copy of a civil school bus stop arm citation is a
record kept in the ordinary course of city business and is prima facie evidence
of the facts contained in the citation. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-226.   SERVICE OF A CIVIL SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM CITATION.
   (a)   In order to impose a civil fine under this article, the director shall
send a school bus stop arm citation to the owner of the motor vehicle involved
in the school bus stop arm violation within 30 calendar days after the date the
violation is alleged to have occurred. The citation must be sent, by United
States mail, to:
      (1)   the owner’s address as shown on the registration records of the
Texas Department of Transportation;
      (2)   if the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the
owner’s address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the
department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the Texas
Department of Transportation;
      (3)   if the owner presents evidence or information under Section
28-224(d) or (g) that the vehicle was being rented, leased, or test driven at
the time of the school bus stop arm violation, the address provided by the
seller or lessor under Section
28-224(d) or (g); or
      (4)   if the registered owner presents evidence under Section
28-224(h) that another person had legal title to the vehicle at the time of the
school bus stop arm violation, the address provided under Section
28-224(h).
   (b)   A school bus stop arm citation is presumed to have been received on
the fifth day after the date the citation is mailed. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-227.   ANSWERING A CIVIL SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM CITATION.
   (a)   A vehicle owner who has been issued a civil school bus stop arm
citation shall, either personally or through a representative, answer to the
charge of the school bus stop arm violation by the date shown on the citation,
which date may not be earlier than the 30th day after the date the citation is
issued. An answer may be made in any of the following ways:
      (1)   An admission of liability with a payment of the applicable civil
fine, and any additional penalties and costs.
      (2)   A request to schedule an administrative adjudication hearing to
either deny liability or admit liability with an explanation before a hearing
officer.
      (3)   A denial of liability accompanied by an affidavit under penalty of
perjury presenting evidence under Section
28-224 that the vehicle depicted in the recorded image was at the time of the
school bus stop arm violation being rented, leased, or test driven.
      (4)   A denial of liability accompanied by an affidavit under penalty of
perjury presenting evidence under Section
28-224 that the person named in the school bus stop arm citation was not the
owner of the vehicle depicted in the recorded image at the time of the
violation.
      (5)   A request for permission from a hearing officer to adjudicate by
mail.
   (b)   Payment of the civil fine and any additional penalties and costs may
be made in person or by mailing the school bus stop arm citation to the address
shown on the citation, accompanied by payment of the amount shown on the
citation. Payment by mail may be made only by money order or check. Payment of
the civil fine and all penalties and costs assessed under this article operates
as a final disposition of the school bus stop arm violation charge, except when
payment is made to reset a scheduled hearing as allowed under Section
28-229. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-228.   ADJUDICATION BY MAIL.
   (a)   If a vehicle owner charged with a school bus stop arm violation shows
good cause for not attending a hearing, either personally or through a
representative, the hearing officer may permit the matter to be adjudicated by
mail, which adjudication must be completed within 90 calendar days after the
date of issuance of the school bus stop arm citation.
   (b)   Letters, memoranda, affidavits, photographs, and other documentary
materials will be admissible as evidence for the purposes of adjudication by
mail. The hearing officer may exclude from consideration any material that is
not relevant to the adjudication of the alleged violation.
   (c)   Failure of the vehicle owner to proceed with an adjudication by mail
after requesting and receiving permission to adjudicate by mail is an admission
of liability for the school bus stop arm violation and will subject the owner
to the appropriate civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed by the hearing
officer.
   (d)   If a hearing officer determines that adjudication cannot proceed by
mail, the hearing officer shall advise the vehicle owner by first class mail
that the owner must appear to answer the charge at a hearing. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-229.   HEARINGS FOR DISPOSITION OF A SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM CITATION;
CITATION AND PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORDED IMAGES AS PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   (a)   Every hearing for the adjudication of a school bus stop arm violation
charge under this article must be held before a hearing officer not later than
the 30th day after the department receives a request for an administrative
adjudication hearing. The director shall notify, in writing, the person
requesting a hearing of the date, time, and location of the hearing.
   (b)   A person may make a request to reset a scheduled administrative
adjudication hearing. A scheduled administrative adjudication hearing may not
be reset more than once unless the vehicle owner pays to the director an amount
equal to the applicable civil fine for the school bus stop arm violation, with
any additional penalties and costs. The director shall issue a receipt for any
amounts paid under this subsection. After presentation of the receipt, all
amounts paid will be refunded to the vehicle owner if the hearing officer, or a
municipal court on appeal, finds that the owner is not liable for the school
bus stop arm violation.
   (c)   At a hearing, the civil school bus stop arm citation and the recorded
images produced by the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system are
prima facie proof of the school bus stop arm violation, and the enforcement
officer or other authorized person who issued the citation is not required to
be present unless requested by the vehicle owner charged or by the hearing
officer. A vehicle owner’s request to have the enforcement officer, or other
authorized person who issued the citation, present at the hearing must be in
writing and received by the hearing officer as part of the person’s request for
an administrative adjudication hearing. Failure to timely make this request
constitutes a waiver of the vehicle owner’s right to require the presence of
the enforcement officer or other authorized person at the hearing.
   (d)   At a hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider evidence
presented by the city and by the vehicle owner. The formal rules of evidence do
not apply to a hearing under this article, and the hearing officer shall make a
decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing,
after giving due weight to all presumptions and prima facie evidence
established by this article or other applicable law.
   (e)   At a hearing, the reliability of the photographic school bus stop arm
enforcement system used to produce the recorded images of the school bus stop
arm violation may be attested to by affidavit of an officer or employee of the
city, or of the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the
system, who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. An
affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that alleges a school bus stop
arm violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded images is
admissible in a proceeding under this article, is evidence of the facts
contained in the affidavit, and is prima facie evidence of the violation
alleged in the school bus stop arm citation.
   (f)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall
immediately render an order or decision, either by:
      (1)   finding the vehicle owner liable for the school bus stop arm
violation, assessing the applicable civil fine and any penalties and other
costs in accordance with this article, and notifying the owner of the right to
appeal to municipal court; or
      (2)   finding the vehicle owner not liable for the school bus stop arm
violation.
   (g)   An order of a hearing officer must be in writing, signed, and dated by
the hearing officer and filed with the department in a separate index and file.
The order may be recorded using computer printouts, microfilm, microfiche, or
similar data processing techniques. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-230.   FAILURE TO ANSWER A CIVIL SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM CITATION OR APPEAR
AT A HEARING.
   (a)   The failure of a vehicle owner charged with a school bus stop arm
violation to answer to the charge within 30 calendar days after the date of
issuance of the school bus stop arm citation or to appear at any hearing,
including a hearing on appeal, when required to appear is an admission of
liability for the school bus stop arm violation, and the hearing officer, or
the municipal court in the case of an appeal, shall issue an order of liability
and assess against the owner the appropriate civil fines, penalties, and other
costs.
   (b)   Within seven calendar days after filing an order of liability issued
under this section, a hearing officer or the entity with which the city
contracts, shall notify the vehicle owner in writing of the order. The notice
must be sent by United States mail to the address required for service of a
citation under Section
28-226 or to the address of the vehicle owner last known to the hearing
officer. The notice must include a statement of:
      (1)   the amount of the civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed; and
      (2)   the right to appeal to municipal court.
   (c)   Regardless of any other provision of this article, a person who
receives a school bus stop arm citation and who fails to timely pay the civil
fine or fails to timely request an administrative adjudication hearing is still
entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing if:
      (1)   the person submits to the hearing officer a written request for a
hearing, accompanied by an affidavit, that attests to the date on which the
person received the school bus stop arm citation; and
      (2)   the written request and affidavit are submitted to the hearing
officer within 30 calendar days after the date the person received the school
bus stop arm citation. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-231.   CIVIL FINES FOR SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES AND
OTHER COSTS.
   (a)   If a civil fine is assessed under this article, it must be in
accordance with this section. A fine may not be waived or modified by a hearing
officer, or by a municipal court on appeal, when a vehicle owner is found
liable for a school bus stop arm violation, except that additional penalties
and other costs may be added in accordance with this section.
   (b)   The owner of a motor vehicle liable for a school bus stop arm
violation shall pay a civil fine of $300 for each violation.
   (c)   An additional $25 late payment penalty will be assessed if the vehicle
owner fails to:
      (1)   answer a school bus stop arm citation within 30 calendar days after
its date of issuance;
      (2)   appear at a hearing scheduled to adjudicate the school bus stop arm
violation charge; or
      (3)   after being found liable, pay all civil fines, penalties, fees, and
costs assessed for a school bus stop arm violation within the time designated
by the hearing officer, or by the municipal court on appeal.
   (d)   A penalty assessed under Subsection (c) of this section may be waived
by a hearing officer, or by a municipal court on appeal, if the vehicle owner
can establish that:
      (1)   through no fault of the owner:
         (A)   no notice of the school bus stop arm violation was received as
required by this article;
         (B)   no notice of the hearing officer’s order was received as
required by this article; or
         (C)   payment of the civil fine assessed for the school bus stop arm
violation was not posted in a timely manner; or
      (2)   the penalty was assessed in error. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-232.   APPEAL FROM HEARING.
   (a)   A vehicle owner determined by a hearing officer at an administrative
adjudication hearing to be liable for a school bus stop arm violation may
appeal this determination to the municipal court by filing an appeal petition,
along with a filing fee of $15, with the municipal court clerk or a deputy
clerk before the 31st calendar day after the date the hearing officer’s order
is entered with the department. If the hearing officer’s order is reversed, the
$15 filing fee will be returned by the city to the appellant.
   (b)   Upon receipt of an appeal petition, the municipal court clerk or
deputy clerk shall schedule an appeal hearing and notify all parties of the
date, time, and location of the hearing. The enforcement officer or other
authorized person who issued the civil school bus stop arm citation is not
required to be present at the appeal hearing unless requested by the vehicle
owner charged. A vehicle owner’s request to have the enforcement officer, or
other authorized person who issued the citation, present at the appeal hearing
must be in writing and made as part of the appeal petition. Failure to timely
make this request constitutes a waiver of the vehicle owner’s right to require
the presence of the enforcement officer or other authorized person at the
appeal hearing.
   (c)   The appeal hearing must be a trial de novo in municipal court and is a
civil proceeding. The decision of the municipal court is final.
   (d)   Service of notice of appeal under this section stays the enforcement
and collection of any civil fines, penalties, and costs ordered by the hearing
officer. An appeal petition must be accompanied by a notarized statement in
which the vehicle owner agrees to pay all civil fines, penalties, and costs
ordered by the hearing officer, if the person is still found liable by the
municipal court upon appeal.
   (e)   At an appeal hearing, the civil school bus stop arm citation and the
recorded images produced by the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement
system are prima facie proof of the school bus stop arm violation, and the
enforcement officer or other authorized person who issued the citation is not
required to be present unless requested by the vehicle owner.
   (f)   At an appeal hearing, the reliability of the photographic school bus
stop arm enforcement system used to produce the recorded images of the school
bus stop arm violation may be attested to by affidavit of an officer or
employee of the city, or of the entity with which the city contracts to install
or operate the system, who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the
system. An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that alleges a
school bus stop violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded
images is admissible in a proceeding under this article, is evidence of the
facts contained in the affidavit, and is prima facie evidence of the violation
alleged in the school bus stop arm citation. (Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-233.   EFFECT OF LIABILITY; EXCLUSION OF CIVIL REMEDY; ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The imposition of a civil fine under this article is not a conviction
or criminal offense and may not be considered a conviction or criminal offense
for any purpose. Failure to timely pay a civil fine under this article may not
result in an arrest warrant being issued for the vehicle owner and may not be
recorded on the owner’s driving record.
   (b)   A civil fine may not be imposed under this article on the owner of a
motor vehicle if the operator of the vehicle was arrested or was issued a
criminal citation by a peace officer under Section 545.066 of the Texas
Transportation Code, as amended, for the school bus stop arm violation recorded
by the photographic school bus stop arm enforcement system.
   (c)   The city attorney is authorized to file suit or take other action to
collect any civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed under this article.
(Ord. 28654)
SEC. 28-234.   DISPOSITION OF CIVIL FINES, PENALTIES, AND COSTS ASSESSED FOR
SCHOOL BUS STOP ARM VIOLATIONS.
   Civil fines, penalties, and costs assessed under this article must be used
to fund the automated school bus stop arm enforcement program, other programs
designed to further student safety, and other traffic safety projects and
improvements. (Ord. 28654)
ARTICLE XXI.
MISCELLANEOUS FEES.
SEC. 28-235.   ENGINEERING REVIEW AND LOCATION FEES.
   (a)   The following fees must be paid to the director when the application
is filed. An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
 
Type of Application Application Fee
311-T Review        $2,500.00
Utilities Location  1,000.00
 
   (b)   The director shall deposit fees in the official city depository not
later than the next business day following receipt of the fees.
   (c)   No refund of the fee may be made.
   (d)   Fee schedule.
(Ord. 31657)
 
VOLUME II
Volume II: Contains 10/25 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 33233, passed 9-17-2025
CHAPTER 29
RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. 29016)
CHAPTER 29A
RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. 31144)
CHAPTER 30
NOISE
Sec.
30-1.   Loud and disturbing noises and vibrations.
Sec.
30-2.   Loud and disturbing noises and vibrations presumed offensive.
Sec.
30-2.1.   Presumption.
Sec.
30-3.   Use of bell, siren, compression, or exhaust whistle on vehicles.
Sec.
30-3.1.   Noise from the idling of commercial motor vehicles.
Sec.
30-3.2.   Use of engine compression brakes prohibited.
Sec.
30-4.   Loudspeakers and amplifiers.
Sec.
30-5.   Penalties.
SEC. 30-1.   LOUD AND DISTURBING NOISES AND VIBRATIONS.
   A person commits an offense if he makes or causes to be made any loud and
disturbing noise or vibration in the city that is offensive to the ordinary
sensibilities of the inhabitants of the city. (Ord. Nos. 13744; 24835; 26022)
SEC. 30-2.   LOUD AND DISTURBING NOISES AND VIBRATIONS PRESUMED OFFENSIVE.
   The following loud and disturbing noises and vibrations are presumed to be
offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of the inhabitants of the city:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, streetcar, or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, as
required by state law.
      (2)   The playing of any radio, phonograph, television, or musical
instrument with such volume as to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, or repose
of persons in any dwelling, apartment, hotel, or other type of residence.
      (3)   The continuous barking, howling, crowing, or making of other loud
noises by an animal for more than 15 minutes near a private residence that the
animal’s owner or person in control of the animal has no right to occupy.
      (4)   The loud grating, grinding, or rattling noise caused by the use of
any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar, or vehicle that is out of repair or
poorly or improperly loaded.
      (5)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger.
      (6)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any stationary
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor boat engine,
except through a muffler or other device that will effectively and efficiently
prevent loud and disturbing noises or vibrations.
      (7)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust from any motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device that will effectively and
efficiently prevent loud and disturbing noises or vibrations.
      (8)   Any construction activity related to the erection, excavation,
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building on or adjacent to a
residential use, as defined in the Dallas Development Code, other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturdays and legal holidays, except that
the director of transportation and public works may issue a written permit to
exceed these hours in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
safety or for other reasons determined by the director of transportation and
public works to be necessary for the public health, safety, or welfare. For
purposes of this paragraph, “legal holidays” include New Year’s Day (January
1), Memorial Day (observed date), Fourth of July (July 4), Labor Day (observed
date), Thanksgiving Day (observed date), and Christmas Day (December 25).
      (9)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors that
disturb the quiet and peace of the neighborhood.
      (10)   The use of any drum or other instrument or sound amplifying
equipment for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise, to
any performance, show, sale, or display of merchandise as to attract customers
to any place of business.
      (11)   The use of mechanical loudspeakers or sound amplifiers on trucks
or other moving vehicles for the purpose of advertising any show, sale, or
display of merchandise.
      (12)   The collection of garbage, waste, or refuse between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on or within 300 feet of any residential use, as
defined in the Dallas Development Code.
      (13)   The operation of sound equipment, including a car stereo, in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the noise is so audible or causes such a
vibration as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, or comfort of another
person. (Ord. Nos. 13744; 22026; 24835; 26022; 28424; 30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 30-2.1.   PRESUMPTION.
   Whenever a violation of Section
30-2(11) of this chapter occurs, it is presumed that the registered owner of
the vehicle for which the citation was issued is the person who committed the
violation, either personally or through an agent or employee. Proof of
ownership may be made by a computer-generated record of the registration of the
vehicle with the Texas Department of Transportation showing the name of the
person to whom state license plates were issued. This proof is prima facie
evidence of the ownership of the vehicle by the person to whom the certificate
of registration was issued. (Ord. Nos. 22094; 24835)
SEC. 30-3.   USE OF BELL, SIREN, COMPRESSION, OR EXHAUST WHISTLE ON VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall be equipped with and no person shall use upon a vehicle any
bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle, except that vehicles operated in
the performance of duty by law enforcement officers, fire department, and
ambulances may attach and use a bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle.
(Ord. 13744)
SEC. 30-3.1.   NOISE FROM THE IDLING OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor vehicle with a gross
vehicle weight rating (GVWR) over 14,000 pounds.
      (2)   IDLE means the operation of a motor vehicle engine in operating
mode where the engine is not engaged in gear.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he idles a commercial motor vehicle for
more than five consecutive minutes at a location on or within 300 feet of any
residential use, as defined in the Dallas Development Code.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if, on any premises that he owns or
controls, he permits the idling of a commercial motor vehicle for more than
five consecutive minutes at a location on or within 300 feet of any residential
use, as defined by the Dallas Development Code.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (b) and (c) of this
section that the commercial motor vehicle:
      (1)   was idling in obedience to an official traffic control device;
      (2)   was idling while stopped in traffic;
      (3)   was idling in obedience to a peace officer;
      (4)   was idling while being repaired in an enclosed structure;
      (5)   was idling in order to defrost a windshield;
      (6)   was a school bus;
      (7)   was intended for commercial passenger transportation and was not
idling on a public street, highway, or alley;
      (8)   was a concrete mixer truck that was only idling while actually
pouring concrete or staging to pour concrete;
      (9)   was a utility truck that was only idling while providing power as
needed to perform utility work; or
      (10)   met a defense set forth in Section
5A-15 of this code.
   (e)   Penalties.
      (1)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500. Each instance of a violation of this section is a separate offense.
      (2)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this section is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
      (3)   Prosecution for an offense under this section does not preclude the
use of other enforcement remedies or procedures that may be available to the
city.
   (f)   Nothing in this section may be construed to authorize idling of a
commercial vehicle in violation of Section
5A-15 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 26022; 26766; 27264)
SEC. 30-3.2.   USE OF ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKE
means a vehicle retarding device that converts a power producing engine into a
power absorbing air compressor in order to reduce motor vehicle speed without
the use of the vehicle’s foundation brakes.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he uses an engine compression brake to
slow or stop a motor vehicle in the city.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
      (1)   the motor vehicle was a fire apparatus owned or operated by a
governmental entity; or
      (2)   the engine compression brake was used in an emergency situation to
prevent or reduce an imminent danger of death or bodily injury to a person or
damage or destruction to property.
   (d)   Presumption. Whenever a violation of this section occurs, it is
presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle for which the citation was
issued is the person who committed the violation, either personally or through
an agent or employee. Proof of ownership may be made by a computer-generated
record of the registration of the vehicle with the Texas Department of
Transportation (or the vehicle registration agency of any other state in which
the vehicle is currently registered) showing the name of the person to whom
state license plates were issued. This proof is prima facie evidence of the
ownership of the vehicle by the person to whom the certificate of registration
was issued. (Ord. 27963)
SEC. 30-4.   LOUDSPEAKERS AND AMPLIFIERS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated
any mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier in a public place or upon any
public sidewalk, street, alley, or highway of the city in violation of any of
the following limitations and requirements:
      (1)   No mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier may be operated within
150 feet of the property line of the premises of a residence, except between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and sunset, as designated by publication in a local
newspaper of general circulation.
      (2)   A mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier may not emit loud and
disturbing noises so as to interfere with the enjoyment of life or property or
to interfere with public peace and comfort.
      (3)   A mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier must be operated so as
not to cause traffic congestion or congregation of crowds that obstructs any
public sidewalk, street, alley, or highway.
      (4)   A mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier may not be operated
within 150 feet of any:
         (A)   hospital;
         (B)   school that is in session;
         (C)   nursing home; or
         (D)   facility that provides surgical services to patients who do not
require overnight hospital care during the hours of operation of the facility.
   (b)   In this section:
      (1)   RESIDENCE means a single-family, duplex, or multifamily dwelling.
      (2)   SURGICAL SERVICES means therapy of a mechanical or operative kind,
including, but not limited to, operations involving cutting, the setting of
fractures and dislocations, and similar manual forms of treatment.
   (c)   If conduct that would otherwise violate this section consists of
speech or other communication, of gathering with others to hear or observe such
speech or communication, or of gathering with others to picket or otherwise
express in a nonviolent manner a position on social, economic, political, or
religious questions, the person must be ordered to move, disperse, or otherwise
remedy the violation prior to arrest or citation.
   (d)   The order required by Subsection (c) may be given by a peace officer,
a fireman, a person with authority to control the use of the premises, or any
person directly affected by the violation.
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   in circumstances in which this section requires an order, no order
was given;
      (2)   an order, if given, was manifestly unreasonable in scope;
      (3)   an order, if given, was promptly obeyed;
      (4)   the mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier was operated in a
public place within an enclosed structure and was not audible beyond the
property line of the premises on which it was located;
      (5)   the person operating the mechanical loud speaker or sound amplifier
was a law enforcement officer or member of the fire department in the
performance of official duties;
      (6)   the mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier was operated for the
purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or danger; or
      (7)   the mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier was operated in the
performance of emergency work necessary to restore public utilities, to restore
property to a safe condition, or to protect persons or property from imminent
danger, following a fire, accident, or natural disaster. (Ord. Nos. 13744;
18798; 19455; 21878; 24835)
SEC. 30-5.   PENALTIES.
   (a)   Criminal penalties. Unless specifically provided otherwise in this
chapter, an offense under this chapter is punishable by a criminal fine not to
exceed $2,000. A person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day
during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued. The culpable
mental state required for the commission of an offense under this chapter is
governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (b)   Civil penalties. In addition to imposing the criminal penalty
prescribed in Subsection (a), the city may, in accordance with Chapter 54 of
the Texas Local Government Code, bring a civil action against a person
violating a provision of this chapter. The civil action may include, but is not
limited to, a suit to recover a civil penalty pursuant to Section 54.017 of the
Texas Local Government Code not to exceed $1,000 for each day or portion of a
day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. (Ord.
Nos. 24835; 27963)
CHAPTER 31
OFFENSES - MISCELLANEOUS
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
Sec.
31-1.   Swimming in certain water prohibited.
Sec.
31-2.   Setting of booby-traps.
Sec.
31-3.   Discrimination and dress codes in places of public accommodation.
Sec.
31-4.   Discharging a firearm in a private place.
Sec.
31-5.   Glue - Use, sale, and possession.
Sec.
31-6.   Other solvents - Use, sale, and possession.
Sec.
31-7.   Icebox or refrigerator - Abandonment or dangerous exposure prohibited.
Sec.
31-8.   Kites with metallic frames prohibited.
Sec.
31-9.   Kites and moored balloons prohibited near airports.
Sec.
31-10.   Abatement of nuisances.
Sec.
31-11.   Nuisance - Judgment in municipal court.
Sec.
31-12.   Limited hours of certain coin-operated devices.
Sec.
31-13.   Sleeping in a public place.
Sec.
31-13.1.   Prohibition on the unauthorized placement, erection, or maintenance
of temporary shelters on designated public property.
Sec.
31-14.   Entering portions of buildings without consent.
Sec.
31-14.1.   Entering motor vehicles without consent.
Sec.
31-15.   Solicitation in certain buildings without consent.
Sec.
31-16.   Replica firearms.
Sec.
31-17.   Specified sex offenders near schools and child-care facilities.
Sec.
31-17.1.   Restrictions on sex offenders residing in the same dwelling unit.
Sec.
31-18.   Urinating or defecating in public.
Sec.
31-19.   Solicitation for sodomy - Not for hire.
Sec.
31-20.   Solicitation for obscene conduct - Not for hire.
Sec.
31-21.   Solicitation in food and drink establishment.
Sec.
31-22.   Regulations for public speeches in Stone Place, Four-Way Place, and
Bullington Street Mall.
Sec.
31-22.1.   Regulations for public speeches in public areas surrounding Thanks-
Giving Square.
Sec.
31-23.   Unauthorized use of city seal or other insignia.
Sec.
31-24.   Reserved.
Sec.
31-25.   Prohibiting release of rats; defenses.
Sec.
31-26.   Reserved.
Sec.
31-27.   Manifesting the purpose of engaging in prostitution.
Sec.
31-28.   Failure to disclose representation.
Sec.
31-29.   Dialing 9-1-1 when no emergency exists.
Sec.
31-30.   Manifesting the purpose of selling illegal drugs and chemicals.
Sec.
31-31.   Prohibiting free distribution of tobacco products in public places.
Sec.
31-32.   Solicitation to purchase a prohibited substance.
Sec.
31-32.1.   Illegal smoking products and related paraphernalia prohibited.
Sec.
31-33.   Reserved.
Sec.
31-34.   Picketing in residential areas.
Sec.
31-35.   Reserved.
Sec.
31-36.   Menacing another person.
Sec.
31-37.   Hours of closure for certain city property.
Sec.
31-38.   Duty of property owner to remove graffiti.
Sec.
31-39.   Responsibility of parent or guardian for graffiti created by a minor.
Sec.
31-39.1.   Possession of graffiti implements prohibited; presumptions;
defenses.
Sec.
31-40.   Possession of shopping carts.
Sec.
31-41.   Lock, take, and hide signs.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
SEC. 31-1.   SWIMMING IN CERTAIN WATER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, with the intent to swim, bathe, wade,
or go in the water, he enters the water of a river, stream, pond, or
watercourse within the city, either natural or artificial, whether public or
private.
   (b)   It is an exception to the application of this section if the body of
water is a public, semi-public, or private swimming pool which meets the
standards of the laws of the state and
Chapter 43A of this code.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
      (1)   the person was engaged in the performance of his official duties as
an officer or employee of the city;
      (2)   the person was engaged in a bona fide effort to rescue or recover a
human being or property from the water;
      (3)   the person was engaged in dredging or other water improvement or
construction work authorized by the city council or the park and recreation
department; or
      (4)   the water was designated by official signs showing that wading or
going into the water in the specific designated area is authorized by the rules
and regulations of the park and recreation department of the city. (Ord. 14971)
SEC. 31-2.   SETTING OF BOOBY-TRAPS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he installs upon premises, a trap or
device of any kind, designed to do bodily harm to a person entering into or
upon the premises.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the device is a
tear gas device installed on a safe, vault, cabinet, or vending machine, which
is activated only when the equipment is wrongfully opened. (Ord. 14971)
SEC. 31-3.   DISCRIMINATION AND DRESS CODES IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1) PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION means every business within the city,
whether wholesale or retail, or place of entertainment, which is open to the
general public and offers for compensation any product, service, or facility,
and includes, all hotels, motels, restaurants, bars, lounges, nightclubs, or
cabarets where food or beverages are sold or offered for sale; theaters; retail
houses; washaterias; bowling alleys; skating rinks; golf courses; and all
public conveyances as well as their stations or terminals.
      (2)   HOTEL and MOTEL means every establishment offering lodging to
transient guests for compensation other than an establishment located within a
building which contains not more than five rooms for rent or hire and which is
actually occupied by the proprietor of the establishment as his residence, nor
does it include an establishment if the majority of occupants are permanent
residents and maintain their fixed place of domicile in the establishment.
      (3)   BAR and LOUNGE means every bar, lounge, or tavern licensed by the
state to serve alcoholic beverages, including wine and beer, for consumption on
the premises, other than restaurants and nightclubs.
      (4)   NIGHTCLUB means a nightclub, cabaret, or coffee house offering
facilities for public entertainment, social recreation, or group amusement or
relaxation, and also offering for sale beverages, whether alcoholic or non-
alcoholic.
      (5)   THEATER means every place, whether indoors or out-of-doors, at
which any theatrical performance, moving picture show, musical concert, circus,
carnival, or other performance is offered for compensation to the general
public.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   discriminates against, withholds from, or denies a person any of
the advantages, facilities, or services offered to the general public by a
place of public accommodation because of race, religion, sex, color, or
national origin; or
      (2)   refuses admission to or expels from a place of public
accommodation, a person for noncompliance with a dress, grooming, or
identification requirement that was not previously posted in writing in
accordance with Subsection (d).
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(2) that the
refusal of admission or expulsion was required by law.
   (d)   If a place of public accommodation posts dress, grooming, or
identification requirements, the requirements must be posted:
      (1)   in writing in a conspicuous, clearly visible location outside each
public entrance to the place of public accommodation; and
      (2)   at least seven days before becoming effective if a change is made
in the requirements after the initial requirements are posted.
   (e)   This section does not apply to a hotel, restaurant, bar, lounge,
nightclub, cabaret, theater, bowling alley, skating rink, or golf course when
the accommodations, advantages, facilities, and services are restricted to
members of a club and their guests; nor to any bona fide social, fraternal,
educational, civic, political, or religious organization, when the profits of
the accommodations, advantages, facilities and services, above reasonable and
necessary expenses, are solely for the benefit of the organization. (Ord. Nos.
14971; 16443; 18960)
SEC. 31-4.   DISCHARGING A FIREARM IN A PRIVATE PLACE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he discharges a firearm, rifle,
shotgun, automatic rifle, revolver, pistol, or other weapon designed for the
purpose of firing or discharging a shell or cartridge, in a place not
customarily open to the public, whether the shell or cartridge is blank or live
ammunition.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
      (1)   the person was a law enforcement peace officer acting in the
performance of his official duties;
      (2)   the person was at a shooting range operated by an agency of the
United States government, State of Texas, or a political subdivision of the
state, or which is privately operated if approved by the police department;
      (3)   the person was using blank cartridges for a show or theatrical
production, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or by
a military organization; or
      (4)   the person was acting in a self-defense or justifiable or excusable
homicide situation. (Ord. 14971)
SEC. 31-5.   GLUE - USE, SALE, AND POSSESSION.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   MODEL GLUE means glue or cement of the type commonly used in the
building of model airplanes, boats, and automobiles, or a similar substance
which contains one or more of the following volatile solvents:
         (A)   Acetone
         (B)   Amylacetate
         (C)   Benzol or Benzene
         (D)   Butyl acetate
         (E)   Butyl alcohol
         (F)   Carbon tetrachloride
         (G)   Chloroform
         (H)   Cyclohexanone
         (I)   Ethanol or ethyl alcohol
         (J)   Ethyl acetate
         (K)   Hexane
         (L)   Isopropanol or isopropyl alcohol
         (M)   Isopropyl acetate
         (N)   Methyl ‘cellosolve’ acetate
         (O)   Methyl ethyl ketone
         (P)   Methyl isobutyl ketone
         (Q)   Toluol or toluene
         (R)   Trichloroethylene
         (S)   Tricresyl phosphate
         (T)   Xylol or xylene
      (2)   KIT means a collection of materials used for the construction of
model airplanes, model boats, model automobiles, model trains, or other similar
assemblage of construction materials.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if:
      (1)   he inhales or otherwise induces into his respiratory or circulatory
system, the volatile vapors of “model glue” with the intent of becoming
intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational, or in any manner changing or
distorting his eyesight, thinking process, judgment, balance, or coordination;
      (2)   being a person under 18 years of age, he carries upon his person
“model glue” unless it is being transported from the place of purchase to his
place of residence or business or is a part of a “kit”; or
      (3)   he knowingly or intentionally possesses, buys, sells or transfers
“model glue” for the purpose of inducing or aiding another person to violate
the provisions of this section.
   (c)   A person shall not sell or otherwise transfer possession of “model
glue” to a minor under the age of 18 years for any purpose, unless at the time
of the sale or transfer of possession, the minor is accompanied by a parent or
guardian, and the parent or guardian signs in the presence of the person making
the sale or transfer, a written consent for the sale or transfer to the minor.
   (d)   The person selling or transferring possession of “model glue” to a
minor person under the age of 18 years shall make a written record showing the
name, address, sex, and age of the minor, as well as the name and address of
the consenting parent or guardian, which record must be kept available for
inspection by the police for a period of at least 12 months from the date of
sale or transfer. Separate records need not be kept if the seller or transferor
retains the consent letter required in Subsection (c), if the letter contains
all the information required by this subsection.
   (e)   The seller or transferor shall provide the records required in
Subsection (d) for inspection by any police officer acting in his official
capacity requesting the records when the seller or transferor is normally open
for business.
   (f)   The person selling or offering for sale “model glue,” shall not
display “model glue” on open shelves or counters in his business establishment
in a manner which will make it accessible to customers or members of the
public.
   (g)   The provisions of Subsections (c) and (d) of this section do not apply
if the “model glue” is sold, delivered, or given simultaneously with, and as
part of, a “kit”. (Ord. 14971)
SEC. 31-6.   OTHER SOLVENTS - USE, SALE, POSSESSION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if:
      (1)   he inhales or otherwise induces into his respiratory or circulatory
system, the volatile vapors of a substance which contains one or more of the
following volatile solvents:
         (A)   Acetone
         (B)   Amylacetate
         (C)   Benzol or Benzene
         (D)   Butyl acetate
         (E)   Butyl alcohol
         (F)   Carbon tetrachloride
         (G)   Chloroform
         (H)   Cyclohexanone
         (I)   Ethanol or ethyl alcohol
         (J)   Ethyl acetate
         (K)   Hexane
         (L)   Isopropanol or isopropyl alcohol
         (M)   Isopropyl acetate
         (N)   Methyl “cellosolve” acetate
         (O)   Methyl ethyl ketone
         (P)   Methyl isobutyl ketone
         (Q)   Toluol or toluene
         (R)   Trichloroethylene
         (S)   Tricresyl phosphate
         (T)   Xylol or xylene
with the intent of becoming intoxicated; elated; dazed; paralyzed; irrational;
in any manner changing or distorting his eyesight, thinking process, judgment,
balance, or coordination; or dulling the brain or nervous system;
      (2)   he sells, offers for sale, delivers, or gives away to a person, any
substance containing one or more of the volatile solvents listed in
Subparagraph (1) of this section, when he knows or has reason to believe that
the substance will be used for the purpose of inhalation to induce symptoms of
intoxication; elation; paralysis; irrational behavior; to change or distort
eyesight, thinking processes, judgment, balance, or coordination; or the
dulling of the brain or nervous system; or
      (3)   for the purposes of violating Subparagraph (1) of this section, he
uses or possesses a substance containing one or more of the solvents listed in
Subparagraph (1) of this section. (Ord. 14971)
SEC. 31-7.   ICEBOX OR REFRIGERATOR - ABANDONMENT OR DANGEROUS EXPOSURE
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   ABANDON means the throwing away of an icebox or refrigerator on
vacant property, junk heaps, trash piles, or debris accumulations or any other
act which at common law would constitute an abandonment of personal property.
      (2)   DANGEROUS EXPOSURE means the placing of an icebox or refrigerator
not in use as an icebox or refrigerator, in a garage, barn, outbuilding, porch,
yard, lot, or other portion of premises where children at play may come upon it
and be attracted to it.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he abandons or dangerously exposes or
causes or permits to be abandoned or dangerously exposed an icebox or
refrigerator, unless the latch or lock holding each door shut is dismantled or
removed so that the door may be opened from within by simply pushing on it.
   (c)   The owner of an abandoned or dangerously exposed icebox or
refrigerator and the owner or occupant of the premises where an abandonment or
dangerous exposure occurs, has the duty to remove the door or dismantle or
remove the latch or lock holding the door shut on the icebox or refrigerator.
   (d)   The abandonment or dangerous exposure of an icebox or refrigerator
with its door, or doors, in normal latching or locking condition is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and a serious menace to life because of the
danger of children entering such an icebox or refrigerator and becoming locked
inside and suffocating, and it is the duty of any city employee upon observing
an abandoned or dangerously exposed icebox or refrigerator to remove the door
or to dismantle the latch or lock holding the door.
   (e)   A person who violates this section is guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction, is punishable by a fine of not more than $500 nor less than:
      (1)   $200 for a first conviction of any violation of this section within
any 24-month period;
      (2)   $400 for the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-
month period; and
      (3)   $500 for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense
within any 24-month period. (Ord. 14971; 20599)
SEC. 31-8.   KITES WITH METALLIC FRAMES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   sells, possesses for sale, offers for sale, or manufactures for
sale, a kite with a metallic frame; or
      (2)   flies a kite with a metallic frame within the city. (Ord. 14971)
SEC. 31-9.   KITES AND MOORED BALLOONS PROHIBITED NEAR AIRPORTS.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   BALLOON means a lighter-than-air aircraft that is not engine
driven.
      (2)   KITE means a framework covered with paper, cloth, plastic metal, or
other material intended to be flown at the end of rope, cable, wire, twine, or
string and having as its only support the force of the wind moving past its
surface and includes a gyro- glider attached by a towline to a vehicle on the
surface of the earth.
      (3)   MOORED BALLOON means a balloon that is secured by a rope, cable,
wire, twine, or string to the surface of the earth or an object on the surface
of the earth.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   operates a moored balloon having a diameter of less than six feet
or a gas capacity of less than 115 cubic feet, or flies a kite weighing less
than five pounds, in the airport approach, turning, or transition zone of
Dallas Love Field or Dallas Executive Airport, as shown on the airport zoning
maps (L-1 and R-1), which are incorporated into this section by reference and
maintained on file in the office of the city secretary;
      (2)   operates a moored balloon having a diameter of less than six feet
or a gas capacity of less than 115 cubic feet, or flies a kite weighing less
than five pounds, in the airport approach, turning, or transition zones of a
private airport in the city; or
      (3)   operates a moored balloon having a diameter of more than six feet
or a gas capacity of more than 115 cubic feet, or flies a kite weighing more
than five pounds, within the city in the following circumstances:
         (A)   closer than 500 feet to the base of a cloud;
         (B)   at an altitude of more than 500 feet above the surface of the
earth;
         (C)   from an area where the ground visibility is less than three
miles; or
         (D)   within five miles of the boundary of an airport within the city.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subparagraph (3) of Subsection
(b) of this section if the operation of the moored balloon or kite is below the
height and within 250 feet of a structure, if the operation does not obscure
lighting on the structure.
   (d)   The operation of a moored balloon or kite in violation of this section
is an air navigation hazard and a nuisance in that it obstructs the air space
required for the flight of aircraft or is hazardous to the landing or taking
off of aircraft, and the chief of police may abate the operation. (Ord. Nos.
14971; 24859)
SEC. 31-10.   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   Whenever a nuisance, as defined in an ordinance of the city, is ascertained
to exist within the city, the city manager may order the owner or occupant of
the premises on which the nuisance exists to abate or remove the nuisance
within a specified time designated in the order, and if the order is not
followed, the city manager may order the chief of police to abate and remove
the nuisance. The expense incurred in abating and removing a nuisance shall be
charged to the owner of the premises and will result in a lien on the real
estate on which the nuisance existed, which may be levied as a special tax
against the real estate. (Ord. 14971)
SEC. 31-11.   NUISANCE - JUDGMENT IN MUNICIPAL COURT.
   Whenever a judgment is rendered in the municipal court against a person for
violation of a city ordinance and the violation is defined as a nuisance, the
person shall abate and remove the nuisance within 24 hours after judgment is
rendered. If the person fails to abate the nuisance, the chief of police may
abate and remove the nuisance. The expense incurred in abating and removing the
nuisance will result in a lien on the real estate whereupon the nuisance
existed, which may be levied as a special tax against the real estate. (Ord.
14971)
SEC. 31-12.   LIMITED HOURS OF CERTAIN COIN-OPERATED DEVICES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, as owner, exhibitor, lessee, or
employee of the owner, exhibitor, or lessee of a coin-operated amusement device
located within 500 feet of a public or private elementary or secondary school,
he permits a person under the age of 17 years to operate the coin-operated
amusement device between the hours of 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. on days during the fall
or spring term when students are required to attend school in the school
district in which the device is located.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE has
the meaning ascribed to it in Section
6A-1 of this code.
   (c)   The owner, exhibitor, or lessee of a coin- operated amusement device
located within 500 feet of a public or private elementary or secondary school
shall place a sign on the device that reads, “Play by Persons Under 17 Not
Allowed during School Hours.”
   (d)   For purposes of this section measurements shall be made in a straight
line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
entry door in the portion of a building where the coin- operated amusement
device is located to the nearest entry door of the school.
   (e)   A person violating Subsection (a) of this section is deemed to be
maintaining a public nuisance and a police officer of the city who observes the
violation shall seize all the coin-operated amusement devices in the
establishment and upon conviction of the person for violation of Subsection
(a), the city shall dispose of the devices in the manner provided by law. (Ord.
Nos. 14971; 16585)
SEC. 31-13.   SLEEPING IN A PUBLIC PLACE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   sleeps or dozes in a street, alley, park, or other public place; or
      (2)   sleeps or dozes in a vacant lot adjoining a public street or
highway.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subparagraph (2) of this section
if the person owns the vacant lot or has the consent of the owner to sleep or
doze on the vacant lot. (Ord. 14971)
SEC. 31-13.1.   PROHIBITION ON THE UNAUTHORIZED PLACEMENT, ERECTION, OR
MAINTENANCE OF TEMPORARY SHELTERS ON DESIGNATED PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   DESIGNATED PUBLIC PROPERTY means any of the following:
         (A)   Any parks, grounds, buildings, facilities, or rights-of-way
under the jurisdiction, management, or control of the city’s park and
recreation board.
         (B)   Any of the following properties, grounds, buildings, facilities,
or rights-of-way owned, leased, or controlled by the city:
            (i)   The Dallas city hall and the city hall plaza, as defined in
Section
31-37 of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
            (ii)   The Dallas convention center and the convention center
grounds, as defined in Section
31-37 of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
            (iii)   The J. Erik Jonsson central library and the central library
grounds, as defined in Section
31-37 of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
         (C)   Any vacant and unimproved lots owned, leased, or controlled by
the city.
      (2)   TEMPORARY SHELTER means any tent or other type of portable or
impermanent structure, whether manufactured or makeshift, in or under which a
person can be sheltered or partially sheltered from the elements.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person places, erects, or maintains
a temporary shelter in or upon any designated public property.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) of this section
that the placement, erection, or maintenance of the temporary shelter by the
person on the designated public property was expressly authorized by:
      (1)   an ordinance or resolution of the city council;
      (2)   a special event permit issued under Chapter 42A of the Dallas City
Code or another license or permit granted by the city;
      (3)   a contract with the city; or
      (4)   if the designated public property is under the jurisdiction,
management, or control of the city’s park and recreation board, a permit or
other written authorization granted by the board or by the director of the park
and recreation department.
   (d)   A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (e)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender’s reason for placing, erecting, or
maintaining a temporary shelter on the designated public property. The police
officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless
the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any response and other circumstances, no defense in Subsection (c) is present.
Before issuing a citation or making an arrest, the police officer shall give
the person an oral or written warning that:
      (1)   requests the person to cease the placement, erection, or
maintenance of the temporary shelter and to completely remove the temporary
shelter and all personal belongings from the designated public property within
one hour after issuance of the warning; and
      (2)   states that failure to comply with the warning may result in the
citation or arrest of the person and the removal by the city of the temporary
shelter and any personal belongings remaining on the designated public
property.
   (f)   Reserved. (Ord. Nos. 29070; 33224)
SEC. 31-14.   ENTERING PORTIONS OF BUILDINGS WITHOUT CONSENT.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   BUILDING means an enclosed structure to which the public or a
substantial group of the public has access;
      (2)   CONSPICUOUSLY MARKED means a sign posted to be reasonably likely to
come to the attention of anyone approaching an entrance to a portion of a
building;
      (3)   OWNER means a person who has title to a building or a leasehold
interest in the building, or someone with apparent authority to act for a
person who has title or a leasehold interest.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he enters a portion of a building
without consent of the owner if the portion of the building entered is
conspicuously marked to give notice that:
      (1)   entry is restricted to a specific class of persons of which the
actor is not a member; or
      (2)   entry is prohibited to the public. (Ord. Nos. 14971; 15084)
SEC. 31-14.1.   ENTERING MOTOR VEHICLES WITHOUT CONSENT.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   MOTOR VEHICLE has the meaning assigned to it by the state vehicle
laws;
      (2)   OWNER means the person who has title to the motor vehicle or the
person who is operating or in control of the motor vehicle with the consent of
the title holder.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he enters any portion of a motor
vehicle without the consent of the owner.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the person
who entered the motor vehicle was:
      (1)   a law enforcement officer or was acting under the direction of a
law enforcement officer; or
      (2)   operating pursuant to a vehicle tow service license or a vehicle
storage facility license issued under
Chapter 48A of this code and was in the process of removing an illegally parked
or unauthorized vehicle from private property or storing an illegally parked or
unauthorized vehicle that was removed from private property. (Ord. Nos. 16617;
19099)
SEC. 31-15.   SOLICITATION IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS WITHOUT CONSENT.
   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   solicits customers or patronage for himself or on behalf of another
or distributes advertising matter, upon the premises of a hotel, private office
building, or public building in the city without first having obtained written
consent from the owner, lessee, managing agent, or person in charge of the
operation of the hotel, private office building, or public building; or
      (2)   solicits, seeks, or begs contributions for himself or on behalf of
another upon the premises of a hotel, private office building, or public
building in the city without first having obtained written consent from the
owner, lessee, managing agent, or person in charge of the operation of the
hotel, private office building, or public building. (Ord. 14971)
SEC. 31-16.   REPLICA FIREARMS.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   AIR SOFT GUN means a spring- operated, gas-operated, or battery-
powered replica firearm made of hard plastic or light metal that fires plastic
or other nonmetallic projectiles.
      (2)   FIREARM means any device designed, made, or adapted to expel a
projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or
burning substance, or any device readily convertible to that use.
      (3)   ICE CREAM VENDING TRUCK OR PUSHCART means any vehicle from which
ice cream or other frozen desserts are sold or offered for sale.
      (4)   PAINTBALL GUN means a replica firearm that is powered by compressed
gas (carbon dioxide, nitrogen, or ordinary air) and fires dye-filled gelatinous
capsules.
      (5)   PUBLIC PLACE means any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
      (6)   REPLICA FIREARM means any device or object that is a toy version or
facsimile of, or is reasonably likely to be perceived as, a pistol, revolver,
shotgun, sawed-off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher, or other
firearm, and includes but is not limited to a starter pistol, BB gun, pellet
gun, air soft gun, paintball gun, or air rifle.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he recklessly displays or brandishes a
replica firearm in a manner or under circumstances that cause another person
to:
      (1)   reasonably believe that the replica firearm is actually an operable
firearm; and
      (2)   fear imminent bodily injury from a firearm.
   (c)   It is defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the person
displaying or brandishing the replica firearm did so in self defense.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if he displays or brandishes a replica
firearm in any public place within the city.
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (d) that the replica
firearm was:
      (1)   a non-firing collector replica firearm modeled on a real firearm
and not intended for use as a toy; or
      (2)   a decorative, ornamental, or miniature object having the
appearance, shape, or configuration of a firearm and measuring not more than 38
millimeters in height and 70 millimeters in length (excluding any gun stock
length measurement), including, but not limited to, an object intended to be
displayed on a desk, worn on a bracelet or necklace, or attached to a keychain;
or
      (3)   being displayed or brandished at a lawfully-operated, contained
location designated for games, events, and activities that involve replica
firearms such as, but not limited to, paintball guns and air soft guns; or
      (4)   being displayed at a lawfully-operated business establishment
authorized to sell merchandise, including replica firearms; or
      (5)   being displayed or brandished as part of an event, performance,
demonstration, or ceremony authorized by the city or sponsored and conducted by
a subdivision of any federal, state, or local government; or
      (6)   being displayed or brandished in the production of a television
program, a theatrical presentation, or a motion picture or other filming event
in the city and written permission was obtained from the city to use the
replica firearm in the production; or
      (7)   being displayed or brandished in a historical reenactment, military
event, or other special event in the city requiring the use of a replica
firearm and written permission was obtained from the city to use the replica
firearm in the event; or
      (8)   being displayed or brandished for the purpose of protecting persons
or property as authorized under Chapter 9 of the Texas Penal Code; or
      (9)   being displayed or brandished by a law enforcement officer or other
government employee or official while acting in the performance of official
duties.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   removes or obscures:
         (A)   the blaze orange tip required to be on a replica firearm under
Title 15, Section 5001 of the United States Code; or
         (B)   any other colors or markings required to be on a replica firearm
under city ordinance or federal or state law; or
      (2)   possesses a replica firearm on which the blaze orange tip required
by Title 15, Section 5001 of the United States Code or any other colors or
markings required by city ordinance or state or federal law have been removed
or obscured.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if he, either personally or through an
employee or agent, sells or offers for sale a replica firearm from an ice cream
vending truck or pushcart.
   (h)   The owner, operator, or person in control of an ice cream vending
truck or pushcart commits an offense if a replica firearm is present in or on
the truck or pushcart while it is in the city.
   (i)   A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500. (Ord. Nos. 19855; 26761)
SEC. 31-17.   SPECIFIED SEX OFFENDERS NEAR SCHOOLS AND CHILD-CARE FACILITIES.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   CHILD-CARE FACILITY has the meaning given that term in Section
51A-4.204(3)(A) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (2)   CONTINUAL PATTERN OF UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY means that, on at least two
occasions within the preceding 12-month period, the specified sex offender came
onto the premises of any school or child-care facility or onto a street,
sidewalk, or other public way adjacent to the premises of any school or child-
care facility and was asked to leave by a person in authority.
      (3)   PERSON IN AUTHORITY means the chief administrative officer of the
school or child-care facility, the chief administrative officer’s authorized
agent, or a peace officer.
      (4)   SCHOOL means any public or private school that has a curriculum for
kindergarten, elementary, or secondary education and that exists apart from a
child’s home.
      (5)   SPECIFIED SEX OFFENDER means any person required to register as a
sex offender under Chapter 62 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as
amended, for a reportable conviction or adjudication of any of the following
violations:
         (A)   Continuous sexual abuse of a young child or children, as
described in Section 21.02 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended.
         (B)   Indecency with a child, as described in Section 21.11 of the
Texas Penal Code, as amended.
         (C)   Sexual assault of a child, as described in Section 22.011 of the
Texas Penal Code, as amended.
         (D)   Aggravated sexual assault of a child, as described in Section
22.021 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended.
         (E)   Online solicitation of a minor, as described in Section 33.021
of the Texas Penal Code, as amended.
         (F)   Sexual performance by a child, as described in Section 43.25 of
the Texas Penal Code, as amended.
         (G)   Possession or promotion of child pornography, as described in
Section 43.26 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended.
         (H)   Any other violation listed in Article 62.001(5) of the Texas
Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, involving a victim younger than 17
years of age.
         (I)   A violation of the laws of another state, federal law, laws of a
foreign country, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice if the violation
contained elements substantially similar to the elements of the violations
described in Subparagraphs (A) through (H) of this paragraph.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person is a specified sex offender
and:
      (1)   remains on any part of the premises of a school or child-care
facility or on any street, sidewalk, or other public way adjacent to any part
of the premises of a school or child-care facility after being asked to leave
by a person in authority;
      (2)   reenters onto any part of the premises of a school or child-care
facility or onto any street, sidewalk, or other public way adjacent to any part
of the premises of a school or child-care facility within seven days of being
asked to leave by a person in authority; or
      (3)   has established a continual pattern of unauthorized entry onto the
premises of any school or child-care facility or onto a street, sidewalk, or
other public way adjacent to the premises of any school or child-care facility.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the person:
      (1)   was the parent or guardian of a child attending the school or
child-care facility, unless a court of competent jurisdiction has issued an
order restricting the person’s access to or presence near the child;
      (2)   was at the time of the offense enrolled in and attending the school
as a student;
      (3)   had prior written permission from the chief administrative officer
of the school or child-care facility to be present, at the time of the offense,
on the premises or on the street, sidewalk, or other public way adjacent to the
premises; or
      (4)   was in active transit in a motor vehicle on a public street that
was a direct route between two locations at which the person had legitimate
business.
   (d)   A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500. (Ord. Nos. 22355; 28065)
SEC. 31-17.1.   RESTRICTIONS ON SEX OFFENDERS RESIDING IN THE SAME DWELLING
UNIT.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   DWELLING means a structure or building occupied as a residence.
      (2)   DWELLING UNIT means one or more rooms in a single-family, duplex,
townhouse, or multifamily dwelling that:
         (A)   are designed to be a single housekeeping unit to accommodate one
family; and
         (B)   contain one or more kitchens, one or more bathrooms, and one or
more bedrooms.
      (3)   MULTIFAMILY DWELLING means a multifamily use as defined in Section
51A-4.209(b)(5) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (4)   REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER means any person registered or required to
register as a sex offender under Chapter 62 of the Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure, as amended.
   (b)   A person who is a registered sex offender commits an offense if the
person resides, either temporarily or permanently, in the same dwelling unit
with another registered sex offender.
   (c)   The owner, operator, or person in control of a dwelling unit commits
an offense if he or she, either personally or through an employee or agent,
allows a registered sex offender to reside, either temporarily or permanently,
in the dwelling unit with another registered sex offender.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) or (c) that:
      (1)   all registered sex offenders residing in the dwelling unit were
related to each other by one or any combination of the following:
         (A)   blood;
         (B)   marriage;
         (C)   adoption; or
         (D)   foster care under a placement program authorized by the Texas
Department of Family and Protective Services pursuant to Chapter 264,
Subchapter B of the Texas Family Code, as amended;
      (2)   the violation for which the sex offender was required to register
was the only sex crime on the sex offender’s record and, at the time of that
violation, the victim in the case was:
         (A)   between 14 and 17 years of age;
         (B)   a willing participant in the sexual activity; and
         (C)   not more than four years younger than the registered sex
offender; or
      (3)   the dwelling unit was a lawfully established and lawfully
operating:
         (A)   halfway house, as defined in Section 51-4.204(5) or
51A-4.204(13) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended;
         (B)   overnight general purpose shelter, as defined in Section
51A-4.205(2.1) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended;
         (C)   homeless assistance center, as defined and authorized in Section
51P-357.108 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended; or
         (D)   institute for special education that holds a valid certificate
of occupancy specifically for that use and that operates a program approved by
the State of Texas for the housing, rehabilitation, and training of criminal
offenders.
   (e)   A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500. (Ord. 28065)
SEC. 31-18.   URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he urinates or defecates:
      (1)   in or on a public street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building,
structure, plaza, public or utility right-of-way, or other public place; or
      (2)   in public view.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person was in
a restroom. (Ord. 14971)
SEC. 31-19.   SOLICITATION FOR SODOMY - NOT FOR HIRE.
   (a)   In this section SODOMY means any contact between the genitals of one
person and the mouth or anus of another person.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he solicits another in a public place
to engage with him in sodomy not for hire.
   (c)   A person violating a provision of this section is guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction, will be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and not
more than $500. (Ord. Nos. 14971; 19963)
SEC. 31-20.   SOLICITATION FOR OBSCENE CONDUCT - NOT FOR HIRE.
   (a)   In this section OBSCENE CONDUCT means the touching or displaying of
the anus or any part of the genitals of another person or the breast of a
female 10 years or older.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he solicits another person in a public
place to engage with him in obscene conduct not for hire.
   (c)   A person violating a provision of this section is guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction, will be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and not
more than $500. (Ord. Nos. 14971; 15208; 19963)
SEC. 31-21.   SOLICITATION IN FOOD AND DRINK ESTABLISHMENT.
   (a)   In this section ESTABLISHMENT means a hotel, motel, night club,
cabaret, bar, lounge, tavern, coffee house, theater, arcade, restaurant, café,
cafeteria, sandwich shop, lunch counter, dining room, or other place of public
accommodation, amusement, recreation, or entertainment not subject to the
provisions of the Texas Liquor Control Act.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if while on the premises of an
establishment which sells or offers for sale food or beverages for consumption
on the premises:
      (1)   as the owner, corporate officer, operator, manager, agent, servant,
or employee of the establishment he solicits a person to buy food or a beverage
for consumption on the premises by an owner, corporate officer, operator,
manager, or employee of the establishment; or
      (2)   as owner, corporate officer, operator, manager, or other person
having control of the establishment, he intentionally or knowingly permits an
employee of the establishment to solicit a person to buy food or a beverage for
consumption on the premises by an owner, corporate officer, operator, manager,
or employee of the establishment.
   (c)   A person violating a provision of this section is guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction, will be punished by a fine not less than $100 and not
more than $500. (Ord. Nos. 14971; 15573; 19963)
SEC. 31-22.   REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC SPEECHES IN STONE PLACE, FOUR-WAY PLACE
AND BULLINGTON STREET MALL.
   (a)   In this section LEGAL HOLIDAY means New Year’s Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   uses a portion of Stone Place, Four-Way Place or the Bullington
Street Mall for the purpose of a demonstration, entertainment, or speech
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday and legal
holidays, without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police;
      (2)   uses an area outside of, but within 100 feet of, an entrance to
Stone Place, Four-Way Place or the Bullington Street Mall for the purpose of a
demonstration, entertainment, or speech, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:
00 p.m. of any day except Sunday and legal holidays; or
      (3)   while using Stone Place, Four-Way Place, or the Bullington Street
Mall, for the purpose of a demonstration, entertainment, or speech creates a
sound pressure level equal to or in excess of the following decibel limits
specified in the designated octave bands:
 
Octave Band                      37 75  150 300 600  1200 2400 4800 A
(cps)                            75 150 300 600 1200 2400 4800 9600 Scale
Decibel Band Limit (db re 0.0002 80 68  61  55  51   48   45   43   56
Micro-bar)
NOTE: A Scale levels are provided for monitoring purposes only. Noise
measurements are made in the same manner as provided in the Environmental
Performance Standards of the Dallas Development Code.
 
   (c)   The chief of police is authorized to issue permits for demonstrations,
entertainment, or speeches in Stone Place, Four-Way Place, or the Bullington
Street Mall when application is made in writing. The permit will state the date
and time of use and the purpose and manner of use, and a permittee shall act in
accordance with the provisions of the permit.
   (d)   The chief of police shall limit permits issued to the following
periods:
      Period A - from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
      Period B - from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
      Period C - from 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
      Period D - from 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.
      Period E - from 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.
The chief of police shall issue a permit for only one time period per day to
each person or organization applying and shall issue the permit for a
particular time and designated location, i.e. Stone Place, Four-Way Place, or
the Bullington Street Mall, to the first applicant making proper application
for that time and location. No permit may be issued for the period of time
between 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
   (e)   The chief of police shall issue only one permit for each location
during a single time period.
   (f)   If a permittee commits an offense under this section or violates a
provision of the permit, the chief of police shall revoke the permit. If the
chief of police denies or revokes a permit, the appeal procedure described in
Section
28-192 of this code applies.
   (g)   A permit issued pursuant to this section does not authorize a person
to obstruct or cause obstruction of a sidewalk, entrance, or exit to which the
public has access nor does it authorize the violation of other provisions of
this code. (Ord. Nos. 14971; 15472; 19455)
SEC. 31-22.1.   REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC SPEECHES IN PUBLIC AREAS SURROUNDING
THANKSGIVING SQUARE.
   (a)    In this section PUBLIC AREA SURROUNDING THANKSGIVING SQUARE
(sometimes referred to as Thanks-Giving Square Surrounding Area) means the
public streets and sidewalks between the private property lines of Block 476 of
the city and the boundary lines of private property opposite Block 476 on Bryan
Street (Blocks 233 and 237), Ervay Street (Block 477), and Pacific Avenue
(Block 75). The land within the boundaries of Thanks-Giving Square situated on
Block 476 is private property.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   uses a portion of the public area surrounding Thanks-Giving Square
for the purpose of a demonstration, entertainment, or speech between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day, without first obtaining a permit from
the chief of police; or
      (2)   while using the public area surrounding Thanks-Giving Square for
the purpose of a demonstration, entertainment, or speech creates a sound
pressure level equal to or in excess of the following decibel limits specified
in the designated octave bands:
 
Octave Band                      37 75  150 300 600  1200 2400 4800 A
(cps)                            75 150 300 600 1200 2400 4800 9600 Scale
Decibel Band Limit (db re 0.0002 80 68  61  55  51   48   45   43   56
Micro-bar)
NOTE: A Scale levels are provided for monitoring purposes only. Noise
measurements are made in the same manner as provided in the Environmental
Performance Standards of the Dallas Development Code.
 
   (c)   The chief of police is authorized to issue permits for demonstrations,
entertainment, or speeches in the public area surrounding Thanks-Giving Square
when application is made in writing. The permit will state the date and time of
use and the purpose and manner of use, and a permittee shall act in accordance
with the provisions of the permit.
   (d)   The chief of police shall limit permits issued to the following
periods:
      Period A - from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
      Period B - from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
      Period C - from 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
      Period D - from 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.
      Period E - from 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.
      Period F - from 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.
The chief of police shall issue a permit for only one time period per day to
each person or organization applying and shall issue the permit for a
particular time to the first applicant making proper application for that time.
No permit may be issued for the period of time between 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
   (e)   The chief of police shall issue only one permit during a single time
period. The chief of police shall inquire about activities planned to take
place on Thanks-Giving Square and shall take care not to issue a permit for an
activity that will conflict with an activity planned on the square.
   (f)   If a permittee commits an offense under this section or violates a
provision of the permit, the chief of police shall revoke the permit. If the
chief of police denies or revokes a permit, the appeal procedure described in
Section
28-192 of this code applies.
   (g)   A permit issued pursuant to this section does not authorize a person
to obstruct or cause obstruction of a sidewalk, entrance, or exit to which the
public has access nor does it authorize the violation of other provisions of
this code. (Ord. Nos. 15472; 19455)
SEC. 31-23.   UNAUTHORIZED USE OF CITY SEAL OR OTHER INSIGNIA.
   A person commits an offense if he uses the official flag, seal, shield,
service mark, badge, or other insignia of the city or a department of the city
or a facsimile of the flag, seal, shield, service mark, badge, or other
insignia of the city or a department of the city:
      (1)   for a commercial purpose; or
      (2)   to signify sponsorship or approval by an agency or department of
the city;
without first obtaining express written authorization from the city manager.
(Ord 14971)
SEC. 31-24.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 19196)
SEC. 31-25.   PROHIBITING RELEASE OF RATS; DEFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   possesses a live rat in captivity; or
      (2)   releases a live rat from captivity.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(1) that:
      (1)   the actor possessed the live rat for the purpose of bona fide
scientific experimentation; or
      (2)   the rat is trained and kept as a pet. (Ord. 15234)
SEC. 31-26.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 19196)
SEC. 31-27.   MANIFESTING THE PURPOSE OF ENGAGING IN PROSTITUTION.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   KNOWN PROSTITUTE OR PANDERER means a person who, within one year
previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has, within the
knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted of prostitution, promotion
of prostitution, or compelling prostitution, or declared himself or herself to
be a prostitute or panderer or available for the act of prostitution.
      (2)   PROSTITUTION has the meaning given that term in the Texas Penal
Code.
      (3)   PUBLIC PLACE has the meaning given that term in the Texas Penal
Code.
      (4)   A LOCATION FREQUENTED BY PERSONS WHO ENGAGE IN PROSTITUTION OR
SOLICITATION OF PROSTITUTION means a geographic area identified by the Dallas
Police Department as having an elevated risk for prostitution-related activity.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person, while in a public place,
manifests the purpose and intent of inducing, enticing, soliciting, or
procuring another to commit an act of prostitution.
   (c)   The following factors must be considered when determining whether a
person has manifested the purpose and intent of inducing, enticing, soliciting,
or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution:
      (1)   that the person is a known prostitute or panderer or is in a
location frequented by persons who engage in prostitution or solicitation of
prostitution; and
      (2)   either:
         (A)   repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages
passers-by in conversation;
         (B)   repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by
hailing, waving of arms, or any other bodily gesture; or
         (C)   repeatedly interferes with the free passage of other persons.
   (d)   A peace officer may not arrest a person for a violation of this
section unless the officer has given the person an opportunity to explain the
person’s conduct.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the
explanation given the arresting officer under Subsection (d) is true and
discloses a lawful purpose. (Ord. 15247; 32574)
SEC. 31-28.   FAILURE TO DISCLOSE REPRESENTATION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, for compensation, he represents the
interest of another by personal appearance before the city council or any board
or commission of the city, and fails to disclose the fact of such
representation and the name or names of the person or persons so represented.
   (b)   In this section:
      (1)   PERSON means an individual, committee, club, or other organization,
or a group of persons who are voluntarily acting in concert.
      (2)   COMPENSATION means money, service, facility, or thing of value or
financial benefit which is received or to be received in return for or in
connection with services rendered or to be rendered. (Ord. 15597)
SEC. 31-29.   DIALING 9-1-1 WHEN NO EMERGENCY EXISTS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly dials a 9-1-1 emergency
telephone number when no emergency exists.
   (b)   A person is presumed to have dialed a 9-1-1 emergency telephone number
if the telephone from which the number is dialed is listed in his name with the
local telephone company. (Ord. 19889)
SEC. 31-30.   MANIFESTING THE PURPOSE OF SELLING ILLEGAL DRUGS AND CHEMICALS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he loiters in a public place in a
manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of selling any illegal
controlled substance, dangerous drug, simulated controlled substance, or
volatile chemical. Among the circumstances that may be considered in
determining whether such a purpose is manifested are:
      (1)   the person is a known drug dealer;
      (2)   the person is at a location frequented by persons who use, possess,
or sell drugs;
      (3)   the person repeatedly engages in conversation with passers-by,
whether on foot or in a vehicle; or
      (4)   the person repeatedly passes to or receives from passers-by,
whether on foot or in a vehicle, money, objects, or written material.
   (b)   No arrest shall be made for a violation of Subsection (a) unless the
arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain his
conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating Subsection (a) if it
appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful
purpose.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, a “known drug dealer” is a person
who, within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this
section, has within the knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted of
the manufacture, sale, or delivery of any illegal controlled substance,
dangerous drug, simulated controlled substance, or volatile chemical. (Ord.
Nos. 20052; 20076)
SEC. 31-31.   PROHIBITING FREE DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS IN PUBLIC
PLACES.
   A person commits an offense if, for any commercial purpose, he distributes
any cigarette or other tobacco or smoking product free to any person in or on
any public street, sidewalk, park, playground, building, or other public place.
(Ord. 20781)
SEC. 31-32.   SOLICITATION TO PURCHASE A PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE has the same meaning ascribed to the term by
Section 481.002 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (2)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOGUE has the same meaning ascribed to the
term by Section 481.002 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (3)   DANGEROUS DRUG has the same meaning ascribed to the term by Section
483.001 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (4)   PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE means a controlled substance, controlled
substance analogue, dangerous drug, volatile chemical, or any combination of
those substances.
      (5)   VOLATILE CHEMICAL means any chemical or isomar of a chemical listed
in Section 484.002 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if, with intent to acquire a prohibited
substance, he requests, commands, or attempts to induce another to sell,
donate, or otherwise transfer or deliver a prohibited substance to the person.
   (c)   A person may not be convicted under this section unless:
      (1) the testimony of the person allegedly solicited is corroborated; and
      (2) the solicitation is made under circumstances strongly corroborative
of both the solicitation itself and the person’s intent that the other person
act on the solicitation.
   (d)   It is no defense to prosecution under this section that:
      (1)   no monetary or other consideration was tendered to the person
solicited; or
      (2)   the person solicited was unable or unwilling to transfer or deliver
a prohibited substance.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this section
that the solicitation was made:
      (1)   in furtherance of a transaction that would not constitute a
violation of any applicable law; or
      (2)   by a peace officer, federal law enforcement officer, or other law
enforcement agent acting in the lawful discharge of an official duty.
   (f)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $2,000.
   (g)   Any conduct proscribed under this section that is also an offense
under state law shall not be prosecuted under this section, but shall be
prosecuted pursuant to, and punishable as provided by, the applicable state
law. An offense under this section is not a lesser included offense under
Chapter 481, 483, or 484 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 20795)
SEC. 31-32.1.   ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS AND RELATED PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   ILLEGAL SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment, device, or
utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body an illegal smoking product, which
paraphernalia includes but is not limited to:
         (A)   a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe
with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal
bowl;
         (B)   a water pipe;
         (C)   a carburetion tube or device;
         (D)   a smoking or carburetion mask;
         (E)   a chamber pipe;
         (F)   a carburetor pipe;
         (G)   an electric pipe;
         (H)   an air-driven pipe;
         (I)   a chillum;
         (J)   a bong; or
         (K)   an ice pipe or chiller.
      (2)   ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCT means any substance, however labeled and
regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being
smoked, which includes any one or more of the following chemicals:
         (A)   Salvia divinorum, including:
            (i)   all parts of the plant, whether growing or not;
            (ii)   the seeds of the plant;
            (iii)   any extract from any part of the plant; and
            (iv)   any compound, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
the plant, its seeds, or its extracts, including Salvinorin A;
         (B)   2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclo-hexyl]-5- (2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol
(also known as CP47, 497) and homologues;
         (C)   [(6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxy-methyl)-6,6- dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-
yl)-6a, 7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol] (also known as HU- 211 or
Dexanabinol);
         (D)   1-pentyl-3-(1-napthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018);
         (E)   1-butyl-3-(1-napthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); or
         (F)   1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaph- tholy)indole (also known as JWH-081).
   (b)   A person commits an offense if, in the city, he:
      (1)   possesses, buys, sells, offers for sale, delivers, or transfers any
illegal smoking product;
      (2)   causes any illegal smoking product to be sold, delivered, or
transferred to another person;
      (3)   uses, inhales, ingests, or otherwise introduces into his body any
illegal smoking product; or
      (4)   uses or possesses with the intent to use any illegal smoking
paraphernalia to inhale, ingest, or otherwise introduce into his body any
illegal smoking product.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that an illegal
smoking product or illegal smoking paraphernalia was:
      (1)   in the possession of a peace officer, or a person acting under the
authority of a peace officer, acting in the performance of official duties;
      (2)   in the possession of or being used by a governmental entity for a
health, research, education, or similar program;
      (3)   in the possession of or being used by a medical, educational, or
research institute operating in compliance with all applicable city ordinances
and state and federal laws;
      (4)   possessed or used by a person under a prescription issued by a
licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances in
the State of Texas; or
      (5)   possessed or used by a person as part of a bona fide religious
ritual or ceremony.
   (d)   A person violating a provision of this section is, upon conviction,
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000. A person commits a separate offense
for each day or part of a day during which a violation is committed, continued,
or permitted.
   (e)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this section is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code. (Ord. 27960)
SEC. 31-33.   RESERVED.
(Repealed by Ord. No. 32735)
SEC. 31-34.   PICKETING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   DIRECTED OR FOCUSED AT means that a particular residence or any of
its occupants has been made the object of picketing.
      (2)   PICKET means to station or post one or more persons to apprise the
public vocally or by standing or marching with signs, banners, or other means,
of an opinion or a message.
      (3)   RESIDENCE means a single-family, duplex, or multi-family dwelling.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he pickets within the city on any
public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public property within 200 feet of the
property line of the premises of a residence when the picketing is directed or
focused at that particular residence or any of its occupants.
   (c)   Before a person may be arrested or issued a citation for a violation
of Subsection (b), the person must have been ordered to move, disperse, or
otherwise remedy the violation by:
      (1)   a peace officer;
      (2)   a member of the fire department;
      (3)   a person with authority to control the use of the residence being
picketed; or
      (4)   any other person directly affected by the violation.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the person:
      (1)   was not given an order as required by Subsection (c);
      (2)   was given an order that was manifestly unreasonable in scope; or
      (3)   promptly obeyed the order given. (Ord. 21667)
SEC. 31-35.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 31-36.   MENACING ANOTHER PERSON.
   (a)   In this section, BODILY INJURY and SERIOUS BODILY INJURY have the
meaning given each term, respectively, in Section 1.07 of the Texas Penal Code,
as amended.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he intentionally places or attempts to
place another person in fear of bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or death
by:
      (1)   following the other person on two or more occasions; or
      (2)   over a period of time, engaging in a course of conduct or
committing two or more specific acts against the other person that would cause
a reasonable person to fear bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or death.
(Ord. 21443)
SEC. 31-37.   HOURS OF CLOSURE FOR CERTAIN CITY PROPERTY.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   CENTRAL LIBRARY GROUNDS means the grounds surrounding the J. Erik
Jonsson central library bounded by Wood Street on the north, Ervay Street on
the east, Young Street on the south, and the property line wall located
approximately 340 feet west of Ervay Street on the west.
      (2)   CITY HALL PLAZA means the grounds surrounding city hall bounded by
Young Street on the north, Ervay Street on the east, Canton Street on the
south, and Akard Street on the west.
      (3)   CONVENTION CENTER GROUNDS means the grounds, including Pioneer
Plaza, surrounding the Dallas convention center that are contained within the
following boundaries:
      Beginning at the intersection of Young Street and Akard Street;
      West on Young Street to Griffin Street;
      South on Griffin Street approximately 407 feet;
      West in a straight line for approximately 863 feet to the Jefferson
Boulevard Viaduct;
      Southwest on the Jefferson Boulevard Viaduct to the Union Pacific
Railroad;
      Southeast along the Union Pacific Railroad to Horton Street;
      Northeast on Horton Street to Lamar Street;
      Northwest on Lamar Street to Memorial Drive;
      East on Memorial Drive to Griffin Street;
      Southeast on Griffin Street to Canton Street;
      Northeast on Canton Street to Akard Street;
      North on Akard Street to Young Street at the point of beginning.
   (b)   The following city property will be closed to the public each day from
12:00 midnight until 5:00 a.m.:
      (1)   the city hall plaza;
      (2)   the convention center grounds; and
      (3)   the central library grounds.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he is on the premises of a city
property designated in Subsection (b) during hours in which the property is
closed.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (c) that the person
was:
      (1)   attending or working at a special event, activity, convention, or
program that was being conducted with city authorization on the city property
or subsequently leaving the event, activity, convention, or program within a
reasonable time after it had ended for the day;
      (2)   on the city property in accordance with the terms of a lease,
rental agreement, contract, or other written permission from the city; or
      (3)   a city employee or a law enforcement officer in the performance of
official duties. (Ord. 22036)
SEC. 31-38.   DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER TO REMOVE GRAFFITI.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this section or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (2)   GRAFFITI means any marking, including, but not limited to, any
inscription, slogan, drawing, painting, symbol, logo, name, character, or
figure, that is made in any manner on tangible property.
      (3)   OWNER means any person with the legal right of possession to
tangible property.
   (b)   An owner of any tangible property in the city commits an offense if he
fails to remove all graffiti from the property that is visible from any public
property or right-of-way or from any private property other than the property
on which the graffiti exists.
   (c)   Before issuing a citation for a violation under Subsection (b) of this
section, the director shall serve the property owner with written notice to
remove the graffiti from the property within 15 calendar days after the date
the notice is served. The notice may be served by handing it to the owner in
person or by United States certified mail, five-day return receipt requested,
addressed to the owner at the owner’s post office address as shown in the
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located. If the
owner cannot be found and the notice is returned by the United States Postal
Service, then the owner may be notified by:
      (1)   publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city;
      (2)   posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on
the property to which the violation relates; or
      (3)   posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the
ground on the property to which the violation relates.
   (d)   The 15 calendar days will be counted:
      (1)   from the date the notice is personally served on the owner or from
the sixth day after the notice is placed in the United States certified mail;
or
      (2)   if the owner cannot be found or the notice is returned by the
United States Postal Service, from the date the notice is:
         (A)   published in accordance with Subsection (c)(1) of this section;
or
         (B)   posted in accordance with Subsection (c)(2) or (c)(3) of this
section.
   (e)   Before the director may issue a notice to remove graffiti under
Subsection (c), all of the following must occur:
      (1)   The city must offer to remove the graffiti from the owner’s
property at no charge to the property owner. The offer must be in writing and
must include a date by which the property owner must accept or refuse the
offer.
      (2)   The property owner must refuse the city’s offer to remove the
graffiti free of charge. The refusal must be provided to the director in
writing. Failure to accept or refuse the city’s offer by the date set forth in
the offer is deemed to be consent for the city to remove the graffiti from the
property free of charge.
   (f)   If the director serves notice to a property owner under Subsection (c)
and the property owner fails to remove the graffiti within the time required by
Subsection (c), then the city may remove the graffiti and charge the expenses
of removal to the property owner in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by
city council ordinance or resolution. The city’s expenses to remove the
graffiti will be collected from the owner, or levied, assessed, and collected
against the property on which the work is performed. To obtain a lien against
the property, the director, on behalf of the city council, shall file a
statement of expenses with the county clerk of the county in which the property
is located setting out the actual expenses incurred by the city, the name of
the property owner, if known, and a legal description of the property. The
city’s lien attaches when the statement of expenses is filed in the real
property records of the county in which the property is located. The city’s
lien is subordinate to any previously recorded lien and to the rights of a
purchaser or lender for value who acquires an interest in the property before
the statement of expenses is filed.
   (g)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) of this section
that:
      (1)   the city did not offer to remove the graffiti at no charge to the
property owner in compliance with Subsection (e)(1);
      (2)   the property owner did not refuse the city’s offer to remove the
graffiti free of charge in compliance with Subsection (e)(2);
      (3)   no notice was served on the property owner in compliance with
Subsection (c);
      (4)   the graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure;
      (5)   the removal of the graffiti would create a hazard for the person
performing the removal;
      (6)   the property owner has removed graffiti from that particular
property three or more times within the preceding 12 months; or
      (7)   the graffiti was created on the property with the owner’s consent
and does not violate the sign regulations of the Dallas Development Code or any
other applicable city ordinance or state or federal law.
   (h)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine of not less than
$200 or more than $500. (Ord. Nos. 22064; 28048)
SEC. 31-39.   RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN FOR GRAFFITI CREATED BY A
MINOR.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   GRAFFITI means any marking, including, but not limited to, any
inscription, slogan, drawing, painting, symbol, logo, name, character, or
figure, that is made in any manner on tangible property.
      (2)   GUARDIAN means:
         (A)   a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (B)   a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      (3)   MINOR means any person under 17 years of age.
      (4)   OWNER means any person with the legal right of possession to
tangible property.
      (5)   PARENT means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or
step-parent of another person.
   (b)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to create graffiti on
tangible property in the city without the property owner’s consent.
   (c)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine of not less than
$200 nor more than $500. (Ord. 22064)
SEC. 31-39.1.   POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS PROHIBITED; PRESUMPTIONS;
DEFENSES.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER means any container that is adapted or made
for the purpose of applying aerosolized paint, or any other aerosolized
substance capable of defacing property.
      (2)   CONSENT means assent in fact, whether express or apparent, by a
person legally authorized to act for an owner of property.
      (3)   ETCHING OR ENGRAVING DEVICE means a device that is capable of
making a delineation or impression on tangible property, regardless of the
manufacturer’s intended use for that device.
      (4)   FELT TIP MARKER means any marker or similar implement that:
         (A)   contains ink; and
         (B)   has a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest
width, exceeds one-eighth inch.
      (5)   GRAFFITI means any temporary or permanent marking, including, but
not limited to, any inscription, slogan, drawing, painting, symbol, logo, name,
character, or figure, that is made in any manner on tangible property without
the consent of the property owner.
      (6)   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT means any aerosol paint container, paint gun,
paint ball gun, paint ball gun pellets or capsules, felt tip marker, paint
stick, graffiti stick, brush, or etching or engraving device that is capable of
scarring, marking, or otherwise defacing stone, glass, metal, concrete, wood,
or any surface of tangible property.
      (7)   MINOR means any person under 17 years of age.
      (8)   OWNER means any person with the legal right of possession to
tangible property.
      (9)   PAINT STICK or GRAFFITI STICK means any device containing a solid
or liquid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance that
leaves a visible mark upon application to a surface.
      (10)   PARENT means a person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent,
or step-parent of a person.
      (11)   GUARDIAN means:
         (A)   a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (B)   a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if, with the intent to make graffiti, he
possesses any graffiti implement:
      (1)   in or on any part of a publicly-owned or privately-owned building,
facility, park, school ground, library, playground, swimming pool, recreational
facility, right-of-way, or other property when that property or that part of
the property is closed to the public; or
      (2)   within 10 feet of any underpass, overpass, bridge abutment, storm
drain, or similar type of infrastructure.
   (c)   A person is presumed to possess the graffiti implement with the intent
to make graffiti on such property under Subsection (b)(1) or on such
infrastructure under Subsection (b)(2) if while on the property or within 10
feet of the infrastructure, whichever applies, he possesses on or about his
person at least:
      (1)   one aerosol paint container; or
      (2)   two graffiti implements other than an aerosol paint container.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if he is the parent or guardian of a minor
and knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to violate:
      (1)   Subsection (b)(1); or
      (2)   Subsection (b)(2).
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (b)(1) and (d)(1)
that the graffiti implement was possessed on the property with consent.
   (f)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (b)(2) and (d)(2)
that the graffiti implement was:
      (1)   possessed on the property with consent; or
      (2)   possessed in a place where the implement was going to be used for a
non-graffiti activity, including but not limited to an employment, school,
home, church, art, or similar activity, or possessed while enroute to or from
such a place and activity.
   (g)   For purposes of applying the defenses set forth in Subsections (e) and
(f)(1) of this section, consent is presumed to exist if the person possessing
the graffiti implement is an employee or relative of the property owner.
   (h)   Before taking any enforcement action under Subsection (b)(2) or (d)(2)
of this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s reason for
being within 10 feet of the underpass, overpass, bridge abutment, storm drain,
or other similar type of infrastructure with a graffiti implement and whether
the apparent offender has the consent of the property owner to be on the
property and to possess the graffiti implement. The officer shall not issue a
citation or make an arrest under Subsection (b)(2) or (d)(2) of this section
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response and other circumstances, no defense described in
Subsection (f) is present.
   (i)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine of not less than
$200 or more than $500. (Ord. 26342)
SEC. 31-40.   POSSESSION OF SHOPPING CARTS.
   (a)   In this section, SHOPPING CART is an object that has the same meaning
as in Chapter 17 of the Texas Business and Commerce Code, as amended.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he possesses a shopping cart at a
location other than the premises of the retail establishment that owns the
shopping cart.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the person
was an owner, employee, or agent of the retail establishment that owns the
shopping cart and was delivering, retrieving, or returning the shopping cart to
the retail establishment.
   (d)   A retail establishment that owns a shopping cart shall affix to the
shopping cart a durable all-weather decal stating the following in legible
letters:
      IT IS AN OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF UP TO $500 TO POSSESS THIS
SHOPPING CART AT A LOCATION OTHER THAN ON THE PREMISES OF THE RETAIL
ESTABLISHMENT THAT OWNS THIS SHOPPING CART.
(Ord. Nos. 25439; 30136)
SEC. 31-41.   LOCK, TAKE, AND HIDE SIGNS.
   (a)   An owner or person in control of property on which 100 or more parking
spaces are located that are available for public use shall post and maintain on
the exterior premises of the property two signs complying with Subsection (b).
One additional sign is required to be posted and maintained for each 50 parking
spaces over 100 that are located on the property. Also, one additional sign is
required to be posted and maintained within five feet of each clustered mailbox
site located on the premises of a multifamily property, as defined in Section
27-3 of this code.
   (b)   Each sign required to be posted and maintained under Subsection (a)
must comply with the following:
      (1)   Contain language that includes the statements: “LOCK YOUR CAR, TAKE
YOUR KEYS, HIDE YOUR BELONGINGS”; “A REMINDER FROM THE DALLAS POLICE
DEPARTMENT”; “WATCH YOUR CAR”; and “1-800-CAR WATCH.”
      (2)   Meet uniform specifications for size, color, and format established
by, and maintained on file in the office of, the chief of police.
      (3)   Be made of durable, all-weather material, with the lettering
readable day and night.
      (4)   Be approved by the chief of police.
      (5)   Be permanently installed on the property in a manner and location
approved by the chief of police so that at least one of the signs is visible
and readable from every parking space located on the property.
      (6)   Be posted so that the bottom edge of the sign is not lower than
five feet or higher than eight feet above ground level.
   (c)   An owner or person in control of property on which signs are required
to be posted and maintained under Subsection (a) commits an offense if he fails
to post or maintain signs in compliance with this section.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if he removes or obstructs, or allows the
removal or obstruction of, a sign required to be posted and maintained on
property under Subsection (a). It is a defense to prosecution under this
subsection that the removal or obstruction of the sign was caused by:
      (1)   a city employee in the performance of official duties; or
      (2)   the owner or person in control of the property who was performing,
or causing the performance of, repairs or maintenance on the sign. (Ord. 25521)
CHAPTER 31A
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE I.
RESERVED.
Secs. 31A-1 thru 31A-3.   Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
CITY OF DALLAS OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE LIABILITY PLAN.
Sec.
31A-4.   Definitions.
Sec.
31A-5.   Coverage.
Sec.
31A-6.   Defense.
Sec.
31A-7.   Limits of coverage.
Sec.
31A-8.   Notice of occurrence, claim, or suit; cooperation.
Sec.
31A-9.   Plan period.
Sec.
31A-10.   Exclusions.
Sec.
31A-11.   Subrogation.
Sec.
31A-12.   Legal representation.
Sec.
31A-13.   Determination of coverage.
Sec.
31A-14.   No creation of cause of action.
ARTICLE I.
RESERVED.
SECS. 31A-1 THRU 31A-3.  
(Repealed by Ord. 24316)
ARTICLE II.
CITY OF DALLAS OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE LIABILITY PLAN.
SEC. 31A-4.   DEFINITIONS.
   (1)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
   (2)   CITY VEHICLE means a vehicle or mobile equipment either leased or
owned by the city.
   (3)   LOSS means an amount which a plan member is legally obligated to pay
resulting from an act or omission of the plan member which is covered under
this plan.
   (4)   PLAN means the City of Dallas Officer and Employee Liability Plan.
   (5)   PLAN MEMBER means a person who is:
      (A)   an employee of the city;
      (B)   a member of a city board, commission, or committee created by
charter, ordinance, or resolution of the city;
      (C)   a member of the city council;
      (D)   a volunteer who has been approved as a volunteer by a departmental
volunteer coordinator and who is working under the direction of an employee of
the city; or
      (E)    a member of the board of trustees of the police and fire pension
fund of the city. (Ord. Nos. 18575; 20811)
SEC. 31A-5.   COVERAGE.
   (a)   The city shall indemnify and defend a plan member, in accordance with
the terms of this plan, against a loss arising out of any claim, suit, or
judgment resulting from an act or omission of the plan member during the
discharge of his duties and within the scope of his office, employment, or
assigned volunteer work with the city.
   (b)   A plan member whose position with the city terminates is entitled to
coverage in accordance with this plan for any event that occurred while the
person was a plan member. (Ord. 18575)
SEC. 31A-6.   DEFENSE.
   (a)   The city will defend any suit against a plan member who is covered
under this plan even if the suit is groundless or fraudulent.
   (b)   The city may investigate, negotiate, and settle any claim or suit as
it determines necessary. (Ord. 18575)
SEC. 31A-7.   LIMITS OF COVERAGE.
   (a)   The city will pay losses covered by this plan that a plan member is
legally obligated to pay, except, that in cases arising from incidents or
occurrences where the city's liability exists by virtue of the Texas Tort
Claims Act (Chapter 101, Texas Civil Practices and Remedies Code), whether or
not the city is a party defendant, the city will pay those losses covered by
this plan that a plan member is legally obligated to pay up to, but not
exceeding the limits of liability provided by that Act, as amended, for a
municipality.
   (b)   In addition to the coverage provided in paragraph (a) the city will
pay:
      (1)   the city's expenses in investigating and defending the claim or
lawsuit;
      (2)   costs taxed against a plan member in a suit covered by this plan
and interest that accrues after entry of judgment before the city has deposited
payment with the court on that part of the judgment which does not exceed the
limits of coverage;
      (3)   reasonable expenses of the plan member incurred at the city's
request; and
      (4)   attorney's fees ordered by the court to be paid by the plan member.
(Ord. Nos. 18575; 18905; 19884)
SEC. 31A-8.   NOTICE OF OCCURRENCE, CLAIM, OR SUIT; COOPERATION.
   To be entitled to coverage under the plan a plan member must:
      (1)   notify the city attorney as soon as practicable upon receipt of
written notice of a claim or lawsuit, but no later than three working days
after receipt;
      (2)   cooperate with the city attorney and, upon the city attorney's
request, assist in making settlements, in the conduct of suits, and in
enforcing any right of contribution or indemnity against a person or
organization who may be liable to the city because of injury or damage covered
under the plan;
      (3)   attend hearings and trials and assist in securing and giving
evidence and obtaining the attendance of witnessess; and
      (4)   not, except upon advice of the city attorney or when questioned by
a police officer at the scene of an accident, give any oral or written
statement or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a claim or
lawsuit;
      (5)   not, except at his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume
any obligation, or incur any expense with respect to a claim or lawsuit without
the consent of the city. (Ord. 18575)
SEC. 31A-9.   PLAN PERIOD.
   This plan covers only acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have
occurred:
   (1)   while the plan is in effect;
   (2)   before the plan was in effect and which are not barred by any statute
of limitations; and
   (3)   if the plan is cancelled, while the plan is in effect and which are
not barred by any statute of limitations. (Ord. 18575)
SEC. 31A-10.   EXCLUSIONS.
   (a)   Coverage under this plan does not apply to a claim or lawsuit that is
brought against a plan member:
      (1)   by the city;
      (2)   arising out of the intentional, knowing, or criminally negligent
violation of a penal statute or ordinance committed by or with the knowledge or
consent of the plan member, or any claim arising out of acts of fraud committed
by or at the direction of the plan member with intent to deceive or defraud;
      (3)   arising out of the gross negligence of the plan member, except that
the city will defend the plan member in accordance with Section
31A-6(a) of this chapter;
      (4)   arising out of affirmative dishonesty or actual intent to injure by
the plan member;
      (5)   arising while the plan member is operating a city vehicle with no
authority to operate the vehicle;
      (6)   arising while the plan member is operating a city vehicle in the
course of personal or private business, unless the operation of the vehicle is
pursuant to the general orders or the applicable standard operating procedure
of the police department;
      (7)   for liability assumed by the plan member under a contract, unless
the contract is entered into at the request of the city;
      (8)   if the plan member joins or attempts to join with the suit against
the plan member a claim against the city for benefits under this plan; or
      (9)   if the plan member fails to comply with Section
31A-8 of this plan.
   (b)   The city council may waive the exclusion for gross negligence set
forth in Subsection (a)(3) of this section if the city council determines that
circumstances justify the waiver. (Ord. Nos. 18575; 19884; 20454)
SEC. 31A-11.   SUBROGATION.
   If payment or legal representation is provided under this plan, the city is
subrogated to the plan member's rights of recovery against any person or
organization to the extent of the city's liability and payments, and the plan
member must execute and deliver to the city attorney whatever documents are
necessary to secure those rights. The plan member must not do anything after a
loss to prejudice those rights. (Ord. 18575)
SEC. 31A-12.   LEGAL REPRESENTATION.
   (a)   The city will provide legal representation for a plan member in a
claim or suit in which the plan member is covered under this plan.
   (b)   If the city attorney determines that there is a conflict of interests
for the city attorney in representing a plan member, and the plan member is
otherwise entitled to coverage under this plan, the city will pay the
reasonable fee of a private attorney to represent the plan member. The private
attorney will be selected by mutual agreement of the plan member and the city
attorney. (Ord. 18575)
SEC. 31A-13.   DETERMINATION OF COVERAGE.
   If the city denies coverage to a plan member, the plan member may seek a
determination of coverage by a court of proper jurisdiction in Dallas County,
Texas. If the court rules in favor of the plan member, the city shall provide
the plan member all benefits under the plan and shall reimburse the plan member
for reasonable attorney fees, expenses and costs incurred in obtaining the
determination of coverage. (Ord. 18575)
SEC. 31A-14.   NO CREATION OF CAUSE OF ACTION.
   Nothing contained in this plan shall be construed as creating a right or
cause of action against a plan member nor as giving a right to a third party to
institute or maintain a suit which would not otherwise exist under law as a
legal claim against a plan member. (Ord. 18575)
CHAPTER 32
PARKS AND WATER RESERVOIRS
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
32-1.   Safety of patrons generally; limitation of activities by permit.
Sec.
32-2.   Speed limit; driving upon walks.
Sec.
32-3.   Injury to trees, shrubs, fences, etc.
Sec.
32-4.   Abusive, obscene, etc., language or acts.
Sec.
32-5.   Use of commercial vehicles, etc.
Sec.
32-6.   Dogs at large.
Sec.
32-6.1.   Off-leash sites for dogs.
Sec.
32-7.   Protection of fish, animals, and fowl.
Sec.
32-8.   Driving and parking vehicles.
Sec.
32-9.   Schedules for operating facilities.
Sec.
32-9.1.   Hours of closure for public parks and park amenities.
Sec.
32-10.   Sale of services or goods on park property.
Sec.
32-11.   Promulgation and posting of rules and regulations.
Sec.
32-11.1.   Public shooting ranges.
Sec.
32-11.2.   Hang-gliders, para-sails, para-kites, parachutes, and similar
devices prohibited; defense.
Sec.
32-11.3.   Possession of alcoholic beverages in parks.
Sec.
32-11.4.   Noises interfering with enjoyment of public park and recreation
areas.
ARTICLE II.
FAIR PARK AND STATE FAIR GROUNDS.
Division 1. Generally.
Sec.
32-11.5.   Fair park boundaries.
Sec.
32-12.   “State fair area” defined.
Sec.
32-13.   Purpose of article.
Sec.
32-14.   Applicability of building code.
Sec.
32-15.   Regulations pertaining to structures used one month or less.
Sec.
32-16.   Rides, elevators, hoists, etc.
Sec.
32-17.   Temporary waste lines.
Sec.
32-18.   Electrical wiring.
Sec.
32-19.   Use, storage, etc., of liquefied petroleum gases.
Sec.
32-20.   Authority of building inspector and fire marshal.
Division 2. Fair Park Parking Area and Fair Park Parking Licenses.
Sec.
32-21.   Definitions.
Sec.
32-22.   Fair Park parking license required.
Sec.
32-23.   License application.
Sec.
32-24.   Investigation of application.
Sec.
32-25.   Issuance of license; expiration.
Sec.
32-26.   License fee.
Sec.
32-27.   License revocation; appeal.
Sec.
32-28.   Supervising attendant; display of license.
Sec.
32-28.1.   Fair Park parking area - Maximum parking fee.
Sec.
32-28.2.   Posting of parking fees required.
Sec.
32-28.3.   Posting signs to prohibit parking on certain property near Fair
Park.
ARTICLE III.
MARSALIS PARK ZOO.
Sec.
32-29.   Hours of opening and closing - established; exceptions.
Sec.
32-30.   Same - Notice of closing hours.
Sec.
32-31.   Same - Remaining in zoo after closing hours.
ARTICLE IV.
WHITE ROCK LAKE AND BACHMAN LAKE RESERVOIRS.
Division 1. Generally.
Sec.
32-32.   Jurisdiction of park and recreation board subject to primary right of
Dallas Water Utilities.
Sec.
32-33.   Authority of city police on property.
Sec.
32-34.   Powers and duties of park and recreation director.
Sec.
32-35.   Disturbing trees and shrubs; gathering pecans.
Sec.
32-36.   Commercial vehicles prohibited; speed limit of vehicles.
Sec.
32-37.   Seining for minnows.
Sec.
32-38.   Reserved.
Sec.
32-39.   Swimming.
Division 2. Operation of Boats.
Sec.
32-40.   Equipment prohibited on the water.
Sec.
32-41.   Sanitary requirements generally.
Sec.
32-42.   Prohibition of boats to suppress epidemic.
Sec.
32-43.   Use of boat under influence of intoxicants.
Sec.
32-44.   Special recreational events.
Sec.
32-45.   Manner of operation generally.
Sec.
32-46.   Reserved.
Sec.
32-47.   Life preservers; lights; mufflers; speed.
Sec.
32-48.   Seaworthiness generally; impounding loose boats.
Sec.
32-49.   Sirens.
Sec.
32-50.   Catching fish for sale.
Sec.
32-51.   Designation of area for anchoring sailboats.
Sec.
32-52.   Reserved.
Sec.
32-53.   Impoundment for lack of license; redemption.
Sec.
32-54.   Disposition of impounded boats for normal sales to redeem.
ARTICLE V.
ELM FORK.
Sec.
32-55.   Polluting waters.
Sec.
32-56.   Creating filth.
Sec.
32-57.   Activities prohibited by two preceding sections deemed nuisances.
Sec.
32-58.   Authority of director of public health and chief of police.
Sec.
32-59.   Power and authority of city; guards.
Sec.
32-60.   Penalty; civil actions.
ARTICLE VI.
LAKE RAY HUBBARD.
Sec.
32-61.   Temporary scope.
Sec.
32-62.   Definitions.
Sec.
32-63.   Construction prohibited.
Sec.
32-64.   Solicitation prohibited.
Sec.
32-65.   Restricted areas.
Sec.
32-66.   Trespassing prohibited in certain areas.
Sec.
32-67.   Destruction of city property.
Sec.
32-68.   Use of firearms and other discharge devices prohibited.
Sec.
32-69.   Discarding of waste prohibited.
Sec.
32-70.   Gasoline or oil storage.
Sec.
32-71.   Advertisements.
Sec.
32-72.   Prohibited uses.
Sec.
32-73.   Diversion of water prohibited.
Sec.
32-74.   Abandonment of personal property.
Sec.
32-75.   Fishing prohibited in certain areas.
Sec.
32-76.   Commercial fishing prohibited.
Sec.
32-77.   Hunting prohibited.
Sec.
32-78.   Camping prohibited in certain areas.
Sec.
32-79.   Picnicking in designated areas.
Sec.
32-80.   Recreational programs.
Sec.
32-81.   Vehicle control
Sec.
32-82.   Local additions to the Texas Water Safety Act.
Sec.
32-83.   Authority to enforce.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 32-1.   SAFETY OF PATRONS GENERALLY; LIMITATION OF ACTIVITIES BY PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any individual or group of individuals to
participate in any activity on any public park area when such activity will
create a danger to the public or may be considered a public nuisance. The park
board may designate particular locations within park areas for specific
activities and when deemed necessary, it may limit the conduct of such
activities by the issuance of special permits upon application, which permits
will set out the particular conditions under which such activity is permitted.
Overnight camping is prohibited on any park property except by special permit
issued by the park board or its representatives for such activity on specific
occasions. (Ord. 8019)
SEC. 32-2.   SPEED LIMIT; DRIVING UPON WALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or go at a rate of speed
faster than speed limits as posted on standard traffic signs, upon horseback,
or upon any bicycle, motorcycle, or any other vehicle whatsoever, upon any
drive or street in any park of the city, or to ride or drive any wheel or
animal upon any walk in such park, or to climb any tree, fence or building.
(Ord. 8019)
SEC. 32-3.   INJURY TO TREES, SHRUBS, FENCES, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break, deface or in any way
injure the trees, shrubs, plants, grass, turf, fountains, seats, fences,
structures, improvements, ornaments or monuments or property, within or upon
any of the public parks. (Ord. 8019)
SEC. 32-4.   ABUSIVE, OBSCENE, ETC., LANGUAGE OR ACTS.
   No person shall use or speak any threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent
language in any of the public parks, and no person shall commit, in any such
parks any obscene, lewd or indecent act or create any nuisance. (Ord. 8019)
SEC. 32-5.   USE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, ETC.
   All vehicles used for the purpose of transporting freight and merchandise,
or brick, stone or gravel, and all those commonly known as floats, moving
wagons, express or delivery wagons are prohibited from entering upon or being
driven through any of the public parks of the city. (Ord. 8019)
SEC. 32-6.   DOGS AT LARGE.
   (a)   An owner, harborer, or person having the care, custody, or control of
a dog commits an offense if he causes or permits the dog to go into or upon the
grounds of any public park within the city, unless the dog is led by some
person and retained in custody by a leash.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the dog was
in an off-leash site established under Section
32-6.1 of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 8019; 24482)
SEC. 32-6.1.   OFF-LEASH SITES FOR DOGS.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   OFF-LEASH SITE means an enclosed area designated by the park board
in which dogs are allowed to run at large without being secured by a leash or
other restraint.
      (2)   DANGEROUS DOG has the meaning given that term in Section 822.041 of
the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
   (b)   The park board is authorized to establish off- leash sites for dogs
within designated areas of the city’s parks and recreational areas. Signs
designating an area as an off-leash site must be conspicuously posted at each
entrance to the site.
   (c)   The park board may promulgate regulations, not inconsistent with this
section, that govern off-leash sites for dogs. Such regulations must be
conspicuously posted at each entrance to an off-leash site. The regulations
must include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   No person may bring into an off-leash site:
         (A)   a dangerous dog;
         (B)   a female dog in heat;
         (C)   more than three dogs at one time; or
         (D)   a dog that is not wearing tags showing that it is currently
registered and vaccinated in compliance with Chapter 7 of this code.
      (2)   Any person who brings a dog into an off- leash site shall:
         (A)   carry materials and implements for removing and disposing of dog
excreta and remove all excreta deposited by the dog in the off-leash site, in
compliance with Section 7-21.2 of this code;
         (B)   lead the dog on a leash and retain the dog in custody when
entering and exiting an off-leash site;
         (C)   keep the dog under visual and voice control at all times while
in the off-leash site;
         (D)   fill any hole that the dog digs in the off-leash site; and
         (E)   remove the dog from the off-leash site at the first sign of
aggression by the dog.
      (3)   Any person who brings a child under 12 years of age into an off-
leash site shall keep the child under strict supervision.
   (d)   A person commits an offense, punishable by a fine of up to $2,000, if
he fails to comply with any regulation:
      (1)   set forth in Subsection (c) of this section; or
      (2)   promulgated by the park board pursuant to Subsection (c) and posted
at the off-leash site.
   (e)   Use of an off-leash site by any dog constitutes:
      (1)   implied consent of the owner, harborer, or person having care,
custody, or control of the dog to comply with all conditions and regulations
stated in this section or promulgated by the park board and posted at the off-
leash site; and
      (2)   a waiver of liability to the city by the owner, harborer, or person
having care, custody, or control of the dog, and an agreement and undertaking
to protect, indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless, for any injury or
damage caused by the dog during any time that the dog is in the off-leash site.
(Ord. 24482)
SEC. 32-7.   PROTECTION OF FISH, ANIMALS, AND FOWL.
   Wherever the city owns or keeps any fish, animals or fowl on public
exhibition in any of the public parks or grounds of the city, it shall be
unlawful for any person in any manner to injure, annoy or interfere with any
such animal, fish or fowl, or to injure or interfere with, in any manner, any
of the enclosures in which any animal, fish or fowl may be kept. The term
“annoy” or “interfere with” shall include any attempt on the part of the
person, save and except the duly authorized keeper thereof, or person in charge
thereof, to feed or offer any foodstuff or other substance to any such animal,
fish or fowl. Whenever any fish, fowl or animals are kept on exhibition, it
shall be the duty of the public to obey all rules provided by the park board or
other authority for the exhibition of any such animal, fish or fowl. (Ord.
8019)
SEC. 32-8.   DRIVING AND PARKING OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, in any park or recreation area in the
city, he knowingly:
      (1)   drives a motor vehicle; or
      (2)   stops, stands, or parks a motor vehicle; or
      (3)   parks a motor vehicle so as to obstruct entrance to or exit from a
roadway, parking area, or trail established for public motor vehicle use; or
      (4)   fails to park the entire motor vehicle within the limit lines of a
designated parking stall, where such lines have been provided.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the driving,
stopping, standing, or parking:
      (1)   was along a roadway, trail, or parking area established for public
motor vehicle use;
      (2)   was due to temporary mechanical failure of the vehicle;
      (3)   was ordered by a police or park officer of the city or a person
charged with supervision of a park or recreation area within the city; or
      (4)   was performed by an employee of the city while in the course of his
official duties.
   (c)   If a motor vehicle is parked or left in violation of this section and
the owner or operator of the vehicle cannot be found, police or park officers
of the city may remove or impound the vehicle, or the vehicle may be removed in
accordance with Chapter 28 of this code.
   (d)   The park board is authorized to establish time limits for the parking
of motor vehicles within designated parking areas of the city’s parks and
recreational areas. (Ord. Nos. 8019; 16503)
SEC. 32-9.   SCHEDULES FOR OPERATING FACILITIES.
   Whenever, in the opinion of the park board it is desirable or necessary to
establish operating hours during which buildings, structures, facilities,
athletic areas or other improvements on park areas shall be operated, the park
board is authorized to establish such hours of operation by resolution and when
such hours so designated are posted on the entrances to such buildings,
facilities, etc., the same shall be deemed as the official hours of operation.
(Ord. 8019)
SEC. 32-9.1.   HOURS OF CLOSURE FOR PUBLIC PARKS AND PARK AMENITIES.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b), all public parks and park
amenities are closed to the public each day from 11:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m.
   (b)   Park amenities for which the park board has established and posted the
hours of operation under Section
32-9 of this chapter are closed to the public at any time other than the
established and posted hours of operation.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he is on the premises of a public park
or park amenity during hours in which the park or park amenity is closed.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (c) that the person
was:
      (1)   driving a vehicle on an interior park roadway that provides direct
access to the person’s residence;
      (2)   attending a special event, activity, or program that was being
conducted in a public park or park amenity during hours of closure with written
permission of the park board, the director of park and recreation, or a
designated representative; or
      (3)   entering or leaving, or engaged in legal boating on or fishing from
the bank or water surface of, any of the following:
         (A)   Lake Ray Hubbard;
         (B)   Mountain Creek Lake;
         (C)   White Rock Lake;
         (D)   Lemmon Lake;
         (E)   Blue Lake;
         (F)   a body of water located within the Trinity River Greenbelt;
         (G)   that part of Joe Pool Lake within the city’s jurisdiction; or
         (H)   Bachman Lake.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section:
      (1)   PARK AMENITY means any building, structure, facility, athletic
area, or other improvement that is located within a public park.
      (2)   PUBLIC PARK means land owned or managed by the city, whether
located inside or outside the city limits, that is planned, developed, or used
for active or passive recreational use by the public. “Public park” includes an
interior park roadway, other than a dedicated street, and excludes any sidewalk
adjacent to the outside perimeter of a park. (Ord. Nos. 20680; 20964; 22073;
22404; 22851; 27993)
SEC. 32-10.   SALE OF SERVICES OR GOODS ON PARK PROPERTY.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person sells, distributes, or
offers for sale any services or goods, including but not limited to food,
drinks, confections, or merchandise, in a city park or another area under the
control of the park and recreation board.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section
that the person:
      (1)   was selling, distributing, or offering for sale the services or
goods by authority of a written contract or permit with the city, through the
park and recreation department, to operate a concession in that area;
      (2)   was selling, distributing, or offering for sale the services or
goods in connection with the transaction of official government business;
      (3)   was selling, distributing, or offering for sale only an item or
items containing primarily noncommercial speech, including but not limited to
newspapers, books, magazines, audio and video compact discs (CDs), or digital
versatile discs (DVDs), and the selling, distributing, or offering for sale was
not being conducted:
         (A)   from a machine;
         (B)   at a time when the area was closed to the public;
         (C)   in an area used for storage;
         (D)   in an area under the control or management of another person or
private entity pursuant to a written agreement with the city;
         (E)   inside any building, including but not limited to a recreational
center;
         (F)   in a parking lot that serves a city park or another area under
the control of the park and recreation board; or
         (G)   in a way that obstructed a public street or sidewalk;
      (4)   was selling, distributing, or offering for sale only periodicals
from a coin-operated machine by authority of a license to operate the machine
in that area, unless such sale, distribution, or offering for sale was
prohibited in the area by another city ordinance or a city contract;
      (5)   was selling or offering for sale the services of a vehicle for hire
that was being operated by that person;
      (6)   did not receive remuneration from the person being given the
services or goods; did not use any type of vehicle or stand, any part of which
touched the ground, when distributing the services or goods; and did not
interfere with traffic flow on a public street or sidewalk when distributing
the services or goods; or
      (7)   was selling, distributing, offering for sale, or delivering the
services or goods to a person qualifying for any defense described in
Paragraphs (1) through (6) of this subsection.
   (c)   In addition to any enforcement action by a peace officer or the
director of the park and recreation department, or an authorized
representative, for a violation of this section, any person who is a victim of
an act prohibited under this section, or who witnesses a violation of this
section, may file a complaint with the city attorney. Evidence to support a
conviction for a violation of this section may include, but is not limited to,
testimony of witnesses, videotape evidence of the violation, and other
admissible evidence.
     (d)   This section does not apply to the occasional sale of lemonade or
other nonalcoholic beverages from a stand in a public park by an individual
younger than 18 years of age. (Ord. Nos. 8019; 28241; 31375)
SEC. 32-11.   PROMULGATION AND POSTING OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The park board shall adopt such rules and regulations as it deems best for
the management of the public parks and where such rules have been adopted for a
specific park area and posted within the specific park so regulated, any person
found guilty of violating such rules is guilty of an offense. (Ord. Nos. 8019;
19963)
SEC. 32-11.1.   PUBLIC SHOOTING RANGES.
   Public shooting ranges may be constructed and operated in parks owned by the
city in accordance with the following provisions:
   (a)   Such public shooting ranges shall at all times be subject to the
control of the park board and shall be in accordance with the rules and
regulations adopted and promulgated by the park board.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or to
consume or be under the influence of any intoxicating beverage while on any
such public shooting range.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any type of weapon named
in Section
31-11 on such a public shooting range, unless such range is open for the
purpose of shooting and under the immediate supervision of qualified personnel
present on such range.
   (d)   In event any such public shooting range is leased to a private
operator, such lease agreement shall contain a provision whereby the
concessionaire shall agree to save and hold the city and its park board whole
and harmless from any and all claims of every character whatsoever that may be
made against it by reason of the maintenance and operations of such concession,
and such concessionaire shall at the time of the execution of this contract,
furnish a public liability or indemnity policy of insurance for the benefit of
the city and its park board and concessionaire herein jointly, and the
certificate of his public liability insurance, with insurance coverage, shall
not be less than $250,000 per person, $500,000 per accident and $50,000
property damage, and the certificate shall include the city and the park board
among the insured. (Ord. 10921)
SEC. 32-11.2.   HANG-GLIDERS, PARA-SAILS, PARA-KITES, PARACHUTES, AND SIMILAR
DEVICES PROHIBITED; DEFENSE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, within or above any park or recreation
area under the management responsibility of the park board, he operates a hang-
glider, para-sail, para-kite, parachute, or similar device capable of
supporting the weight of a person above ground or water level.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the person
has obtained written permission from the park board, or a designated
representative, authorizing a special event. (Ord. 18745)
SEC. 32-11.3.   POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PARKS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he consumes or possesses an alcoholic
beverage:
      (1)   while in a public park; or
      (2)   while on a public street, sidewalk, or parking area adjacent to a
public park.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   the person was on the premises of:
         (A)   Fair Park;
         (B)   Old City Park;
         (C)   Reunion Park;
         (D)   the DeGolyer Estate, Camp Estate, or other area of the Arboretum
designated by the park and recreation board for the possession and consumption
of an alcoholic beverage;
         (E)   Betty Marcus Park, when attending a city-approved activity at
the Meyerson Concert Hall;
         (F)   an area in Samuel Farm designated by the park and recreation
board for the possession and consumption of an alcoholic beverage;
         (G)   the following park facilities, when pursuant to written
permission of the director of the park and recreation department and in
compliance with park facility reservation policies established by the park and
recreation board:
            (i)   Arlington Hall;
            (ii)   Sunset Bay;
            (iii)   Winfrey Point; or
            (iv)   Big Thickett;
         (H)   a municipal golf course;
         (I)   a park facility or other park property or part of a park
property for which:
            (i)   a valid license issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission existed; or
            (ii)   a lease or rental agreement had been granted by the city
that allowed the possession and consumption of an alcoholic beverage; or
         (J)   the Prism Center;
      (2)   the person was on the waters of a lake or water reservoir under the
jurisdiction of the park and recreation board where the private launching and
mooring of boats was permitted;
      (3)   the person was on premises where a special event, activity, or
program was being conducted with written permission of the park and recreation
board and the director of the park and recreation department and possession and
consumption of an alcoholic beverage was allowed under the terms of the
permission; or
      (4)   the container of alcoholic beverage possessed by the person had an
unbroken seal or other evidence of having never been opened.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE is used as defined
in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. (Ord. Nos. 16881; 20336; 20699; 20963;
22850; 33105)
SEC. 32-11.4.   NOISES INTERFERING WITH ENJOYMENT OF PUBLIC PARK AND RECREATION
AREAS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly makes or causes to be made
any loud and raucous noise in any public park and recreation area in the city.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the person:
      (1)   is a city employee acting within the scope of his official duties;
or
      (2)   first obtained the written permission of the director of the park
and recreation department of the city authorizing a special event.
   (c)   The following enumerated acts are presumed to create loud and raucous
noises for purposes of this section:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, as required by
state law.
      (2)   The use of any mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier for the
purpose of attracting the attention of other persons by the creation of noise.
      (3)   The playing of any radio, television, tape machine, musical
instrument, or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of
sound at such a volume that the sound produced is audible at a distance in
excess of 150 feet.
      (4)   The operation of any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle
or mechanical device in such a manner so as to produce a sound that is audible
at a distance in excess of 150 feet. (Ord. 17090)
ARTICLE II.
FAIR PARK AND STATE FAIR GROUNDS.
Division 1. Generally.
(Ord. 29102)
SEC. 32-11.5.   FAIR PARK BOUNDARIES.
   (a)   For purposes of this chapter, the boundaries of Fair Park shall be as
follows:
      BEGINNING at the intersection of the southeast right- of-way of Parry
Avenue and the T. & P. Railroad;
      THENCE eastward along the south boundary of the T. & P. Railroad right-
of-way to the beginning of a curve bearing to the right having a radius of
459.12 feet;
      THENCE southeastward along said curve to the northwest right-of-way of
Pennsylvania Avenue;
      THENCE southwestward along the northwest right-of- way of Pennsylvania
Avenue to its intersection with the northwesterly prolongation of the southwest
right- of-way of Gaisford Street;
      THENCE southeastward along the northwesterly prolongation and southwest
right-of-way of Gaisford Street to the intersection with the northwest right-
of-way of Fitzhugh Avenue;
      THENCE southwestward along the northwest right-of- way of Fitzhugh Avenue
to the northeast right-of-way of Robert B. Cullum Boulevard;
      THENCE northwestward along the northeast right-of- way of Robert B.
Cullum Boulevard to the intersection with the southeast right-of-way of Parry
Avenue;
      THENCE northeastward along the southeast right-of- way of Parry Avenue to
the place of beginning.
   (b)   Before the Fair Park boundaries established in Subsection (a) may be
expanded, a public hearing before the city council shall be held to allow the
proponents and opponents of the expansion to present their views.
   (c)   Written notice of the public hearing required by Subsection (b) must
be sent to all owners of real property lying within 500 feet of the boundaries
of the proposed area of expansion. The measurement of the 500 feet includes
streets and alleys. The notice must be given, not less than 10 days before the
date set for the public hearing, by depositing the notice in the United States
mail with postage paid and properly addressed to each property owner as
evidenced by the last approved city tax roll. (Ord. 19541)
SEC. 32-12.   “STATE FAIR AREA” DEFINED.
   “State Fair area”, as used in this article, shall mean the area in Fair Park
bounded by the Texas & Pacific Railroad right of way, Pennsylvania Avenue, to
Lagow, Lagow to Birmingham, Birmingham to Cross, Cross to Pennsylvania,
Pennsylvania to First Avenue, First Avenue to Grand Avenue, Grand Avenue to
Second Avenue, Second Avenue to Parry Avenue with the sites of the Health and
Science Museum, Aquarium, State of Texas and Swimming Pool buildings excluded.
It shall not include that portion of Fair Park known as the Civic Center, which
is bounded by Pennsylvania Avenue, Second Avenue, Grand Avenue and First
Avenue. (Code 1941, Art. 96-2; Ord. 8021)
SEC. 32-13.   PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.
   The purpose and intent of this article is to provide certain rules and
regulations governing design, construction, equipment, use and operation of
temporary buildings, establishments, concessions and exhibits within the
grounds of the state fair. The provisions of this article shall include
buildings and structures to be occupied and used only during the period of the
state fair which, because of the character of material used, nature of
fabrication and design, have a life expectancy of not more than five years. The
provisions of this article shall apply only to the State Fair area as defined
in this article and shall never be construed as modifying the regulations of
any chapter of this code with reference to other areas within the city. (Code
1941, Art. 96-1)
SEC. 32-14.   APPLICABILITY OF BUILDING CODE.
   All buildings and structures erected or constructed within or moved into the
state fair area shall comply with the Dallas Building Code, except that:
   (a)   Buildings and structures of not more than two stories in height
erected and constructed for use as temporary buildings, as defined in Section
32-13 and which are classified under the Dallas Building Code as groups A2, B,
M, S2, and U occupancies, shall not be required to set back from the site
property lines and may be built adjoining other buildings; provided, that all
exterior walls shall be of fire resistive construction as required by the
Dallas Building Code; and provided further, that the aggregate or total ground
area of all buildings and structures constructed in any one group shall not
exceed 10,000 square feet for one story buildings or structures and 5,000
square feet for two story buildings or structures, unless provided with an
absolute fire separation or 15 foot clear space between such groups. All fire
extinguisher requirements must adhere to Section 906 of the Dallas Fire Code.
Additionally, all temporary and permanent tents and membrane structures must
comply with Section 3104 of the Dallas Fire Code. This includes, but is not
limited to, drapes, curtains, decorations, and other similar flammable
materials.
   (b)   Partitions in the interior of buildings shall be constructed of one-
half inch sheet rock on both sides of wood studs or equal or better fire
resistive construction and shall maintain fire extinguishers as provided in
Subsection (a) of this section and flame retardant proofing shall be done as
provided in Subsection (a).
   (c)   The requirements of the Dallas Building Code with respect to the
number of toilets may be waived by the health officer of the city when the
waiving of this requirement does not conflict with this Code or other
ordinances of the city dealing with health. (Code 1941, Art. 96-3; Ord. No.
33224)
SEC. 32-15.   REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO STRUCTURES USED ONE MONTH OR LESS.
   The following regulations shall apply to buildings and other structures for
temporary use for any period of one month or less:
   (a)   Tents, stands, awnings and canopies may be used individually in any
size in the area known as the midway area or may be grouped together; provided,
that any tent, stand or groups of tents and stands having 3,000 square feet in
total ground area shall be separated from all other tents, stands, buildings
and structures by not less than 15 feet of open space, clear of all combustible
material and provided that flame proofing is carried out as provided in Section
32-14. If any additional decoration or combustible material is used therein,
this material shall be flameproofed.
   (b)   In areas other than the midway area, tents, stands, awnings and
canopies exceeding 1,000 square feet in total ground area shall be provided
with separations as described in Subsection (a) above and shall conform to the
requirements for flame proofing. (Code 1941, Art. 96-4; Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 32-16.   RIDES, ELEVATORS, HOISTS, ETC.
   Rides, elevators, hoists or any mechanical device provided for and
accessible to the public shall not begin operation until authorized by the
building inspector and shall stop operation at any time the building inspector
gives notice in writing that he wishes to inspect or test the same or he
considers that the same may not be safe for use. The method of making tests and
the determination of safety shall be left to the discretion of the building
inspector. All tests shall be reasonable. (Code 1941, Art. 96-5)
SEC. 32-17.   TEMPORARY WASTE LINES.
   Grease traps may be omitted from temporary waste lines where these waste
lines are required by the health officer and where they shall not be used for a
period of more than 30 days. Requirements for separate laterals for each such
temporary use shall be so interpreted that a number of these temporary uses may
be jointly served by one lateral and be considered as one occupancy under the
jurisdiction of the state fair and it shall be the responsibility of the state
fair to keep this lateral open and free from obstruction. (Code 1941, Art. 96-
6)
SEC. 32-18.   ELECTRICAL WIRING.
   All electrical wiring shall conform to the National Electrical Code, current
edition, except as specified below:
   (a)   Festoon wiring shall be allowed where not accessible to the public and
when not less than eight feet high when indoors and when not less than 10 feet
high when outdoors; provided, that where vehicles or structures are or may come
under such wiring, the wiring shall be five feet higher than the highest part
of such vehicle or structure, including counters; provided further, that no
combustible drapes, paper or other decoration is allowed within two feet of
such festoon wiring; provided further, that there are no electrical conductors,
terminals or contacts that are not properly insulated for 300 volts; and
provided further, that such festoon wiring is for temporary use not to exceed
30 days.
   (b)   All wiring installed permanently in buildings owned by the city shall
be installed in compliance with the National Electrical Code and in rigid metal
conduit or in metal wireways or busways of equal strength and rigidity of each
respective installation.
   (c)   All wiring installed in buildings owned by the city for temporary use
not to exceed 30 days shall be installed in compliance with the National
Electrical Code and shall be armoured cable, nonmetallic sheathed cable,
electrical metallic tubing, rigid metal conduit or equivalent metal wireway or
busway and shall be installed with proper fittings, outlets and devices for
such use.
   (d)   Extension or flexible cords shall not be used if in a worn or
otherwise unsafe condition and when used shall be on the Type S hard service
cord as listed in Table 19 of the National Electrical Code and shall not exceed
25 feet in length except that portable fixtures and devices bearing the label
of approval of Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., may be used with cords not to
exceed six feet in length when cord is the cord regularly supplied with such
device, and when used in places that are dry and not hazardous and when not
subject to hard wear. (Code 1941, Art. 96-7)
SEC. 32-19.   USE, STORAGE, ETC., OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES.
   Liquefied petroleum gases shall not be stored, retained or used within the
grounds and buildings of the state fair area except that liquefied petroleum
gases in interstate commerce commission bottles not to exceed a 50 pound total
may be used for temporary installations not to exceed 30 days by special
permission of the fire marshal when such containers are placed and located
outside other structures in a special housing designed and approved for that
purpose and arranged so that it will not be accessible to unauthorized persons.
Gasoline, kerosene and liquefied petroleum gases shall not be used for cooking,
heating or lighting purposes within the state fair area. (Code 1941, Art. 96-8)
SEC. 32-20.   AUTHORITY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR AND FIRE MARSHAL.
   The building inspector and the fire marshal of the city and their authorized
deputies in line of duty shall have the right of entry into any building,
structure, concession, exhibit, show or ride at any time upon presentation of
their credentials and in consideration of the special rules and regulations
contained in this article shall have the authority and right to condemn and
cause to be removed any construction, use, occupancy or anything which in their
opinion may constitute a hazard to the safety of life or property or such as
would be a probable fire hazard. (Code 1941, Art. 96-9)
Division 2. Fair Park Parking Area and Fair Park Parking Licenses.
SEC. 32-21.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   DESIGNATED SPECIAL EVENT means an event conducted at Fair Park
during which the city council has by resolution authorized the parking of motor
vehicles for compensation in the Fair Park parking area in accordance with this
division.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this division, or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (3)   FAIR PARK PARKING AREA means the area contained within the
following boundaries and includes the widths of all streets and rights-of-way
referenced:
         BEGINNING at the intersection of the southeast right-of- way line of
R. L. Thornton Freeway (Interstate Highway 30) with Peak Street;
         THENCE southeastward along Peak Street to Stonewall Street;
         THENCE eastward along Stonewall Street to McKenzie Street;
         THENCE southeastward along McKenzie Street to Herndon Street;
         THENCE southward along Herndon Street to the southwest line of the
Dallas Area Rapid Transit Authority (“DART”) right-of-way;
         THENCE eastward along the southwest line of the DART right-of-way to
Metropolitan Street;
         THENCE southwestward along Metropolitan Street to the northeast line
of the DART right-of-way;
         THENCE northwestward along the northeast line of the DART right-of-way
to Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard;
         THENCE southwestward along Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard to
Malcolm X Boulevard;
         THENCE northwestward along Malcolm X Boulevard to Grand Avenue;
         THENCE northeastward along Grand Avenue to the northeast line of the
DART right-of-way;
         THENCE northwestward along the northeast line of the DART right-of-way
to the southeast line of R. L. Thornton Freeway;
         THENCE northeastward along R. L. Thornton Freeway to the point of
beginning.
      (4)   FAIR PARK PARKING LICENSE means written authority issued under this
division that allows a person to park a motor vehicle for compensation within
the Fair Park parking area during the state fair of Texas or any other
designated special event.
      (5)   STATE FAIR OF TEXAS means the annual fall fair held at Fair Park.
(Ord. Nos. 22067; 29102)
SEC. 32-22.   FAIR PARK PARKING LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A person commits an offense if he, either for himself or as an agent or
representative of another, engages in the business of parking motor vehicles
for compensation within the Fair Park parking area during the state fair of
Texas or any designated special event without having a valid Fair Park parking
license. (Ord. Nos. 4037; 22067; 29102)
SEC. 32-23.   LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Every person desiring a Fair Park parking license shall file an application
with the director on a form provided for that purpose. The application must
include:
      (1)   the trade name, address, and telephone number of the business, if
any;
      (2)   the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
      (3)   whether the applicant is an owner, member, or employee of the
business;
      (4)   the name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the
property on which motor vehicles will be parked for compensation, if the
property owner is different from the applicant;
      (5)   the address of the property on which motor vehicles will be parked
for compensation and the extent of the area on which the business is to
operate;
      (6)   proof of ownership of the property on which motor vehicles will be
parked for compensation, or, if the applicant is not the property owner, a
current notarized statement from the owner authorizing the operation of the
business on the property;
      (7)   an agreement to indemnify the city and its officers and employees
against all claims of damage or injury to persons or property, whether public
or private, arising out of the parking of motor vehicles by the applicant, or
by the applicant’s agents or representatives, for compensation within the Fair
Park parking area;
      (8)   the signature of the applicant (if the applicant is a corporation,
the signature of a duly authorized officer and, if the applicant is a
partnership, the signature of one of the partners); and
      (9)   any other information the director considers necessary to the
enforcement and implementation of this division. (Ord. Nos. 4037; 16703; 22067;
29102)
SEC. 32-24.   INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.
   Upon the filing of a properly filled out application for a Fair Park parking
license, the director shall make or cause to be made such investigation as is
deemed necessary to determine the fitness of the applicant for a license. (Ord.
Nos. 4037; 4124; 21037; 22067; 29102)
SEC. 32-25.   ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION.
   (a)   Upon approving the license application and receiving payment of the
license fee required by this division, the director shall issue a Fair Park
parking license to the applicant.
   (b)   The issuance of a license under this division permits premises to be
used as a parking area only during the period of the state fair of Texas and
any designated special event, although the premises are not zoned for such use
under the Dallas Development Code. Within the area bounded by Fitzhugh Avenue,
the T. and P. Railroad, Metropolitan Avenue, and R. B. Cullum Boulevard,
parking must be limited to driveways and vacant lots.
   (c)   No license may be issued under this division during an event in
progress unless the director received the license application at least five
business days before the day the event began.
   (d)   The issuance of any license under this division does not grant or
confer any vested right to the licensee or operator, but is subject to
revocation or cancellation as provided in this division.
   (e)   A Fair Park parking license expires May 31 of each year and may be
renewed by making application in accordance with Section
32-23. A licensee shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the license. (Ord. Nos. 4037; 4124; 16703; 22067; 29102)
SEC. 32-26.   LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for a Fair Park parking license is $100. No refund of a
license fee will be made. (Ord. Nos. 4037; 16703; 18411; 22067; 29102; 31657)
SEC. 32-27.   LICENSE REVOCATION; APPEAL.
   In addition to any other penalties, the director may revoke a Fair Park
parking license if the director determines that a licensee has violated any
provision of this division. A licensee may appeal the revocation of a license
to the permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 4037; 16703; 18200; 22067; 29102)
SEC. 32-28.   SUPERVISING ATTENDANT; DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   A supervising attendant shall remain on the licensed premises at all
times during which a motor vehicle is parked or remains parked on the premises
for compensation.
   (b)   A person issued a Fair Park parking license under this division shall
ensure that the laminated license is displayed in a conspicuous manner on the
clothing of the supervising attendant at all times the supervising attendant is
on duty at the licensed premises. (Ord. Nos. 22067; 29102)
SEC 32-28.1.   FAIR PARK PARKING AREA - MAXIMUM PARKING FEE.
   A person commits an offense if, during the state fair of Texas or any
designated special event, he charges a customer a fee for parking a motor
vehicle within the Fair Park parking area that is more than 150 percent of the
fee that is charged for parking a motor vehicle within the fair grounds. (Ord.
Nos. 4037; 4124; 12701; 14684; 16703; 22067; 29102)
SEC. 32-28.2.   POSTING OF PARKING FEES REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person who engages in the business of parking motor vehicles for
compensation in the Fair Park parking area during the state fair of Texas or
any designated special event shall post a sign in a conspicuous place on the
premises that indicates, in letters at least five inches high, the fee charged
for parking a motor vehicle on the premises.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he charges a fee for parking a motor
vehicle in the Fair Park parking area that is higher than the fee indicated on
the sign posted on the premises. (Ord. Nos. 16710; 22067; 29102)
SEC. 32-28.3.   POSTING SIGNS TO PROHIBIT PARKING ON CERTAIN PROPERTY NEAR FAIR
PARK.
   (a)   Any person who owns or rents property that is located within the Fair
Park parking area or within the following boundaries (including the widths of
all streets and rights-of-way referenced) in the vicinity of Fair Park is
authorized to post signs to prohibit the parking of motor vehicles on that
property:
      BEGINNING at the intersection of the northeast right- of-way line of Peak
Street with R. L. Thornton Freeway (Interstate Highway 30);
      THENCE northeastward along R. L. Thornton Freeway to Carroll Avenue;
      THENCE southeastward along Carroll Avenue to Haskell Avenue;
      THENCE eastward along Haskell Avenue to Fitzhugh Avenue;
      THENCE southeastward along Fitzhugh Avenue to Fitzhugh Avenue/Crosstown
Expressway;
      THENCE southward along Fitzhugh Avenue/ Crosstown Expressway to the
southwest line of the Dallas Area Rapid Transit Authority (“DART”) right- of-
way;
      THENCE westward along the southwest line of the DART right-of-way to
Herndon Street;
      THENCE northward along Herndon Street to McKenzie Street;
      THENCE northwestward along McKenzie Street to Haskell Avenue;
      THENCE westward along Haskell Avenue to Stonewall Street;
      THENCE northwestward along Stonewall Street to Peak Street;
      THENCE northwestward along Peak Street to the point of beginning.
   (b)   Signs that are posted in accordance with Subsection (a) must be placed
in a conspicuous place on the property. The words on the sign used to prohibit
parking must be in letters not less than five inches high and must be visible
and legible from the public street or accessway to the property.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he parks a vehicle on any property
located within the Fair Park parking area or the boundaries described in
Subsection (a), when the property has a sign posted on it that prohibits
parking as set forth in Subsection (b). It is a defense to prosecution under
this subsection that the vehicle was parked with the express consent of the
owner or occupant of the property, and no compensation was received for the
parking of the vehicle.
   (d)   Any vehicle that is found unattended or unoccupied upon any property
in violation of this section is a nuisance, and the fact that the vehicle is
unattended or unoccupied by any person is prima facie evidence that the vehicle
owner unlawfully parked the vehicle.
   (e)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle parked or standing upon
property in violation of this section, the officer is authorized to require the
driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle from the
property. Any police officer who finds a vehicle parked and unattended or
unoccupied in violation of this section is authorized to remove the vehicle
from the property to a vehicle storage facility designated by the police chief.
(Ord. Nos. 12707; 21037; 29102)
ARTICLE III.
MARSALIS PARK ZOO.
SEC. 32-29.   HOURS OF OPENING AND CLOSING - ESTABLISHED; EXCEPTIONS.
   The Marsalis Park Zoo shall open at 7:00 a.m. each day of the week and shall
be closed each day of the week at 9:00 p.m.; excepting, however, the two below
listed tracts consisting of the picnic area in Tract No. 1 and the ride
concession area and animal shelter in Tract No. 2, as hereinafter described,
shall not be subject to this section:
TRACT NO. 1.
Beginning at a point in the west line of South Marsalis Avenue 175 feet south
of the center line of Opera Street; thence southward along the property line a
distance of 100 feet; thence south 42 degrees west a distance of 480 feet to a
point near the southwest corner of the picnic shelter; thence north 38 degrees
west a distance of 450 feet to a point in the center of a park drive; thence
north 52 degrees east a distance of 180 feet to a point in the south border
line of an automobile parking area; thence southeastward following the curb
border line of the auto parking area a distance of 680 feet to the place of
beginning. Said tract designated herein includes all of the area usually
occupied for picnic purposes.
TRACT NO. 2.
Beginning at a point in the north property line of Clarendon Avenue 50 feet
east of the east line of the building occupied as an animal shelter; thence
westward with the north property line of Clarendon Avenue a distance of 850
feet; thence northward a distance of 80 feet to the upper south bank of Cedar
Creek; thence eastward following the meanders of the upper south bank of Cedar
Creek a distance of 880 feet; thence southward a distance of 165 feet to the
place of beginning. (Ord. 6230)
SEC. 32-30.   SAME - NOTICE OF CLOSING HOURS.
   Signs advising the public that the Marsalis Park Zoo is closed at 9:00 p.m.
each day shall be place at all street entrances to the zoo prior to 9:00 p.m.
each day. (Ord. 6230)
SEC. 32-31.   SAME - REMAINING IN ZOO AFTER CLOSING HOURS.
   No person shall enter or remain in Marsalis Park Zoo, except as provided in
Section
32-29, after 9:00 p.m. of any day without authority of the park board of the
city. (Ord. 6230)
ARTICLE IV.
WHITE ROCK LAKE AND BACHMAN LAKE RESERVOIRS.
Division 1. Generally.
SEC. 32-32.   JURISDICTION OF PARK AND RECREATION BOARD SUBJECT TO PRIMARY
RIGHT OF DALLAS WATER UTILITIES.
   The jurisdiction of the park and recreation board over the White Rock Lake
property and the Bachman's Dam property shall be subject to the primary right
of Dallas Water Utilities to utilize it for waterworks purposes and the park
and recreation board shall in no way interfere with the exercise of the right
in the event that it becomes expedient and necessary to again devote those
properties for the use of waterworks purposes. Any building on the respective
sites owned and operated by Dallas Water Utilities shall continue to be at the
disposal of Dallas Water Utilities at all times. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-33.   AUTHORITY OF CITY POLICE ON PROPERTY.
   Any police officer of the city shall have authority to arrest any person on
any property owned and used by the city for recreational or water supply
purposes for violation of any of the provisions of this article. (Ord. Nos.
8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-34.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF PARK AND RECREATION DIRECTOR.
   The director of the park and recreation department or the director's
designee, subject to the control and direction of the park and recreation
board, shall have full charge and control of the waters of the lakes and
grounds of White Rock and Bachman Lakes, and shall have the right at all times
to command and preserve the peace and patrol such waters and grounds or to
cause the same to be done for the purpose of enforcing obedience and strict
compliance upon the part of any person with the terms, provisions, and
conditions of this article and all other provisions of this code, laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city relating to the waters of White
Rock and Bachman Lakes and the grounds adjacent thereto. (Ord. Nos. 8018;
32407)
SEC. 32-35.   DISTURBING TREES AND SHRUBS; GATHERING PECANS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any of the shrubbery or trees
and particularly the pecan trees growing upon the lands adjacent to White Rock
and included within White Rock and Bachman Lakes. It shall be unlawful for any
person to thrash, throw sticks into, or otherwise disturb pecan trees and it
shall be unlawful for any person to gather pecans from the trees growing upon
such premises; except, that persons may pick up from the ground pecans that
have fallen thereon. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-36.   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED; SPEED LIMIT OF VEHICLES.
   No commercial vehicles or trucks shall be permitted to go upon or travel
over the driveways and roads located on the grounds of White Rock and Bachman
Lakes that are constructed and maintained as part of the facilities of the
grounds in their use as a public park. No motor driven vehicle or automobile
shall travel at a greater rate of speed than the speed limits posted on
standard traffic signs in or upon such driveways maintained in the use of such
park grounds. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-37.   SEINING FOR MINNOWS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to seine for minnows or use a seine for
any purpose within the waters of White Rock or Bachman Lakes. (Ord. Nos. 8018;
32407)
SEC. 32-38.   RESERVED.
SEC. 32-39.   SWIMMING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or bathe in the waters of White
Rock and Bachman Lakes. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
Division 2. Operation of Boats.
SEC. 32-40.   EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED ON THE WATER.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he takes a surfboard, jet ski, water
skis, or other similar device on the waters of White Rock or Bachman Lakes.
City Departments have the authority to use jet skis or other similar devices on
the waters to address an emergency.
   (b)   Except as provided in this section, a person commits an offense if he
operates a boat by means of a motor having a commercial-power rating in excess
of 10.5 H.P. on the waters of White Rock or Bachman Lakes.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) or (b) that the
person was participating in a special recreational event authorized in writing
by the park and recreation board.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the person
was a city employee operating a motorboat in the scope of his or her
employment.
   (e)   Rescue boats utilized by the Dallas Fire-Rescue Department and the
Dallas Police Department may use a motor as determined appropriate by them on
waters of White Rock or Bachman Lakes.
   (f)   Rescue boats utilized by authorized users under a formal city
agreement may use a motor having a commercial power rating of 60 H.P. on waters
of White Rock or Bachman Lakes. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 15195; 32407)
SEC. 32-41.   SANITARY REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   All persons using and operating a boat in the waters of the lakes shall do
so in such a manner as to not create an unsanitary condition in or about such
waters, and not to pollute such water or make them unwholesome or unfit for
use. It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or wash any article of any
character in the waters of White Rock and Bachman Lakes, or throw or place or
deposit any trash, urine, excrement, or filth of any kind in waters of such
lakes, or to deposit or throw any substance of any kind in such waters which
will pollute or is likely to pollute the waters of such lakes, and all such
persons shall obey all sanitary regulations and provisions contained in this
code regulating the use of such waters and ground. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-42.   PROHIBITION OF BOATS TO SUPPRESS EPIDEMIC.
   The city council shall at all times have full power and authority to
prohibit the use and operation of any and all boats in the waters of the lakes
should it become necessary, in the opinion of the city council, to do so for
the purpose of suppressing and arresting any epidemic or any contagious or
infectious disease or whenever, in the opinion of the city council, the use and
operation of boats in such waters should be discontinued for any reason
whatever. Subject to such control and supervision, the lakes shall be
controlled and maintained for recreational purposes by the park and recreation
board. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-43.   USE OF BOAT UNDER INFLUENCE OF INTOXICANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the waters of White Rock and
Bachman Lakes or to operate a boat upon such waters while under the influence
of liquor or intoxicating beverages of any character. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-44.   SPECIAL RECREATIONAL EVENTS.
   On certain occasions and for the purpose of recreational and sports events
at White Rock or Bachman Lakes, the park and recreation board may authorize the
use of water equipment and motorboats that are otherwise prohibited by Section
32-40. This special use shall be under the supervision of the director of the
park and recreation department. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 15195; 32407)
SEC. 32-45.   MANNER OF OPERATION GENERALLY.
   Every person using or operating a boat of any character or description upon
the waters of the lakes shall use and operate the same in careful and prudent
manner, so as not to collide or come in contact with any other boat being used
or operated in such waters, and so as to avoid accident and injury to any
person or damage to property. Failure to use and operate any boat in such
waters in a careful and prudent manner and so as to avoid accident and injury
to persons or damage to property is an offense. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 19963; 32407)
SEC. 32-46.   RESERVED.
SEC. 32-47.   LIFE PRESERVERS; LIGHTS; MUFFLERS; SPEED.
   (a)   Life preservers must be worn in compliance with Texas Parks & Wildlife
regulations regarding life preserving devices.
   (b)   All motorboats or boats propelled by motors in the waters of White
Rock Lake must be equipped with lights according to United States government
regulations. All rowboats, sailboats, or other watercraft must have a light on
some part thereof. The lights on such boats must be operated after sunset so
that the same are visible for a distance of one-half mile.
   (c)   All motorboats must be equipped with mufflers on the exhausts. The
park and recreation board shall have authorization to establish safety zones
and speed limits by the placing of buoys wherever deemed advisable for the
safety of all water participants and it shall hereafter be unlawful for a speed
boat or motorboat to go or travel within the designated areas plainly marked by
buoys or shorelines and at a speed greater than five miles per hour. Motorboats
or speed boats in coming to the docks or landing places must slow down to five
miles per hour.
   (d)   Boating is prohibited from sundown to sunup on Bachman Lake, unless
under a formal city agreement. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-48.   SEAWORTHINESS GENERALLY; IMPOUNDING LOOSE BOATS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, keep, and use any
watercraft of any description on the waters of the lakes if such craft is not
seaworthy. If any such craft is, in the opinion of the officer enforcing the
terms of this article, unseaworthy, he may bar the use of such unseaworthy
craft until the same is reconditioned.
   (b)   All boats, of every kind and description, that are not anchored or are
loose shall be impounded in accordance with the provisions of this article. If
such boat is not redeemed or retrieved within 30 days after such impounding, it
shall be disposed of in accordance with Division 2, "Sale of Unclaimed and
Surplus Property," of Article IV, "Procurement," of
Chapter 2, "Administration," of the Dallas City Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos.
8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-49.   SIRENS.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to equip a motorboat with a siren and to use such siren on
the waters of White Rock and Bachman Lakes.
   (b)   Rescue boats may be equipped with sirens. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-50.   CATCHING FISH FOR SALE.
   No person shall use or operate a boat of any kind or description in the
waters of the lakes for the purpose of catching and taking fish, game, or other
wildlife for market or sale. This shall not apply to persons authorized by
contract by the park and recreation board to remove rough fish under the
supervision of the director of park and recreation when such persons are
licensed by the state fish and game commission to remove rough fish. (Ord. Nos.
8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-51.   DESIGNATION OF AREA FOR ANCHORING SAILBOATS.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, all sailboats on White Rock Lake,
in the city, shall be anchored only at the following location, or part thereof,
on the shore of White Rock Lake:
   Beginning at the Garland Highway and following the meanderings of the lake
for a distance of 3.5 miles to the south point. The south point as designated
herein is .7 mile from the north point; and the north point, as designated and
referred to herein, is 1.2 miles from the highway. The area herein referred to
between the south and north points is commonly referred to and known as Big
Thicket Bay.
   (b)   The director of the park and recreation department or the director's
designee, shall determine the number of boats that can be safely anchored in
the location at one time.
   (c)   If a sailing club has entered an agreement with the city, sailboats
may be moored at the location specified in the agreement. (Ord. Nos. 8018;
32407)
SEC. 32-52.   RESERVED.
SEC. 32-53.   IMPOUNDMENT FOR LACK OF LICENSE; REDEMPTION.
   The director of park and recreation or the director's designee shall have
the right to impound all boats on White Rock and Bachman that are on such lakes
without a required state-issued license. The director of park and recreation
and those acting under his or her directions shall hold every boat impounded in
accordance with this article for 30 days after the same is impounded. The owner
shall secure and affix to such boat before removing same from the possession of
the director of park and recreation or the director's designee the required
state- issued license. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
SEC. 32-54.   DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED BOATS FOR NORMAL SALES TO REDEEM.
   (a)   If the owner shall not redeem a boat impounded in accordance with this
article within 30 days from the date of it being impounded, the director of
parks and recreation or the director's designee shall cause the impounded boat
to be disposed of in accordance with Division 2, "Sale of Unclaimed and Surplus
Property," of Article IV, "Procurement," of
Chapter 2, "Administration," of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
   (b)   If the owner of an impounded boat shall desire to redeem the same
after the expiration of 30 days as set out above, but before the final sale is
made, he may do so by securing a state-issued license for the then current
year, and the payment of all costs of sale incurred up to that time and by
affixing to the boat the state- issued licenses required by the terms of this
article. The city shall not be liable for any damages in connection with the
sale of any boat. (Ord. Nos. 8018; 32407)
ARTICLE V.
ELM FORK.
SEC. 32-55.   POLLUTING WATERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute any of the waters of Elm Fork
impounded by reason of the dams maintained by the city, viz., Carrollton,
California, Elm Fork and Grape Vine Dams. It shall be unlawful for any person
to use in any manner such water or create a condition that may likely pollute
the waters or so as to cause the waters to become unwholesome for domestic use
by the inhabitants of the city or so as to affect the health or life of the
inhabitants of the city. (Code 1941, Art. 157-1)
SEC. 32-56.   CREATING FILTH.
   It shall be unlawful to cause in any manner any filth to be created in or
about the waters of Elm Fork, or to do any act in or about the waters or along
the banks of the waters or on the watersheds of the waters that is likely to
pollute the waters or render them unwholesome for domestic use or that is
likely to affect the water so as to endanger the lives and health of the
inhabitants of the city. (Code 1941, Art. 157-2)
SEC. 32-57.   ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED BY TWO PRECEDING SECTIONS DEEMED NUISANCES.
   Any of the acts or practices set out in the two preceding sections shall be
deemed to be nuisances as affecting the health and lives of the inhabitants of
the city. (Code 1941, Art. 157-3)
SEC. 32-58.   AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The director of public health and the chief of police are hereby authorized
to exercise full police authority over the waters of Elm Fork and to enforce
the terms and provisions of this article. (Code 1941, Art. 157-4)
SEC. 32-59.   POWER AND AUTHORITY OF CITY; GUARDS.
   The full power and authority of the city is hereby extended over the
territory and waters of Elm Fork for the purposes contemplated by this article.
The city, through its department of public health and the police department and
in behalf of the preservation of the public health, may order portions of the
waters not to be trespassed upon by any person. It shall be deemed a trespass
on the part of any person to swim, bathe or otherwise use the waters contrary
to the terms of this article. The city may place guards for the purpose of
guarding the waters against pollution and for the purpose of carrying out the
terms of this article. (Code 1941, Art. 157-8)
SEC. 32-60.   PENALTY; CIVIL ACTIONS.
   Any person violating any of the terms of this article is guilty of an
offense. Such penalty may be enforced in any court having jurisdiction thereof
against any violation of this article and may also be enforced in the municipal
court. In addition to such penalty, the right shall exist, in behalf of the
public health of the city, for the director of public health or the chief of
police or any person whose health may be affected thereby to bring any cause of
action in any competent court by way of injunction or otherwise against any
person violating any of the terms of this article. (Code 1941, Art. 157-7; Ord.
19963)
ARTICLE VI.
LAKE RAY HUBBARD.
SEC. 32-61.   TEMPORARY SCOPE.
   The temporary use of the land area adjacent to Lake Ray Hubbard for
recreational purposes is supplemental to the purpose of the lake as a water
supply reservoir. Nothing in this article is intended to bring the area within
the scope of Chapter 26 of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Code; provided, that
Elgin B. Robertson Park, an area of 257 acres located in Dallas and Rockwall
Counties on a peninsula between the East Fork and Muddy Creek arms of Lake Ray
Hubbard, was purchased for park and recreational purposes and forms a part of
the City of Dallas Park System. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-62.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department of water utilities of
the city of Dallas or an authorized representative.
      (3)   LAKE means the waters of Lake Ray Hubbard as illustrated in Exhibit
A.
      (4)   LAKE SHORE means the land owned by the city surrounding the lake,
as illustrated in Exhibit A and located within the city.
      (5)   MOTOR VEHICLE means any vehicle that is self-propelled.
      (6)   PERSON means any individual assumed name entity, partnership,
joint-venture, association, or corporation. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-63.   CONSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall build, use, or maintain any structure upon or alter the lake
shore without first obtaining express written authority from the director.
(Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-64.   SOLICITATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall engage in or solicit any business on the lake or lake shore
without first obtaining express written authority from the director. (Ord. Nos.
15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-65.   RESTRICTED AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall enter or use any of the following described land or
facilities located at the lake or lake shore without first obtaining express
written authority from the director:
      (1)   land below contour elevation 435.5 mean sea level as established by
the United States Geological Survey;
      (2)   land within 2,500 feet of the Forney pump station facility;
      (3)   intake works, spillway, or service roads on Forney Dam, bridge
structures, or access channels to boat docks owned and operated by the city;
      (4)   maintenance shop, equipment buildings, or equipment quarters
operated by the department of water utilities;
      (5)   Forney pump station facility and intake works;
      (6)   the lake within 1,000 feet of the overflow section of the spillway,
extending in an arc to 1,000 feet from the end of each non-overflow section;
      (7)   the lake within 1,000 feet of the Forney pump station intake works;
      (8)   the lake within 1,000 feet of any other public water supply intake;
      (9)   the stilling basin south of the Forney Dam spillway;
      (10)   all land within 300 feet on either side of the centerline of the
river channel between the Forney Dam stilling basin and U.S. 80; or
      (11)   any other restricted area designated by signs or floating buoys
marked “Restricted Area - Keep Out”.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to a city employee in the performance of
an official duty. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 18823; 21176)
SEC. 32-66.   TRESPASSING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   No person shall trespass on, fish from, or anchor a boat to the land
surrounding Forney Dam or the Dallas Power and Light Company embankment. (Ord.
Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-67.   DESTRUCTION OF CITY PROPERTY.
   No person other than a city employee in the performance of an official duty
shall destroy, damage, deface, or remove shrubbery, trees, or other vegetation,
rock, minerals, or any other personal or real property of the city located at
the lake or lake shore. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-68.   USE OF FIREARMS AND OTHER DISCHARGE DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall carry, possess, or discharge any firearm, rifle, shotgun,
automatic rifle, revolver, pistol, or other weapon designed for the purpose of
firing or discharging a shell or cartridge, or any explosive as defined in
Chapter 16 of this code or launch an arrow or like projectile from a cross bow,
long bow, blow gun or like launching device upon the lake or lake shore. This
section does not apply to a law enforcement peace officer when acting in the
performance of an official duty. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-69.   DISCARDING OF WASTE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discard any type of wastewater, trash, brush, or garbage, as
defined in this code, at the lake or lake shore, other than in garbage
containers supplied by a municipality. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-70.   GASOLINE OR OIL STORAGE.
   No person shall store at the lake or lake shore any gasoline, oil, or other
inflammable or combustible liquid, as defined in the code, without first
obtaining written authority from the director. No person shall discard at the
lake or lake shore any gasoline, oil, or other petroleum products. (Ord. Nos.
15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-71.   ADVERTISEMENTS.
   No person shall post or display any private notice or advertisement at the
lake or lake shore without express written authority of the director. (Ord.
Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-72.   PROHIBITED USES.
   (a)   No person shall anchor or operate a boat as a primary residence at the
lake.
   (b)   No person shall use the lake or lake shore as a landing area for
aircraft. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-73.   DIVERSION OF WATER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall divert water from the lake without prior written authority
from the director and then only in compliance with the terms of such authority.
(Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-74.   ABANDONMENT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall abandon or leave unattended personal property at the
lake or lake shore. The city assumes no responsibility for any personal
property at the lake or lake shore.
   (b)   If property is abandoned or unattended in places other than authorized
in writing by the director, or under an existing regulation, for a period in
excess of 48 hours, the property may be impounded by the city. If personal
property is not reclaimed and an impoundment charge, if any, is not paid within
90 days, the personal property may be sold, destroyed, converted to city use,
or otherwise disposed of by the city. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-75.   FISHING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   No person shall fish in the following water areas located at the lake:
   (1)   from any highway bridge structure or approach; or
   (2)   in any restricted area marked “Restricted Area - Keep Out” or any
other area appropriately designated with a sign as a “No Fishing Area”. (Ord.
Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-76.   COMMERCIAL FISHING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall engage in the business of catching or taking fish or game
from the lake for the purpose of sale. This section shall not apply to any
person authorized by contract with the city to catch or take fish under the
supervision of the director when the person is licensed by the Texas Park and
Wild Life Department to remove fish. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-77.   HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   Except for the following, no person shall intentionally hunt, capture, kill,
maim, wound, or poison any bird, mammal, or reptile at the lake or lake shore:
   (1)   city employees acting in their employment and carrying out the policy
of the city;
   (2)   independent contractors and their employees under contract with the
city, state, or federal government to perform such acts; and
   (3)   state or federal employees acting in their employment and carrying out
the policy of state or federal government. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-78.   CAMPING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall camp at the lake or lake shore except in areas
appropriately designated by signs or markings.
   (b)   No person shall camp at the lake or lake shore for a period in excess
of seven consecutive days without first obtaining express written authority
from the director.
   (c)   No person shall park a house trailer or recreational vehicle at the
lake or lake shore in any area not designated by the signs or markings as
public camp grounds. No person shall leave or park a house trailer or
recreational vehicle for any period in excess of two consecutive days without
first obtaining express written authority from the director. (Ord. Nos. 15071;
21176)
SEC. 32-79.   PICNICKING IN DESIGNATED AREAS.
   No person shall picnic at the lake or lake shore in an area where picnicking
is prohibited by appropriately designated signs or markings. (Ord. Nos. 15071;
21176)
SEC. 32-80.   RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS.
   (a)   No person shall conduct any special event or recreation program such
as but not limited to a water carnival, fishing rodeo, boat regatta, speed
race, festival, trade show, or outdoor presentation at the lake or lake shore
without a permit or written authorization from the director.
   (b)   No person shall conduct any special event or recreation program at the
lake or lake shore in violation of any term or condition specified in the
permit or written authorization. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-81.   VEHICLE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at the lake shore other than
on a roadway, parking area, or trail established for public motor vehicle use.
This section shall not apply to a city employee operating a vehicle in the
performance of an official duty.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at the lake shore in excess of
the posted speed limits. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 21176)
SEC. 32-82.   LOCAL ADDITIONS TO THE TEXAS WATER SAFETY ACT.
   (a)   No person shall moor or attach any boat to, or move, remove, displace,
tamper with, damage, or destroy, any buoy, beacon, light marker, stake, flag,
or other aid to safe operation placed upon the public waters of the state by,
or by others under the authority of, the United States or State of Texas. No
person shall moor or attach any vessel to a public boat launching ramp except
in connection with the launching or retrieving of a boat from the water.
   (b)   The operator of a vessel shall not permit the vessel to come within
750 feet of the intake structure or within any restricted area marked by
floating markers and signs, except when specifically authorized by the
director.
   (c)   A “Slow-No Wake” zone is established within 300 feet of the dam, all
jetties and the entire shoreline of the lake, and any other area that may be
designated by authorized or appropriate buoys, markers, or posted signs. No
person shall cause a wake within a “Slow-No Wake” zone.
   (d)   No person shall moor or operate any vessel for more than seven days
without mooring in an authorized facility, unless the person has written
authorization from the director. (Ord. Nos. 15071; 20161; 21176)
SEC. 32-83.   AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE.
   Authority to enforce this article is delegated to the department of water
utilities acting by and through the director and the police department. (Ord.
Nos. 15071; 19312; 21176)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-39.png]
CHAPTER 33
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
Sec.
33-1.   Purpose and construction.
Sec.
33-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
33-3.   State license required.
Sec.
33-4.   City health, safety, and construction standards applicable.
Sec.
33-5.   Inspection.
Sec.
33-6.   Injunction.
Sec.
33-7.   Civil penalties.
Sec.
33-8.   Offenses and criminal penalties.
SEC. 33-1.   PURPOSE AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of Chapter
247, Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, which establish regulations for
the protection of the health and safety of residents of assisted living
facilities, by providing for municipal enforcement to the extent permitted by
that state law. In the event of a conflict, this chapter must be construed so
as to comply with Chapter 247, Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
   (b)   It is the intent and purpose of the city to administer and enforce
this chapter to ensure quality care and the protection of the health and safety
of assisted living facility residents by requiring assisted living facilities
operating within the city limits to comply with state regulations. It is the
further intent of the city to administer and enforce this chapter in compliance
with the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act and to ensure that all persons
have equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. In the event of a conflict,
this chapter must be construed so as to comply with the Federal Fair Housing
Amendments Act. (Ord. Nos. 23631; 28706)
SEC. 33-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY has the meaning given that term in Section
247.002 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the city department designated by
the city manager to enforce and implement this chapter, or the director’s
designated representative.
      (3)   FEDERAL FAIR HOUSING AMENDMENTS ACT means the Federal Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988 (42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq.), as amended.
      (4)   IMMEDIATE THREAT means a situation in which there is a high
probability that serious harm or injury to a resident of an assisted living
facility could occur at any time, or has already occurred and may occur again,
if the resident is not protected effectively from the harm or if the threat is
not removed.
      (5)   LICENSE means a current, valid license to operate an assisted
living facility issued by the Texas Department of Aging and Disability Services
pursuant to Chapter 247, Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
      (6)   PERSON means an individual, partnership, company, corporation,
association, firm, organization, institution, or similar entity.
      (7)   PERSONAL CARE SERVICES has the meaning given that term in Section
247.002 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 23631;
28706)
SEC. 33-3.   STATE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A person commits an offense if he establishes or operates an assisted living
facility in the city without a license. (Ord. Nos. 23631; 28706)
SEC. 33-4.   CITY HEALTH, SAFETY, AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS APPLICABLE.
   All health, safety, and construction standards established by the city in
this code, the fire code, the construction codes, and any other applicable city
ordinance or regulation apply to all assisted living facilities located within
the city. (Ord. Nos. 23631; 28706)
SEC. 33-5.   INSPECTION.
   (a)   The director may inspect any facility at reasonable times as necessary
to determine if it is an assisted living facility and to ensure compliance with
this chapter and Chapter 247, Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended.
   (b)   Upon request of the Texas Department of Aging and Disability Services,
the city attorney may petition a district court for a temporary restraining
order to inspect a facility that is allegedly required to be licensed as an
assisted living facility and that is operating without a license, when
admission to the facility cannot be obtained.
   (c)   The director shall report to the Texas Department of Aging and
Disability Services any assisted living facility that the director finds:
      (1)   is established or operating in the city without a license;
      (2)   poses an immediate threat to the health and safety of a resident of
the assisted living facility; or
      (3)   is otherwise violating a provision of Chapter 247, Texas Health and
Safety Code, as amended, or any rule, regulation, or standard governing
assisted living facilities promulgated by the Texas Department of Aging and
Disability Services under Chapter 247, Texas Health and Safety Code, as
amended. (Ord. Nos. 23631; 28706)
SEC. 33-6.   INJUNCTION.
   Upon request of the Texas Department of Aging and Disability Services, the
city attorney may petition a district court for a temporary restraining order
to restrain a continuing violation of the standards or licensing requirements
for assisted living facilities under Chapter 247 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code, as amended, if the Texas Department of Aging and Disability Services
finds that the violation creates an immediate threat to the health and safety
of the assisted living facility residents. (Ord. Nos. 23631; 28706)
SEC. 33-7.   CIVIL PENALTIES.
   The city attorney shall, upon being referred a case by the Texas Department
of Aging and Disability Services, file suit in district court to collect and
retain the civil penalty provided in Section 247.045, Texas Health and Safety
Code, as amended. The city attorney and the Texas Department of Aging and
Disability Services shall work in close cooperation throughout any legal
proceedings requested by the Texas Department of Aging and Disability Services.
(Ord. Nos. 23631; 28706)
SEC. 33-8.   OFFENSES AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   violates Section
33-3 of this chapter; or
      (2)   refuses to allow or interferes with an inspection authorized under
Section
33-5(a) of this chapter.
   (b)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than
$200 or more than $2,000. A separate offense occurs each day or part of a day
that the violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
   (c)   Prosecution in municipal court for an offense under this section does
not prevent the use of other enforcement remedies or procedures provided by
other city ordinances or state or federal laws that are applicable to the
person charged with or the conduct involved in the offense. (Ord. Nos. 23631;
28706)
CHAPTER 34
PERSONNEL RULES
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
34-1.   Policy.
Sec.
34-2.   Administration.
Sec.
34-3.   Penalty.
Sec.
34-4.   Definitions.
Sec.
34-5.   Conditions of employment.
Sec.
34-6.   Requirements for induction.
Sec.
34-7.   Application for employment.
Sec.
34-8.   Appointments.
Sec.
34-9.   Eligibility for benefits.
Sec.
34-10.   Reappointments.
Sec.
34-11.   Probation.
Sec.
34-12.   Demotions.
Sec.
34-13.   Transfers and reassignments.
Sec.
34-14.   Terminations.
ARTICLE II.
COMPENSATION.
Sec.
34-15.   General.
Sec.
34-16.   Work hours.
Sec.
34-17.   Overtime and paid leave for civilian employees.
Sec.
34-18.   Pay for vacation leave.
Sec.
34-19.   Work hours, paid leave, and overtime for public safety employees.
Sec.
34-20.   Exempt employees.
Sec.
34-21.   Distribution of pay checks.
ARTICLE III.
LEAVE POLICIES.
Sec.
34-21.1.   General.
Sec.
34-22.   Sick leave.
Sec.
34-22.1.   Medical testing.
Sec.
34-22.2.   Quarantine leave.
Sec.
34-22.3.   Mental health leave.
Sec.
34-22.4.   Compassionate leave.
Sec.
34-23.   Vacation leave.
Sec.
34-24.   Compensatory leave.
Sec.
34-24.1.   Family and medical leave.
Sec.
34-24.2.   Paid parental leave.
Sec.
34-25.   Holidays.
Sec.
34-26.   Court leave.
Sec.
34-27.   Death-in-family leave.
Sec.
34-28.   Leave without pay.
Sec.
34-29.   Leave with pay (excused absence).
Sec.
34-30.   Military service/military leave.
Sec.
34-31.   Injury leave.
Sec.
34-31.1.   Mandatory city leave.
ARTICLE IV.
BENEFITS.
Sec.
34-32.   Health benefit plans.
Sec.
34-33.   Life insurance.
Sec.
34-34.   Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
RULES OF CONDUCT.
Sec.
34-35.   Fair employment practices.
Sec.
34-36.   Rules of conduct.
ARTICLE VI.
DISCIPLINE, GRIEVANCE, AND APPEAL PROCEDURES.
Sec.
34-37.   Discipline procedures.
Sec.
34-38.   Grievance and appeal procedures.
Sec.
34-39.   Appeals to the civil service board.
Sec.
34-40.   Appeals to the trial board or administrative law judge.
Sec.
34-41.   Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
WAGE SUPPLEMENTATION.
Sec.
34-42.   Reserved.
Sec.
34-43.   Wage supplementation plan.
Sec.
34-44.   Reserved.
Sec.
34-45.   Benefit policy for off-duty security or traffic control services.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 34-1.   POLICY.
   The provisions of this chapter are subject to modification, rescission, and
amendment by the Dallas city council at any time. Nothing in this chapter
conveys a contract of employment with the city of Dallas and nothing in this
chapter is intended to be a term of a contract when combined with any other
document, instrument, or writing. Nothing in this chapter conveys a private
cause of action to any employee. (Ord. Nos. 24873; 26182; 30657)
SEC. 34-2.   ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   City manager.
      (1)   The city manager is designated by the charter as the chief
administrative and executive officer with appointing authority for all
positions of employment with the city, except as otherwise provided by the city
charter.
      (2)   The city manager is responsible for employee efficiency, morale,
and welfare. The city manager, a department director, or a designated
representative of either may discharge, demote, suspend, or reprimand any
employee, subject to provisions of the charter.
   (b)   Director of human resources. The director of human resources is
appointed by the city manager to administer the human resources system as
established by the city charter, this chapter, and other applicable city
ordinances and state and federal laws. Responsibilities include, but are not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Establishing processing and orientation procedures for all new city
employees.
      (2)   Reviewing and approving all appointments, reappointments, and
reinstatements to city employment.
      (3)   Providing and administering human resources programs, rules,
regulations, procedures, and actions affecting employment status, including,
but not limited to, promotions, transfers, leaves of absence, and paid leave
programs.
      (4)   Administering and ensuring compliance with disciplinary and
grievance procedures in cooperation with department directors, assistant
directors, and supervisors, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (5)   Reviewing departmental human resources programs, rules,
regulations, procedures, and actions and ensuring compliance with city policies
and this chapter.
      (6)   Ensuring departmental compliance and cooperation with the rules and
regulations of the civil service board, when applicable.
      (7)   Providing regulations, guidelines, procedures, and assistance to
employees and departments regarding human resources-related complaints,
excluding formal complaints filed with the civil service board.
      (8)   Regulating information made available to employees by regular
distribution, including all charity drives or fund solicitations in which
employees are asked to contribute or participate.
      (9)   Developing and administering, in cooperation with other
departments, training and development programs for city employees.
      (10)   Administering the employee benefit program as directed by the city
manager.
      (11)   Developing, recommending, and administering equitable compensation
and benefit programs for city employees.
      (12)   Maintaining master employee human resources files and, in
consultation with the city attorney, developing procedures for responding to
all requests for human resources information.
      (13)   Reviewing all council resolutions amending the number of budgeted
positions or the salary and classification schedules.
      (14)   Maintaining an employee service awards program.
      (15)   Administering classification and evaluation programs applicable to
positions of employment.
      (16)   Administering the unemployment compensation program.
      (17)   Maintaining a human resources information system and preparing and
submitting all statistical human resources reports required by federal, state,
or other agencies.
      (18)   Providing guidance, consultation, and personnel information to
other departments.
      (19)   Developing and maintaining an employee performance evaluation and
associated merit pay program.
      (20)   Performing all other actions necessary for the proper
administration of the human resources system as established by the city
charter, this chapter, and other applicable city ordinances and state and
federal laws.
   (c)   Fire and police departments. The chiefs of the fire and police
departments shall, respectively, designate an officer of rank in each
department who shall act as human resources officer, subject to the direction
and supervision of the chief of the department. Those officers shall cooperate
with the director of human resources in all departmental human resources
matters relating to their respective departments and maintain complete
departmental human resources records.
   (d)   Certification for classified positions. The names of persons eligible
for classified positions are certified by the civil service board only upon
request of the city manager, a department head, the director of human
resources, or a designated representative. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 19473; 22026;
24873; 28424; 31745)
SEC. 34-3.   PENALTY.
   An employee who fails to comply with this chapter, or who violates one or
more of the rules of conduct set forth in this chapter, is subject to
appropriate disciplinary action, including reprimand, suspension, demotion, or
discharge, whichever is applicable. All disciplinary action taken and any
appeal from the disciplinary action must be in conformance with the procedures
established by the city charter, this chapter, departmental rules and
regulations, and other applicable law. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 24873)
SEC. 34-4.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
   (1)   ADMINISTRATIVE TERMINATION means termination because of death,
disability, service retirement, or end of a temporary assignment.
   (2)   APPOINTMENT means:
            (A)   initial city employment; or
            (B)   placement into a position of department director, assistant
department director, or other managerial personnel designated by the city
council in accordance with Section 11, Chapter XVI of the city charter,
regardless of whether the placement was through a competitive or noncompetitive
selection process.
   (3)   ASSIGNMENT PAY means additional compensation for specialized duties as
established by the salary and classification schedule.
   (4)   AUTHORIZED POSITION means an individual position described by a
specific classification title and approved by the city council. Any change to
an authorized position requires city council approval.
   (5)   BASE HOURLY RATE OF PAY means the hourly rate of an employee's base
salary as established in the salary and classification schedule for nonexempt
employees.
   (6)   BENEFIT means an employer-sponsored program that includes, but is not
limited to, paid leave and health and life insurance benefits, but does not
include wages, merit increases, service credit, or seniority.
   (7)   BREAK IN SERVICE means termination for one or more work days as a
result of:
      (A)   administrative termination, resignation, reduction in force, or
discharge, followed by reappointment; or
      (B)   leave of absence without pay for more than six consecutive calendar
weeks, except to the extent that the leave without pay is authorized by federal
or state law.
   (8)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
   (9)   CIVIL SERVICE BOARD means the civil service board of the city.
   (10)   CLASSIFICATION means all positions, regardless of departmental
location, that are sufficiently alike in duties and responsibilities to:
      (A)   be called by the same descriptive title;
      (B)   be accorded the same pay scale under like conditions; and
      (C)   require substantially the same education, experience, and skills.
   (11)   CLASSIFICATION CHANGE means revision of a position title that may
include an adjustment of pay range.
   (12)   CLASSIFIED POSITION means a position that is subject to civil service
rules and regulations as designated by the city charter.
   (13)   DEMOTION means a demotion as defined in Section
34-12(a) of this chapter.
   (14)   DISCHARGE means involuntary termination.
   (15)   EMPLOYEE means a person employed and paid a salary or wages by the
city, whether under civil service or not, and includes a person on a part-time
basis, but does not include an independent contractor or city council member.
   (16)   EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT FUND BOARD means the board of trustees of the
employees’ retirement fund of the city of Dallas.
   (17)   EXEMPT EMPLOYEE means an exempt employee as defined by the Fair Labor
Standards Act, as amended.
   (18)   FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT means the Family and Medical Leave Act
of 1993 (29 U.S.C.A. §§ 2601 et seq.), as amended.
   (19)   FAMILY LEAVE means authorized leave as provided for in the Family and
Medical Leave Act.
   (20)   FIRE DEPARTMENT means the fire-rescue department of the city.
   (21)   Reserved.
   (22)   FURLOUGH LEAVE means time off from work when employees are placed in
a temporary non- duty, non-pay status for required budgetary reasons.
   (23)   GENDER IDENTITY AND EXPRESSION means an individual's real or
perceived gender identity as male, female, both, or neither.
   (24)   GRADE means a division of a salary and classification schedule with
specified rates or ranges of pay.
   (25)   GRIEVANCE means an employee’s formal, written complaint regarding
work conditions that the employee claims have been adversely affected by a
violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of a specific law, ordinance,
resolution, policy, rule, or regulation.
   (26)   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER means:
      (A)   a husband, wife, father, mother, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son,
daughter, foster child, brother, or sister of an employee; or
      (B)   any person related to an employee by blood or marriage and who
resides in the same household as the employee.
   (27)   INTERNAL APPEAL means an administrative appeal to which an employee
may be entitled under this chapter, this code, the city charter, or
departmental regulations.
   (28)   LEAVE WITHOUT PAY means an authorized temporary absence without pay.
   (29)   MANDATORY CITY LEAVE means paid leave that is provided to employees
by the city as a result of budget-related pay reductions.
   (30)   MERIT INCREASE means a discretionary increase in salary based on
performance.
   (31)   MILITARY LEAVE means authorized leave to perform duties in the
military service as provided for in:
      (A)   the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act;
      (B)   Chapter 431 of the Texas Government Code, as amended; and
      (C)   Chapter 613 of the Texas Government Code, as amended.
   (32)   MILITARY SERVICE means:
      (A)   the uniformed services, as defined in the Uniformed Services
Employment and Reemployment Rights Act;
      (B)   the state militia, as defined in Chapter 431 of the Texas
Government Code, as amended; and
      (C)   the military service, as defined in Chapter 613 of the Texas
Government Code, as amended.
   (33)   NON-CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEE means an employee who fills a position
that is exempt from the provisions applicable to the civil service, as
designated by the city charter. Non-civil service employees include:
      (A)   employees of the legal department, the city manager’s office, the
city auditor’s office, the city secretary’s office, the library department, the
park and recreation department, and the radio department (WRR);
      (B)   municipal court judges; and
      (C)   city council office staff.
   (34)   NONEXEMPT EMPLOYEE means a nonexempt employee as defined by the Fair
Labor Standards Act, as amended.
   (35)   PAID LEAVE means sick leave, vacation leave, holiday leave, court
leave, death-in-family leave, no more than 21 days of military leave each
fiscal year as required by state law, parental leave, quarantine leave, mental
health leave, compassionate leave, and mandatory city leave.
   (35.1)   PERMANENT EMPLOYEE means an employee who is not a temporary
employee. A permanent employee's employment with the city may be terminated
based on a reduction-in-force, for cause, or for any reason not prohibited by
this chapter, the city charter, or federal, state, or local law.
   (36)   POLICE AND FIRE PENSION BOARD means the board of trustees of the
police and fire pension system of the city of Dallas.
   (37)   POSITION means a collection of tasks, duties, and responsibilities
regularly assigned to and performed by an individual.
   (38)   PROBATION:
      (A)   Probation means a minimum six-month period:
         (i)   after initial appointment, during which an employee can be
terminated without right of appeal; or
         (ii)   after promotion, during which an employee can be:
            (aa)   returned to the previous position, if a retreat right to the
previous position exists; or
            (bb)   terminated without right of appeal, if no retreat right
exists.
      (B)   Probation may be extended to allow:
         (i)   six months on-the-job work performance; or
         (ii)   completion of any written prerequisites to employment.
      (C)   Probation does not apply to positions in departments exempt from
civil service, and employees in those positions do not serve a probationary
period.
      (D)   The service of a probationary period or the successful completion
of a probationary period does not convey upon, imply, or intend to imply that
an employee has a property interest in continued employment or a contract of
employment with the city.
   (39)   PROMOTION means an increase in grade with a resulting increase in
salary due to placement in a position as a result of a competitive or
noncompetitive selection process.
   (39.1)   PRORATED SALARY RATE means a proportionate salary rate based on the
annual salary divided by the employee's standard annual work hours for exempt
employees.
   (40)   REAPPOINTMENT means re-employment of a former city employee.
   (41)   REASSIGNMENT means a change of an employee to an equivalent position
(same grade) within the same department.
   (42)   REDUCTION IN FORCE means a reduction in the number of budgeted
positions due to a change in work or funds.
   (43)   REGULAR RATE OF PAY means a nonexempt employee's base hourly rate of
pay or a prorated salary rate for exempt employees plus additional payments as
established in the salary and classification schedule.
   (44)   RESIGNATION means a voluntary termination.
   (45)   SALARY AND CLASSIFICATION SCHEDULE means a city council-approved
resolution that establishes all position classifications for city employment
and the corresponding pay rates.
   (46)   SERVICE CREDIT means the total duration of city employment, less any
adjustments for breaks in service.
   (47)   SEXUAL ORIENTATION means the actual or perceived status of an
individual with respect to the individual’s sexuality. Heterosexual,
homosexual, and bisexual are examples of sexual orientation.
   (48)   SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL PAY means additional compensation for regularly
scheduled work hours outside of the city’s normal business hours, as
specifically described in administrative directives of the city.
   (49)   STEP means one salary increment within a grade for a sworn police or
fire department employee.
   (50)   SUSPENSION means unpaid disciplinary leave for a specified period of
time.
   (51)   SWORN EMPLOYEES OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT means:
      (A)   police officers and all related classifications, including trainee
police officers; and
      (B)   park rangers and all classifications above park ranger in the same
classification family.
   (52)   TASKING means release from duty upon completion of assigned work
before the scheduled end of the work day.
   (52.1)   TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE means an employee who has been designated as
temporary pursuant to Section
34-8.
   (53)   TERMINATION means cessation of employment with the city.
   (54)   TRANSFER means the change of an employee from a position in one
department to an equivalent position (same grade) in another department, but
that does not result in either promotion or demotion.
   (55)   UNCLASSIFIED POSITION means an unclassified civil service position as
designated by Section 3, Chapter XVI of the city charter.
   (56)   UNIFORMED SERVICES EMPLOYMENT AND REEMPLOYMENT RIGHTS ACT means the
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (38 U.S.C.A.
§§ 4301 et seq.), as amended.
   (57)   WORK WEEK means the seven- day period from Wednesday through Tuesday.
   (58)   WORKING DAYS means Monday through Friday, excluding official holidays
observed by the city of Dallas as set forth in Section 34-25 of this chapter.
(Ord. Nos. 19340; 19473; 19679; 22195; 22296; 22318; 24873; 28024; 28794;
29480; 30216; 31745; 32035; 32604)
SEC. 34-5.   CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.
   (a)   Compliancewithrulesandlaws. Every city employee shall comply with:
      (1)   the provisions of the city charter and ordinances; and
      (2)   instructions and regulations promulgated by the city council or by
any person in whom authority is vested by the city council.
   (b)   Retirementfundmembership. Every permanent employee must be a member of
the employees’ retirement fund except a sworn employee of the police or fire
department, who shall be a member of the police and fire pension system.
   (c)   Subrogation. Every employee of the city accepts employment upon the
condition that, if in the course of employment the employee sustains injury
attributable in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, through the
negligence or wrongdoing of a third person, firm, or corporation, the city
shall be subrogated to the employee’s rights, remedies, and claims against the
third party to the extent of the amounts expended by the city for and on behalf
of the employee, including wage supplementation during absence from work,
workers’ compensation, and medical costs arising out of or in any manner
connected with the injury.
   (d)   Nepotism.
      (1)   An employee may not work under the line of supervision of a
relative or the employee’s domestic partner.
      (2)   An employee shall not make, or attempt to influence, any
determination concerning the employment status or eligibility for employment of
a relative or the employee’s domestic partner.
      (3)   For purposes of this subsection:
         (A)   DOMESTIC PARTNER has the meaning given that term in Section
12A-2 of the Dallas City Code.
         (B)   RELATIVE means the employee's spouse, mother, father,
stepmother, stepfather, mother-in-law, father-in-law, son, daughter, foster
child, stepson, stepdaughter, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother, sister,
stepbrother, stepsister, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, or any grandparent,
aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, or cousin related to the employee by blood or
marriage.
   (e)   Notification of arrest. Within one business day after returning to
work, an employee who has been arrested in the United States or any other
country shall notify the human resources representative for the employee’s
department of the arrest and the reason for the arrest. An arrested employee
who gives notice under this subsection is still required to comply with the
notice of absence or tardiness requirements set forth in Section
34-36(b)(1)(B) of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 22296; 22318; 24873; 28024;
31745)
SEC. 34-6.   REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUCTION.
   To obtain employment with the city, an applicant must:
      (1)   be at least 16 years of age, unless otherwise approved under a
federally-sponsored program, or be at least 15 years of age for employment in a
seasonal position as a summer lifeguard in the Park and Recreation Department,
in accordance with state and federal laws governing employment of persons age
15 years;
      (2)   be eligible to work in the United States in accordance with the
federal Immigration Reform and Control Act, as amended;
      (3)   have a social security number;
      (4)   agree to be fingerprinted, if requested;
      (5)   take a polygraph examination related specifically to job
performance, for positions designated by the director of human resources; and
      (6)   pass a medical, physical agility, drug and alcohol, and/or mental
examination after an employment offer has been extended, appropriate for the
position as designated by the director of human resources. (Ord. Nos. 19340;
22026; 22195; 24873; 31745; 32604)
SEC. 34-7.   APPLICATION FOR EMPLOYMENT.
   (a)   Application form. Every applicant for employment with the city shall
submit a completed application form. Every question on the form must be
answered.
   (b)   False or incomplete information. Any applicant or employee who
provides false information on the application form or who fails to disclose
information that is pertinent to the appointment is subject to denial of
employment or discharge. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 24873)
SEC. 34-8.   APPOINTMENTS.
   (a)   Temporary employees.
      (1)   Appointments. An employee is designated as temporary when appointed
to any of the following:
         (A)   an assignment less than six months in duration;
         (B)   a position funded under a federal employment and training
program as a participant meeting federal eligibility requirements, but not
including administrative or staff positions;
         (C)   positions in the city’s temporary help service program;
         (D)   a cooperative work-study program with an educational
institution;
         (E)   a seasonal position, even though the assignment may last more
than six months;
         (F)   a position that is intended to give introductory work experience
to a person preparing for entry into the work force; and
         (G)   a position scheduled to work less than 20 hours per week.
      (2)   Release. A temporary employee does not serve probation and may be
released at any time without right of internal appeal.
   (b)   Permanent employees. An employee is designated as permanent when
appointed in any situation not defined as temporary under Subsection (a).
Exceptions to this subsection must be approved by the director of human
resources. Nothing in this provision conveys a contract of employment with the
City of Dallas and nothing in this provision is intended to be a term of a
contract when combined with any other document, instrument, or writing.
   (c)   Full-time and part-time status. An employee is designated as:
      (1)   full-time when appointed on a work schedule that is at least 40
hours per week or averages 40 hours per week;
      (2)   part-time when appointed on a work schedule that:
         (A)   is less than the usual work schedule of the unit to which the
employee is assigned; or
         (B)   averages less than 40 hours per work week.
   (d)   Special appointments. An employee is designated as a special
appointment when the appointment is:
      (1)   to a special body or commission not fully under the jurisdiction of
the city, but where the employee is carried on the city payroll for
administrative purposes;
      (2)   a mobility appointment under the federal Intergovernmental
Personnel Act; or
      (3)   a cooperative appointment with another agency or organization.
(Ord. Nos. 19340; 19473; 22026; 24873; 31745)
SEC. 34-9.   ELIGIBILITY FOR BENEFITS.
   (a)   Permanent employees.
      (1)   A permanent full-time employee is eligible for employee benefits,
including, but not limited to, paid leave as provided in this chapter, health
benefit plan participation, life insurance, and retirement benefits. Benefits
may be changed at any time subject to applicable law and subject to city
council approval when required, for any lawful reason, including budget
constraints.
      (2)   An employee hired in a classification other than permanent full-
time is eligible for benefits in accordance with federal law and as described
in the applicable plan documents.
   (b)   City council members. City council members are not employees. City
council members are eligible for certain tax-favored benefits in accordance
with federal law and as described in the applicable plan documents. (Ord. Nos.
19340; 22026; 22195; 22296; 22318; 24873; 25051; 29883; 31745; 32342; 32865)
SEC. 34-10.   REAPPOINTMENTS.
   (a)   Retrieving continuous full-time service.
      (1)   A person who is reappointed as a city employee retrieves previous
continuous full-time service earned during the immediately preceding period of
full-time city employment if the person:
         (A)   previously had completed at least six months, but less than five
years, of continuous full- time service with the city; and
         (B)   is reappointed within one year after termination of the previous
city employment.
      (2)   A person who is reappointed as a city employee retrieves previous
continuous full-time service earned during the longest single preceding period
of full-time service if the person:
         (A)   previously had completed at least five years of continuous full-
time service with the city; and
         (B)   is reappointed within 10 years after termination of the previous
city employment.
      (3)   Continuous full-time service retrieved under this subsection will
be for purposes of determining all service related benefits except retirement
benefits. Service credit for retirement and pension programs is defined in the
governing documents, ordinances, and statutes establishing those programs.
   (b)   Probation. A reappointed employee who retrieves service under
Subsection (a) of this section must serve a new probation period, if
applicable, starting with the reappointment date. The service of a probationary
period or the successful completion of a probationary period does not convey
upon, imply, or intend to imply that an employee has a property interest in
continued employment or a contract of employment with the city.
   (c)   Pay grade within one year. When a person is reappointed to the same
classification or to a comparable one within one year after termination of
prior city employment, the person may be returned to the same salary level held
before termination. The date of reappointment determines the date of
eligibility for a pay increase.
   (d)   Reappointment with no service time retrieved. A reappointed employee
will be governed by regulations applying to new appointments if the employee is
ineligible to retrieve continuous full-time service under Subsection (a) of
this section after a break in service.
   (e)   Return from military service. Reappointment of an employee from
military service must be in accordance with Section
34-30 of this chapter and administrative directives established pursuant to
that section. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 22296; 22318; 24873; 25663; 28024)
SEC. 34-11.   PROBATION.
   (a)   Charter provisions. Section 10, Chapter XVI of the city charter
establishes the period of probation, when applicable.
   (b)   Purpose. The purpose of any probation is to determine that the
employee can and will perform satisfactorily. The service of a probationary
period or the successful completion of a probationary period does not convey
upon, imply, or intend to imply that an employee has a property interest in
continued employment or a contract of employment with the city.
   (c)   Applicability.
      (1)   All employees in a classified or unclassified civil service
position (including directors, assistant directors, and other managerial
personnel designated by the city council of departments that are not exempt
from civil service provisions under Section 9, Chapter XVI of the Dallas City
Charter) serve a probationary period of six months after an initial appointment
or a promotion.
      (2)   Non-civil service employees do not serve a probationary period
after either an initial appointment or a promotion.
      (3)   No employee serves a probationary period after a lateral transfer
or demotion.
   (d)   Initial probation. Until an employee in a classified or unclassified
civil service position successfully completes probation required to be
initially served after appointment or reappointment to city employment, the
employee has no right to an internal appeal of a determination that the
employee failed probation or of any subsequent termination of employment with
the city. Even after serving an initial probation, appeal rights of department
directors, assistant department directors, and other managerial personnel
designated by the city council are limited by this chapter and Section 11,
Chapter XVI of the Dallas City Charter.
   (e)   Promotional probation. Until an employee in a classified or
unclassified civil service position successfully completes probation required
to be served after a promotion, the employee has no right to an internal appeal
of a determination that the employee failed probation or of any subsequent
demotion. Even after serving a promotional probation, appeal rights of
department directors, assistant department directors, and other managerial
personnel designated by the city council are limited by this chapter and
Section 11, Chapter XVI of the Dallas City Charter.
   (f)   A probationary period may be extended by the civil service board in
the classified service or by the director of human resources, with approval of
the city manager, in the unclassified service to include the entire training
period of a formal apprenticeship training program or to allow six months on-
the-job work performance or completion of any written prerequisites to
employment. An employee will be informed in writing of the approval of such an
extension.
   (g)   Notification of failed probation. Upon failing initial or promotional
probation, an employee shall be immediately notified of the failure and:
      (1)   terminated, if serving an initial probation;
      (2)   given an opportunity to retreat, if serving a promotional probation
and a right to retreat exists; or
      (3)   terminated, if serving a promotional probation and no right to
retreat exists.
   (h)   Right to retreat.
      (1)   Right to retreat for certain positions.
         (A)   Right to retreat for classified and unclassified civil service
civilian employees. If an employee is promoted into a classified or
unclassified civilian civil service position and fails to complete probation in
that position, whether voluntarily or because of nonsatisfactory performance,
the employee maintains a right to retreat to the immediately former position,
grade, and base hourly rate of pay or step, whichever is applicable if the
immediately former position is vacant, provided that probation was completed in
the immediately former position and the former position was a classified or
unclassified civil service position. A department director, in their
discretion, may allow an employee in the classified or unclassified civil
service to retreat to a vacant comparable position if the immediately former
position is no longer available.
         (B)   Right to retreat for classified civil service sworn employees.
Promotion of any classified civil service sworn employee of the police and fire
department shall not be deemed complete until a period of six months shall have
elapsed from the date of appointment to the higher rank. If, during the six-
month period, the promoted employee does not merit the promotion and it is
recommended by the Chief of the department that the employee be reduced, then
the employee so promoted shall be returned to the rank held by the employee at
the time of promotion.
      (2)   Not applicable to certain positions. The right to retreat does not
apply to an employee promoted to or from a position that is not a classified or
unclassified civil service position or to an employee appointed to the position
of director, assistant director, or other managerial personnel designated by
the city council.
      (3)   Property interest not conveyed. An employee's right to retreat does
not convey upon, imply, or intend to imply that an employee has a property
interest in continued employment or a contract of employment with the city.
(Ord. Nos. 19340; 19932; 22296; 22318; 24873; 28024; 31745)
SEC. 34-12.   DEMOTIONS.
   (a)   Demotion means a reduction in grade with a resulting decrease in
salary. Demotions are not necessarily the result of or limited to reductions in
grade resulting from disciplinary action. Department directors, assistant
department directors, and other managerial personnel designated by the city
council may be reduced in grade without a right to an internal appeal.
   (b)   Salary adjustment. If an employee who has completed probation is
demoted by the employee’s own election, demoted as a result of a reduction in
force, or demoted in a disciplinary action, the employee’s salary will be
adjusted as outlined in the administrative directives of the city and in
accordance with city council- approved salary schedules for the demoted
position. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 22296; 22318; 24873)
SEC. 34-13.   TRANSFERS AND REASSIGNMENTS.
   (a)   Processing promotional transfers. A supervisor shall process an
employee transfer that results in promotion within two weeks following
notification of the employee’s intent to accept the promotion. The director of
human resources must approve exceptions to this subsection.
   (b)   Reassignments. A department director may reassign positions and staff
within a department to provide for the best interest of the employee or the
department. An employee may not grieve a reassignment, including situations in
which the employee:
      (1)   was involuntarily reassigned; or
      (2)   applied for and was not selected for the reassignment.
   (c)   Transfers. An employee who applies for a transfer must meet the
minimum qualifications of the requested position. The following procedures
apply to a transfer:
      (1)   Present and prospective supervisors shall cooperate in considering
and processing a transfer when operations of the transferring or receiving
department are not impaired and department directors for both departments agree
to the transfer. Supervisors shall process the release of an employee transfer
within a reasonable time following notification of the employee's intent to
accept the transfer.
      (2)   An employee who is transferred has no right to return to the
immediately former position or a comparable position.
      (3)   An employee who accepts a transfer is not guaranteed the same base
hourly rate of pay held in the immediately former position.
   (d)   Retention of benefits. A transferred employee maintains all benefits,
including accrued leave, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   Retirement plans. An employee who transfers to a position that is
covered by a different retirement program than the one that covered the
employee’s previous position with the city must change membership to the
appropriate employee retirement program. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 22026; 22296; 22318;
24873; 31745)
SEC. 34-14.   TERMINATIONS.
   (a)   Classification. A termination is classified as follows:
      (1)   resignation;
      (2)   discharge;
      (3)   reduction in force; or
      (4)   administrative.
   (b)   Death during working hours. An employee who dies during working hours
will be paid as if the employee had worked the entire regular work day.
   (c)   Benefits. Benefits due a terminating employee are stipulated elsewhere
in this chapter under the sections pertaining to the respective benefit. (Ord.
Nos. 19340; 24873; 28024)
ARTICLE II.
COMPENSATION.
SEC. 34-15.   GENERAL.
   (a)   Charter provisions. Section 18, Chapter XXIV of the city charter
provides that the wages, hours, and conditions of employment of all city
employees shall be fixed and approved by the city council.
   (b)   Salary schedule. All classifications and salary ranges existing in
city employment are identified in the salary and classification schedule. Any
addition to or deletion from this schedule must be made by resolution of the
city council.
   (c)   The provisions of this article may be modified by a city council
ordinance or resolution adopting a meet and confer or collective bargaining
agreement. If any provision of this article conflicts with a provision of a
meet and confer or collective bargaining agreement adopted by the city council,
the provision of the meet and confer or collective bargaining agreement will
prevail. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 24873; 28024; 31745)
SEC. 34-16.   WORK HOURS.
   (a)   Standard work day. The standard work day is eight hours, but may
deviate depending on departmental operating needs. The work day may exclude
approved meal periods, but may include a 15- minute break period within any
uninterrupted four-hour work period. An employee may be required to work hours
other than the employee’s normal work schedule.
   (b)   The standard work week is 40 hours, but may deviate depending on
departmental operating needs.
   (c)   Alternate work schedules. The following alternate work schedules, and
any additional ones adopted by city council resolution, may be selected and
implemented for a department, with prior written approval from the director of
human resources and the city manager.
SCHEDULE HOURS PER WEEK HOURS PER 24 HOUR PERIOD BEGINNING AT MIDNIGHT
SCHEDULE                    HOURS PER WEEK          HOURS PER 24 HOUR PERIOD
                                                    BEGINNING AT MIDNIGHT
(1) Four 10-hour days a     40                      Maximum of 10.
week.
(2) 12-hour days on Monday
and Tuesday and 8-hour days 40                      Varies from a minimum of 8
on Thursday and Friday.                             to a maximum of 12.
Tasking is allowed.
(3) Five 8-hour days a      40                      Maximum of 8.
week. Tasking is allowed.
(4) Four 9-hour days and    40                      Varies from a minimum of 4
one 4- hour day a week.                             to a maximum of 9.
(5) Three 11-1/2 hour days
one week of a pay period
and four 11-1/2 hour days   Varies from 34.5 to 46. Maximum of 11- 1/2.
the other week of a pay
period.
(6) Three 12-hour days one
week of a pay period and    Varies from 36 to 48    Maximum of 12
four 12-hour days the other
week of a pay period.
(7) Three 12-hour days one
week of a pay period and                            Varies from a minimum of 8
three 12-hour days and one  Varies from 36 to 44    to a maximum of 12
8-hour day the other week
of a pay period.
(8) Two 13-hour days and    40                      Varies from a minimum of 13
one 14-hour day a week                              to a maximum of 14.
(9) Any combination of
hours, ranging from a
minimum of 4 to a maximum
of 12, in a day. A work     Varies from 32 to 48    Varies from a minimum of 4
week consists of a minimum                          to a maximum of 12.
of 3-1/2 days and a maximum
of 7 days. Tasking is
allowed.
 
   (d)   24-hour staffing. For jobs requiring 24-hour staffing, meals may be
eaten while on duty. An employee is considered on duty during all meal breaks
and is expected to be readily available to perform required duties.
   (e)   Take-home vehicles. The work day for an employee who travels to and
from a regular jobsite in city equipment begins at the time and location at
which the employee is initially required to report for duty. The work day ends
when the employee is relieved of duty. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 19473; 22296; 22318;
24052; 24873; 28024; 32604)
SEC. 34-17.   OVERTIME AND PAID LEAVE FOR CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   Weekly overtime. Any nonexempt employee will be paid an overtime
hourly rate of 1-1/2 times the employee’s regular rate of pay for all hours
worked over 40 in any work week.
   (b)   Paid leave. An employee is charged with paid leave only on days the
employee would otherwise have been scheduled to work. If the employee is
assigned to a standard work week, no more than 40 hours paid leave may be
charged in one work week. If the employee is assigned to an approved alternate
work schedule, the hours charged in one work week as paid leave may not exceed
the maximum hours contained in the alternate work week during which the leave
was taken. Except for holiday leave, mental health leave, compassionate leave,
injury leave, quarantine leave, mandatory city leave, and court leave pursuant
to Section
34-26 , paid leave will not be counted as work time for purposes of computing
overtime or compensatory leave.
   (c)   Call backs. A nonexempt employee who is called back to work and
reports back to work outside of the employee’s scheduled work hours must be
paid a minimum of two hours worked, if the call back does not merge with the
employee’s scheduled start time.
   (d)   Exception. This section does not apply to a sworn employee of the
police department or the fire department. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 19473; 22296;
22318; 24052; 24873; 25389; 28024; 30216; 32604)
SEC. 34-18.   PAY FOR VACATION LEAVE.
   (a)   Rate of pay. When pay in lieu of vacation leave is approved as
provided by Section
34-23(o), the employee will receive the employee's base hourly rate of pay for
nonexempt employees or the employee's prorated salary rate for exempt
employees. This pay is not considered in determining eligibility for overtime
pay under Section
34-17.
   (b)   Exception. This section does not apply to a sworn employee of the
police department or the fire department. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 22296; 22318;
24873; 31745)
SEC. 34-19.   WORK HOURS, PAID LEAVE, AND OVERTIME FOR PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   Police department. The work period and work hours for sworn employees
of the police department are as follows:
      (1)   For purposes of the Fair Labor Standards Act, as amended, the work
period for a nonexempt sworn employee of the police department is 28 days.
      (2)   Weekly overtime. A nonexempt sworn employee of the police
department will be paid an overtime hourly rate of 1-1/2 times the employee’s
regular rate of pay for all hours worked over 40 in any work week, or be
granted compensatory leave for all hours in excess of 40.
      (3)   Paid leave. Any sworn employee of the police department is charged
with paid leave only on days the employee would otherwise have been scheduled
to work. If the employee is assigned to a standard work week, no more than 40
hours paid leave may be charged in one work week. If the employee is assigned
to an approved alternate work schedule, the hours charged in one work week as
paid leave may not exceed the maximum hours contained in the alternate work
week during which the leave was taken. Authorized attendance incentive leave,
vacation leave, holiday leave, leave with pay as defined by Section
34-29 , compensatory leave, court leave pursuant to Section
34-26 , mandatory city leave, military leave, death-in-family leave,
compassionate leave, injury leave, mental health leave, and quarantine leave
will be counted as work time for purposes of computing overtime or compensatory
leave. Paid parental leave and sick leave will not be counted as work time for
purposes of computing overtime or compensatory leave.
      (4)   Call backs. A nonexempt sworn employee of the police department who
is called back to work and reports back to work outside of the employee’s
scheduled work hours must be paid a minimum of two hours worked, if the call
back does not merge with the employee’s scheduled start time.
      (5)   Compensatory leave in lieu of overtime pay may be granted a
nonexempt sworn employee of the police department at the request of the
employee, subject to supervisory approval. Compensatory leave is earned at the
rate of 1-1/2 hours for each hour worked, to a maximum of 480 hours accrued.
Compensatory leave will be granted within a reasonable time after being
requested if the use of the compensatory leave does not unduly disrupt the
operations of the department. Compensatory leave may be taken in hourly
increments. The accrual and use of compensatory leave is governed by the Fair
Labor Standards Act, as amended, and Section 142.0016 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended. Compensatory leave not taken during the payroll
quarter in which it is accrued or during the following two payroll quarters
will be paid at the employee’s regular rate of pay earned at the time of
payment or at the time of forfeiture of the compensatory leave, whichever rate
is higher. Compensatory leave will be paid upon termination at the higher of:
         (A)   the average regular rate of pay received by the employee during
the last three years of the employee’s employment with the city; or
         (B)   the final regular rate of pay received by the employee.
      (6)   A sworn employee of the police department above the rank of captain
is an exempt employee and does not earn overtime or compensatory leave.
   (b)   Fire department. The work period and work hours for sworn employees of
the fire department are as follows:
      (1)   The work period for a sworn employee of the fire department is,
depending upon assignment, 28 days (pursuant to Fair Labor Standards Act, as
amended,) or a standard 40-hour work week.
      (2)   The standard work day or shift for a sworn employee of the fire
department may consist of the following, depending upon assignment:
         (A)    8 hours a day;
         (B)   12 hours a day; or
         (C)   24 hours a day.
      (3)   A sworn employee of the fire department assigned to special
training is subject to the eight-hour work day.
      (4)   A sworn employee of the fire department with the rank of assistant
chief or above is an exempt employee and does not earn overtime. A civilian
employee of the fire department with a classification equivalent to assistant
chief or above is an exempt employee and does not earn overtime.
      (5)   A nonexempt sworn employee of the fire department who works more
than 212 hours in a 28-day work period or 40 hours in a standard work week,
depending upon assignment, will be paid at 1- 1/2 times the employee’s regular
rate of pay for hours worked beyond the scheduled work period.
      (6)   A nonexempt sworn employee of the fire department may, subject to
departmental approval, choose to receive compensatory leave in lieu of overtime
pay at the rate of 1-1/2 hours for each hour worked beyond each scheduled work
period, to a maximum of 480 hours accrued.
      (7)   Compensatory leave may be earned by a sworn employee of the fire
department other than an exempt employee above the ranks of fire battalion/
section chief and fire prevention section chief. Compensatory leave will be
granted within a reasonable time after being requested if the use of the
compensatory leave does not unduly disrupt the operations of the department.
Compensatory leave may be taken in hourly increments. The accrual and use of
compensatory leave is governed by the Fair Labor Standards Act, as amended, and
Section 142.0016 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. Compensatory
leave not taken during the payroll quarter in which it is accrued or during the
following two payroll quarters will be paid at the employee’s regular rate of
pay earned at the time of payment or at the time of forfeiture of the
compensatory leave, whichever rate is higher. Compensatory leave will be paid
upon termination at the higher of:
         (A)   the average regular rate of pay received by the employee during
the last three years of the employee’s employment with the city; or
         (B)   the final regular rate of pay received by the employee.
      (8)   A sworn employee of the fire department must use or be paid for all
accrued compensatory leave before transferring to or from the emergency
response bureau of the fire department or whenever the employee’s full-time
regular work schedule is increased or reduced.
      (9)   Authorized attendance incentive leave, vacation leave, holiday
leave, leave with pay as defined by Section
34-29, compensatory leave, court leave pursuant to Section
34-26, mandatory city leave, military leave, death-in-family leave,
compassionate leave, injury leave, mental health leave, and quarantine leave
will be counted as work time for purposes of computing overtime or compensatory
leave. Paid parental leave and sick leave will not be counted as work time for
purposes of computing overtime or compensatory leave.
      (10)   Call backs. A nonexempt sworn employee of the fire department who
is called back to work and reports back to work outside of the employee’s
scheduled work hours must be paid a minimum of two hours worked, if the call
back does not merge with the employee’s scheduled start time.
      (11)   A sworn employee of the fire department may, with prior approval
from the fire chief or a designated representative, trade time with another
sworn employee. Trade time is not considered as work time in determining
overtime, but trading time is subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act, as
amended. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 22195; 24873; 24930; 25142; 25389; 28024; 30216;
32604)
SEC. 34-20.   EXEMPT EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   Pay. An exempt employee is paid on a weekly salary basis regardless of
the number of hours worked, unless an absence is taken when the employee has no
remaining paid leave balances or when the employee is on furlough leave. In
rare instances, and with the approval of the city manager, an exempt employee
may receive additional compensation for overtime worked.
   (b)   Absence. Pursuant to the principles of public accountability and
depending upon the reason for the absence, an absence of an exempt employee may
be charged to administrative leave, sick leave, vacation leave, compensatory
leave, furlough leave, mandatory city leave, family leave, court leave, death-
in-family leave, military leave, or leave without pay.
   (c)   Prorated salary. If part of a week is taken as leave without pay, a
proportionate part of the weekly salary will be paid to an exempt employee for
the hours worked or charged to paid leave. A proportionate part of the weekly
salary will be paid to an exempt employee for the part of the week worked in
the initial or terminal week of employment.
   (d)   Emergency work. As appropriate, during emergencies, such as a
declaration of local state of disaster, and subject to the approval of the
department director, an employee may be temporarily required to perform work
outside of the employee's normal job duties. In such situations, the employee
will not lose their exempt status. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 19473; 20075; 22195;
24873; 26182; 28024; 31745)
SEC. 34-21.   DISTRIBUTION OF PAY CHECKS.
   (a)   Administration. The city controller is responsible for proper
distribution of pay checks. Any discrepancy in a pay check resulting in
overpayment or otherwise should be brought to the attention of the employee's
supervisor. The employee shall also report the discrepancy to the city
controller payroll section.
   (b)   Payday. Friday is the official payday of the city.
   (c)   Pay information for the appropriate payroll will be made available
electronically to employees immediately after payroll processing is completed.
This electronic information is provided in lieu of paper pay stubs and may be
accessed from any computer with internet access. If necessary, signature pay
checks will be released on or about 2:00 p.m. Friday by the city controller to
authorized departmental personnel or directly to payee employees. (Ord. Nos.
19340; 22296; 22318; 24873; 28024; 31745)
ARTICLE III.
LEAVE POLICIES.
SEC. 34-21.1.   GENERAL.
   The provisions of this article may be modified by a city council ordinance
or resolution adopting a meet and confer or collective bargaining agreement. If
any provision of this article conflicts with a provision of a meet and confer
or collective bargaining agreement adopted by the city council, the provision
of the meet and confer or collective bargaining agreement will prevail. (Ord.
28024)
SEC. 34-22.   SICK LEAVE.
   (a)   Eligibility. Every permanent employee accrues and may use sick leave
upon initial appointment.
   (b)   Reappointments. A person reappointed as a city employee under
conditions described in Section
34-10(a)(1) or (a)(2) retrieves sick leave credit accumulated before the
person's previous termination from city employment and is entitled to both
accrue and use sick leave after reappointment.
   (c)   Sworn employee's sick leave eligibility.
      (1)   A sworn employee of the police or fire department may take 30 sick
leave days each calendar year. This amount shall not exceed 360 hours for a
sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of the fire department and 240
hours for every other sworn employee of the police or fire department.
      (2)   Any sick leave days taken in excess of the number that, under
Subsection (d), can be accrued during a year will be subtracted from the
employee's accrued sick leave balance.
   (d)   Accrual. Every permanent employee accrues sick leave each year as
follows:
      (1)   A sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of the fire
department accrues six hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 144
hours annually.
      (2)   A sworn employee in the communications bureau of the fire
department accrues four hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 96
hours annually.
      (3)   Every other bi-weekly paid employee accrues five percent of hours
paid up to 80 in each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 96 hours annually.
      (4)   Every weekly paid employee accrues five percent of hours paid up to
40 in each weekly pay period, to a maximum of 96 hours annually.
   (e)   Maximum accrual. The maximum sick leave that may be accrued is 2,160
hours for a sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of the fire
department and 1,440 hours for any other employee. When an employee's accrued
sick leave reaches the maximum number of hours, the accrual ceases until the
employee takes sick leave hours.
   (f)   Computation of sick leave taken. An absence charged to sick leave will
be for the number of hours in the standard work day and will not include
overtime whether scheduled or not. An absence charged to sick leave for a sworn
employee of the emergency response bureau of the fire department will be made
on the basis of 24 hours for each scheduled work shift.
   (g)   Sick leave usage. Sick leave may only be granted or taken when:
      (1)   an employee is incapacitated for the performance of duties due to
an illness, surgical procedure, or off-job injury;
      (2)   a medical, dental, or optical examination or treatment is
necessary, provided that prior approval of the supervisor is obtained;
      (3)   an employee is incapacitated by or recovering from pregnancy,
miscarriage, abortion, or childbirth;
      (4)   it is necessary to care for an immediate family member who is ill
or incapacitated;
      (5)   an employee has been exposed to a contagious disease, meaning one
that would warrant quarantine by a health officer, and the employee's presence
on the job would jeopardize the health of others;
      (6)   it is allowed under the city's wage supplementation plan; or
      (7)   it is allowed under the city's administrative directives governing
the administration of the Family and Medical Leave Act.
   (h)   Notice of unexpected absence.
      (1)   Notice of absence due to an illness, injury, or any other
unexpected reason must be given in the following manner:
         (A)   Every employee, except one covered by Paragraph (1)(B) of this
subsection, must give notice to the employee's supervisor from within two hours
before to within 30 minutes after starting time, depending upon departmental
procedures. The supervisor may require the employee to report on each
succeeding day of absence.
         (B)   An employee in a department with a 24-hour, seven-day work
schedule must give notice to the employee's supervisor at least one hour before
reporting time on the first day of the absence and, if required by the
supervisor, on each succeeding day of absence.
      (2)   Failure to give the notice required in this subsection may result
in the employee being declared absent without leave and subject to disciplinary
action.
   (i)   Physician's statement. Upon request by a supervisor, a department
director, or the director of human resources, an employee may be required to:
      (1)   furnish a statement from an attending physician demonstrating the
existence of circumstances described in Subsection (g)(1), (2), (3), (4), or
(5) of this section; or
      (2)   submit to a physical or mental examination by a health care
provider (including but not limited to a physician or psychologist) selected by
the city.
   (j)   Refusal to return from sick leave. An employee who is released by the
treating physician to return to regular or limited duty and who refuses to
report for work or perform assigned duties is subject to disciplinary action.
   (k)   Holidays. If an official holiday occurs during a period of illness, an
employee will be charged for the holiday instead of for sick leave.
   (l)   Illness during vacation. If an employee becomes ill while taking
vacation leave, the period of illness may be charged as sick leave and the
charge against vacation leave will be reduced accordingly. A request for this
substitution must be made within two days after the employee's return to work
and must be supported by a medical statement.
   (m)   Sick leave during suspension. An employee on suspension forfeits use
and accrual of sick leave for the duration of the suspension. Upon completion
of the suspension, the employee must either physically return to work or, if
ill, submit an approved doctor's statement justifying inability to return to
work before sick leave credit and accrual may be restored.
   (n)   Sick leave during leave without pay. An employee on leave without pay
forfeits use and accrual of sick leave for the duration of the leave without
pay, except to the extent that the leave without pay is authorized by the
City's Family and Medical Leave provisions. Upon completion of the leave
without pay, the employee must either physically return to work or, if ill,
submit an approved doctor's statement justifying inability to return to work
before sick leave credit and accrual may be restored.
   (o)   Military service. Sick leave for an employee performing duties in the
military service is governed by Section
34-30 of this chapter and administrative directives established pursuant to
that section.
   (p)   Sick leave adjustment for changes in work schedules. A sworn employee
of the fire department will have any sick leave balance adjusted
proportionately to reflect differences in work schedules when:
      (1)   the employee transfers to or from the emergency response bureau of
the fire department; or
      (2)   the employee's full-time regular work schedule is increased or
decreased.
   (q)   Use of vacation leave when sick leave is exhausted. If an employee's
sick leave balance is exhausted, the employee may use available vacation leave
in cases of illness or injury.
   (r)   Advance sick leave. The director of a department may approve a request
for advance sick leave for an employee who has completed three consecutive
years of city employment and accumulated a minimum of 96 hours of sick leave
prior to the occurrence of the condition for which the advance sick leave is
needed. The employee shall provide an anticipated return to work date when
making the request. The maximum advance of sick leave that may be granted may
not exceed 120 hours for a sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of
the fire department or 80 hours for any other employee. A request for advance
sick leave will not be approved until all expendable paid leave is exhausted
and the employee has no outstanding balance of previously-granted advance sick
leave. If an employee who is indebted for unearned sick leave terminates, the
employee shall refund the amount paid for the period of the advanced sick
leave. No refund is required in cases of death or retirement for disability.
   (s)   Lump sum payment of sick leave.
      (1)   Retirement or 20 years' service. An employee shall be granted lump
sum payment of sick leave remaining to the employee's credit in any amount that
does not exceed 1,080 hours for a sworn employee in the emergency response
bureau of the fire department or 720 hours for any other employee when the
employee:
         (A)   retires from city employment and is immediately eligible to
receive retirement payments; or
         (B)   terminates for any reason with 20 or more years of continuous
full-time service, including:
            (i)   any continuous full-time service retrieved under Section
34-10(a) of this chapter; and
            (ii)   any credited service purchased for retirement purposes under
Section
40A-14 of this code after a termination resulting from a reduction in force.
      (2)   Disability. Any employee who is placed on a disability pension
shall be granted lump sum payment of any sick leave remaining to the employee's
credit in any amount that does not exceed 1,080 hours for a sworn employee in
the emergency response bureau of the fire department and 720 hours for any
other employee. The appropriate pension board will determine the date of
permanent disability. Use of sick leave will be discontinued and lump sum
payment made effective on that date.
      (3)   Death. If an employee dies, the total accumulated sick leave in any
amount that does not exceed 1,080 hours for a sworn employee in the emergency
response bureau of the fire department and 720 hours for any other employee
shall be computed with the final settlement of the employee's wages and paid in
a lump sum to the employee's beneficiary or estate.
      (4)   Computation. Lump sum payment of sick leave is computed by
multiplying the number of hours of sick leave to which an employee is entitled
by the employee's regular rate of pay on the date of termination. An employee
who elects to receive lump sum payment of sick leave upon termination and who
is later reemployed with the city may not receive another lump sum payment of
sick leave.
      (5)   Eligibility. An employee hired or rehired by the city on or after
October 1, 2003 is not eligible for any lump sum payment of sick leave under
this subsection.
   (t)   Family leave. An employee who is eligible for family leave under
Section
34-24.1(b) may be required to deduct hours from the employee's sick leave
balance to cover all or part of any absence from work for a family leave
purpose described in Section
34-24.1(c).
   (u)   Discretionary sick leave for new third-tier executive and above. In
addition to sick leave accrual authorized in Subsection (d) of this section,
the city manager may, beginning on the person's employment start date, approve
up to 80 hours of sick leave for a person hired into a third-tier executive
position and above. This subsection does not apply to a city employee who is
promoted into a third-tier executive position and above.
   (v)   Department rules. Departments that implement rules regarding employee
attendance must do so with review and input by the Department of Human
Resources and the City Attorney's Office.
   (w)   Sick leave to be used first. Accrued sick leave balances must be used
first for sick leave purposes before other types of accrued leave balances can
be used. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 19932; 22026; 22195; 22296; 22318; 24873; 24930;
25386; 28024; 28425; 29480; 29883; 30657; 31745)
SEC. 34-22.1.   MEDICAL TESTING.
   (a)   An employee may be required to submit to drug and/or alcohol testing.
Specific procedures regarding drug and/or alcohol testing are outlined in the
administrative directives of the city.
   (b)   An employee may be required to submit to a physical and/or mental
examination by a city- selected health care provider, including, but not
limited to, a physician or psychologist, in order to evaluate the employee’s
current mental or physical status as it relates to the ability to perform the
employee’s job duties. (Ord. 24873)
SEC. 34-22.2.   QUARANTINE LEAVE.
   (a)   Eligibility. A sworn member of the fire department or police
department, or an emergency medical technician or detention officer as defined
in this section, who is ordered to quarantine or isolate by the employee's
supervisor or the city's health authority due to a possible or known exposure
to a communicable disease while on duty, is eligible to receive paid quarantine
leave for the duration of the ordered quarantine or isolation.
   (b)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   DETENTION OFFICER means an individual employed by the city, and
whose job responsibilities include the care and custody of individuals
incarcerated in the city's municipal jail.
      (2)   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN means an individual who is employed by
the city and certified as an emergency medical technician in accordance with
Chapter 773 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
      (3)   HEALTH AUTHORITY means a physician appointed by the city to
administer state and local laws relating to public health within the city's
jurisdiction.
   (c)   Entitlements. Eligible employees under this section who are required
to quarantine or isolate by their supervisor or the city's health authority due
to a possible or known exposure to a communicable disease while on duty are
entitled to receive:
      (1)   all employment benefits and compensation, including leave accrual,
pension benefits, and health benefit plan benefits provided by the city; and
      (2)   if applicable, reimbursement for reasonable costs related to the
quarantine, including lodging, medical, and transportation costs.
   (d)   Effect on leave balances. The city will not reduce an eligible
employee's sick leave balance, vacation leave balance, holiday leave balance,
or other paid leave balance in connection with paid quarantine leave taken in
accordance with this section.
   (e)   Reimbursements. An employee may be required to provide receipts or
proof of payment with a request for reimbursement of expenses and may be denied
reimbursement for any expenses that the city deems unreasonable or unrelated to
quarantine. (Ord. 32035)
SEC. 34-22.3.   MENTAL HEALTH LEAVE.
   (a)   Eligibility.
      (1)   An employee who experiences a traumatic event while on duty is
eligible to receive paid mental health leave if the need for mental health
leave is verified by a licensed psychiatrist, licensed psychologist, or
licensed mental health professional.
         (A)   up to 60 hours for sworn employees in the emergency response
bureau of the fire department; and
         (B)   up to 40 hours for all other employees.
      (2)   In this section, TRAUMATIC EVENT means actual or threatened death,
serious injury, or physical abuse, either of one's self or of another, during
the employee's scope of employment that is outside the typical experiences of
the employee's routine work environment and causes the employee to experience
unusually strong emotional reactions or feelings that have the potential to
cause lasting adverse effects on their functioning and mental, physical,
social, or emotional well-being. A traumatic event does not include routine
work-related events or incidents, personality conflicts, or disagreements
between or among supervisors or co-workers.
      (3)   City departments may develop additional departmental rules to carry
out the provisions of this policy, subject to the approval of the director of
the human resources department and the city attorney's office.
   (b)   Confidentiality. The city will keep requests for mental health leave
and any medical information related to mental health leave in accordance with
this section confidential to the extent allowed by law and separate from the
employee's personnel or departmental file. The city cannot guarantee
confidentiality of information that is otherwise public or necessary to carry
out the city's obligations under the law.
   (c)   Effect on leave balances. The city will not reduce an eligible
employee's sick leave, vacation leave, holiday, or other paid leave balance for
mental health leave taken in accordance with this section. (Ord. Nos. 32035;
32158; 32604)
SEC. 34-22.4.    COMPASSIONATE LEAVE.
   (a)   Purpose. Compassionate leave is intended for employees with a serious
medical condition or injury that prevents the employee from performing any type
of work and, due to the employee’s medical condition, it is anticipated that
the employee will not be able to return to work for an extended period of time
or indefinitely.
   (b)   Eligibility. An employee who has exhausted all accrued leave balances,
has completed a minimum of one year of city employment, and accumulated a
minimum of 40 hours of sick leave at any time prior to the occurrence of the
condition for which the compassionate leave is requested.
   (c)   Maximum leave allowed. For employees who are approved for
compassionate leave, the maximum amount of compassionate leave that may be
awarded is 348 hours for a sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of
the fire department, and 232 hours for any other employee. An employee may only
be awarded compassionate leave once.
   (d)   Required approval. An employee's request for compassionate leave must
be approved by the employee's department director and the director of human
resources. Specific procedures and requirements for the administration of
compassionate leave are outlined in the administrative directives of the city.
(Ord. Nos. 32035; 32604)
SEC. 34-23.   VACATION LEAVE.
   (a)   Eligibility. Every permanent employee accrues vacation leave during
the initial six months of city employment. Except for a newly hired third-tier
executive and above who has been granted discretionary vacation leave pursuant
to Subsection (r) of this section, vacation leave may not be used until the
initial six months of employment are completed. All vacation leave is forfeited
if the employee terminates employment before completing the initial six months
of employment.
   (b)   Reappointments. A person reappointed under conditions described in
Section
34-10(a)(1) or (a)(2) accrues vacation leave at a rate determined by the number
of years of continuous full-time service retrieved and may both accrue and use
vacation leave during the initial six months of employment after reappointment.
   (c)   Accrual. Vacation leave accrues as follows:
      (1)   Every permanent employee with less than five years of service
accumulates vacation leave as follows:
         (A)   A sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of the fire
department accrues nine hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 180
hours annually.
         (B)   A sworn employee in the communications bureau of the fire
department accrues six hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 120
hours annually.
         (C)   A sworn employee of the police department accrues 7.5 percent of
hours paid up to 80 in each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 120 hours
annually.
         (D)   Every other bi-weekly paid employee accrues 6.5 percent of hours
paid up to 80 in each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 104 hours annually.
         (E)   A weekly paid employee accrues 6.5 percent of hours paid up to
40 in each weekly pay period, to a maximum of 104 hours annually.
      (2)   Every permanent employee with five years of service but less than
nine years of service accumulates vacation leave as follows:
         (A)   A sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of the fire
department accrues 10.2 hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 204
hours annually.
         (B)   A sworn employee in the communications bureau of the fire
department accrues 6.8 hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 136
hours annually.
         (C)   A sworn employee of the police department accrues 8.5 percent of
hours paid up to 80 in each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 136 hours
annually.
         (D)   Every other bi-weekly paid employee accrues 7.5 percent of hours
paid up to 80 in each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 120 hours annually.
         (E)   A weekly paid employee accrues 7.5 percent of hours paid up to
40 in each weekly pay period, to a maximum of 120 hours annually.
      (3)   Every permanent employee with nine years of service but less than
15 years of service accumulates vacation leave as follows:
         (A)   A sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of the fire
department accrues 10.8 hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 216
hours annually.
         (B)   A sworn employee in the communications bureau of the fire
department accrues 7.2 hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 144
hours annually.
         (C)   Every other bi-weekly paid employee accrues nine percent of
hours paid up to 80 in each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 144 hours
annually.
         (D)   A weekly paid employee accrues nine percent of hours paid up to
40 in each weekly pay period, to a maximum of 144 hours annually.
      (4)   Every permanent employee with 15 years of service but less than 19
years of service accumulates vacation leave as follows:
         (A)   A sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of the fire
department accrues 12 hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 240
hours annually.
         (B)   A sworn employee in the communications bureau of the fire
department accrues eight hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 160
hours annually.
         (C)   Every other bi-weekly paid employee accrues 10 percent of hours
paid up to 80 in each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 160 hours annually.
         (D)   A weekly paid employee accrues 10 percent of hours paid up to 40
in each weekly pay period, to a maximum of 160 hours annually.
      (5)   Every permanent employee with 19 or more years of service
accumulates vacation leave as follows:
         (A)   A sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of the fire
department accrues 13.8 hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 276
hours annually.
         (B)   A sworn employee in communication bureau of the fire department
accrues 9.2 hours each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 184 hours
annually.
         (C)   Every other bi-weekly paid employee accrues 11.5 percent of
hours paid up to 80 in each bi-weekly pay period, to a maximum of 184 hours
annually.
         (D)   A weekly paid employee accrues 11.5 percent of hours paid up to
40 in each weekly pay period, to a maximum of 184 hours annually.
   (d)   Maximum accumulation.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, an employee may accumulate
vacation leave up to an amount equal to the employee's vacation leave
entitlement for a two-year period. When accumulated vacation leave reaches the
maximum allowed, the accrual ceases until vacation leave is taken.
      (2)   During a local state of disaster declared by the city, employees
who are prohibited by their department from taking vacation leave due to the
local state of disaster may continue to accrue vacation leave beyond the
maximum allowed for the duration of the local state of disaster. Any vacation
leave accrued beyond the maximum allowed during a local state of disaster will
be forfeited if not used within one year after the expiration of the local
state of disaster.
   (e)   Acceleration and increased accrual limits. Upon the date of an
employee's 5th, 9th, 15th and 19th service anniversary:
      (1)   accrual of vacation leave will be accelerated; and
      (2)   annual accrual limits of vacation leave will be increased.
   (f)   Incentive programs. In addition to vacation leave earned under this
section, an employee may earn vacation leave under incentive programs approved
by the city manager and adopted by the city council.
   (g)   Vacation usage. Vacation use is based on the employee's regular work
day and the number of hours the employee would have worked that day. If the
employee is assigned to a standard work week, no more than 40 hours paid leave
may be charged in one work week. If the employee is assigned to an approved
alternate work schedule, the hours charged in one work week as paid leave may
not exceed the maximum hours contained in the alternate work week during which
the leave was taken. This subsection does not apply to sworn fire department
shift personnel.
   (h)   Selection of vacation time. A supervisor may grant vacation leave at a
time during the year that will best serve the public interest. Preference may
be given to an employee on the basis of length of service.
   (i)   Holidays. If an official holiday occurs during vacation leave, an
employee will be charged for holiday leave instead of vacation leave. This
subsection does not apply to a sworn employee of the emergency response bureau
or communications bureau of the fire department who is assigned to a 12-hour or
24-hour work shift.
   (j)   Death in family. An appropriate extension of death-in-family leave may
be given for a death in an employee's family occurring while the employee is
taking vacation leave.
   (k)   Vacation leave during suspension. An employee on suspension forfeits
use and accrual of vacation leave for the duration of the suspension. Upon
completion of the suspension, the employee must either physically return to
work or, if ill, submit an approved doctor's statement justifying inability to
return to work before vacation leave credit and accrual may be restored.
   (l)   Vacation leave during leave without pay. An employee on leave without
pay forfeits use and accrual of vacation leave for the duration of the leave
without pay, except to the extent that the leave without pay is authorized by
the City's Family and Medical Leave provisions. Upon completion of the leave
without pay, the employee must either physically return to work or, if ill,
submit an approved doctor's statement justifying inability to return to work
before vacation leave credit and accrual may be restored.
   (m)   Vacation leave in conjunction with leave without pay. Prior
departmental approval must be obtained for any period of leave without pay
taken in conjunction with a normal vacation. Favorable consideration will be
given only to exceptional reasons.
   (n)   Pay in lieu of vacation leave. Vacation leave is provided for the
specific purpose of allowing an employee a period of rest and recreation, and
the practice of "selling" vacation leave is contrary to this purpose. Pay in
lieu of vacation leave may only be granted in cases of extreme emergency and
must be approved by the city council or city manager.
   (o)   Lump sum payment of vacation leave.
      (1)   Payment upon termination. An employee who terminates employment
after the initial six months of employment shall be paid for vacation leave
accrued but not taken.
      (2)   Retirement. An employee who retires will be paid in a lump sum for
the period of vacation leave due the employee.
      (3)   Discharge. A discharged employee who has completed the initial six
months of city employment will be paid for all accrued vacation leave in a lump
sum at the end of the next complete pay period following the date of discharge.
No credit will be given for a holiday that may have fallen within the vacation
period had the vacation period been extended on the payroll.
      (4)   Death. Vacation leave accrued to the credit of an employee who dies
will automatically be paid in a lump sum. Holidays occurring after the date of
death will not be paid. Upon instructions from the city attorney's office,
monies due the deceased employee will be delivered to the employee's
beneficiary or estate.
      (5)   Computation. Lump sum payment of vacation leave is computed by
multiplying the number of hours of vacation leave to which an employee is
entitled by the employee's regular rate of pay on the date of termination from
city employment.
   (p)   Vacation leave adjustment for changes in work schedules. A sworn
employee of the fire department will have any vacation leave balance adjusted
proportionately to reflect differences in work schedules when:
      (1)   the employee transfers to or from the emergency response bureau of
the fire department; or
      (2)   the employee's full-time regular work schedule is increased or
decreased.
   (q)   Family leave. An employee who is eligible for family leave under
Section
34-24.1(b) may be required to deduct hours from the employee's vacation leave
balance to cover all or part of any absence from work for a family leave
purpose described in Section
34-24.1(c).
   (r)   Discretionary vacation leave for new third-tier executive and above.
In addition to vacation leave accrual authorized in Subsection (c) of this
section, the city manager may, beginning on the person's employment start date,
approve up to 80 hours of vacation leave for a person hired into a third-tier
executive position and above. An employee forfeits any leave granted under this
subsection if his or her employment terminates within the first six months.
This subsection does not apply to a city employee who is promoted into a third-
tier executive position and above. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 19473; 19932; 22195;
22296; 22318; 24873; 24930; 28024; 29480; 29883; 30657; 31745)
SEC. 34-24.   COMPENSATORY LEAVE.
   (a)   Eligibility. An exempt employee (other than the city manager, the
first assistant city manager, an assistant city manager, a department director,
an assistant department director, other managerial personnel designated by the
city council, or an exempt employee of the city attorney's office or the city
auditor's office) who works overtime one full hour or more in a pay period may
earn compensatory leave. A nonexempt employee (other than a sworn employee of
the police or fire department) may not accrue compensatory leave but will be
paid overtime for any overtime hours worked.
   (b)   Accrual. Compensatory leave is accrued in half hour increments for
each half hour worked over 80 hours in a pay period, up to a maximum balance of
80 hours.
   (c)   Reportingandrecords. Compensatory leave must be reported biweekly. As
with any payroll transaction, the recording of compensatory time may be subject
to audit.
   (d)   Maximum balance. An employee’s compensatory leave balance may not
exceed 80 hours at any time. Hours accrued in excess of this maximum amount
will be immediately forfeited. An exempt employee may not be paid for accrued
compensatory hours.
   (e)   This section does not apply to an exempt sworn employee of the fire
department below the rank of deputy chief. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 20075; 22195;
24873; 24930; 29480; 31745)
SEC. 34-24.1.   FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE.
   (a)   Federal regulations. The terms used in this section that are not
defined in Section
34-4 of this chapter have the meanings given them in the Family and Medical
Leave Act and Part 825, Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as
amended. All interpretations and applications of this section must be made in
compliance with the minimum requirements of the Family and Medical Leave Act
and Part 825, Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended. If any
provision of this section conflicts with a provision of the federal law
governing family and medical leave, the federal law prevails.
   (b)   Eligibility. Every employee is eligible for family and medical leave
if the employee has:
      (1)   been employed by the city for at least 12 months; and
      (2)   worked at least 1,250 hours during the 12-month period immediately
preceding the commencement of family and medical leave.
   (c)   When family and medical leave may be taken. An eligible employee may
take family and medical leave only in the following circumstances:
         (A)   for the birth of the employee's son or daughter or to care for
the child after its birth;
         (B)   for the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for
adoption or foster care or to care for the child after placement;
         (C)   to care for a spouse, son, daughter, or parent of the employee,
if the spouse, son, daughter, or parent has a serious health condition;
         (D)   for a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to
perform the functions of the employee's position;
         (E)   for any qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that the
employee's spouse, son, daughter, or parent is a covered military member who is
on active duty or has been notified of an impending call or order to active
duty in support of a contingency operation; or
         (F)   to care for a covered service member with a serious injury or
illness if the employee is the spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin of
the service member.
   (d)   Administration of family and medical leave. Specific procedures and
requirements for the administration of the Family and Medical Leave Act are
outlined in the administrative directives of the city. No procedure or
requirement adopted by administrative directive may conflict with the Family
and Medical Leave Act or Part 825, Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations,
as amended.
   (e)   Disciplinary action. Disciplinary action, up to and including
discharge from city employment, may be taken against an employee who:
      (1)   falsifies or misrepresents any facts in order to obtain family and
medical leave; or
      (2)   shares confidential medical information relating to a request for
family and medical leave with any person not authorized to receive the
information. (Ord. Nos. 22195; 24873; 28024; 29320; 31745)
SEC. 34-24.2.   PAID PARENTAL LEAVE.
   On or after October 1, 2021, a maximum of six weeks of paid parental leave
is available to employees following the birth of the employee’s child or to
care for the child after birth, or for the placement of a child with the
employee for adoption or foster care or to care for the child after placement.
Specific procedures and requirements for the administration of paid parental
leave are outlined in the administrative directives of the city. (Ord. Nos.
32035; 32604)
SEC. 34-25.   HOLIDAYS.
   (a)   Days designated.
      (1)   The following official holidays will be observed:
         (A)   New Year's Day (January 1);
         (B)   Martin Luther King's Birthday (third Monday in January);
         (C)   President's Day (third Monday in February);
         (D)   Memorial Day (last Monday in May);
         (E)   Juneteenth (June 19th);
         (F)   Independence Day (July 4);
         (G)   Labor Day/Cesar E. Chavez Day (first Monday in September);
         (H)   Indigenous People's Day (second Monday in October);
         (I)   Veterans Day (November 11th);
         (J)   Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November);
         (K)   Day after Thanksgiving/ September 11th Remembrance Day; and
         (L)   Christmas Day (December 25).
      (2)   Additional holidays may be granted by ordinance or resolution of
the city council at the recommendation of the city manager.
   (b)   Holiday pay. Paid holidays are extended to every permanent employee. A
temporary employee receives the official city holiday without pay except that a
temporary employee who is assigned to work on the official city holiday is paid
for the hours worked. A full-time permanent employee receives holiday pay equal
to the employee’s standard work day. A part- time permanent employee receives
holiday pay prorated on the basis of the average number of paid hours credited
to the employee in the four payroll weeks preceding the holiday. For the
purpose of calculating overtime, holidays are included as hours worked.
   (c)   Fire department. A sworn employee in the emergency response bureau of
the fire department will receive the equivalent of 12 holidays a year in
accordance with departmental regulations.
   (d)   Weekend holidays. When an official holiday falls on a weekend, the
following alternative schedule applies:
      (1)   A holiday that falls on a Saturday will be taken the Friday before
the holiday.
      (2)   A holiday that falls on a Sunday will be taken the Monday after the
holiday.
   (e)   Worked holidays. In a department in which employees regularly work on
holidays, the department shall arrange schedules to allow each employee who
works on the holiday a substitute holiday either before or after the holiday,
but within a reasonable period of time. If the department cannot arrange a
substitute holiday, the employee will be paid for hours equal to the employee’s
standard workday. This subsection does not apply to sworn fire department shift
personnel.
   (f)   Loss of holiday pay. An employee will not receive pay for a holiday if
the employee is:
      (1)   on unapproved leave without pay either the day before or the day
following an official holiday;
      (2)   on unapproved leave without pay on a holiday on which the employee
is normally scheduled to work; or
      (3)   on approved leave without pay the day before and the day following
an official holiday, except to the extent the leave is authorized by the City’s
Family and Medical Leave provisions.
   (g)   Holiday during vacation or sick leave. When an official holiday occurs
during an employee's vacation leave or sick leave, the employee will be paid
for the holiday and no deduction from the employee's vacation or sick leave
balance will be made for the holiday.
   (h)   Holiday during injury leave. Any employee who is on injury leave when
a holiday occurs will be paid workers' compensation and will be paid for the
holiday up to the number of hours needed to supplement the employee's pay. If
the employee is on wage supplementation, no wage supplementation payments will
be received for the holiday. No compensation will be provided for unused
holiday time.
   (i)   Holiday during other leave. An employee on military leave, court
leave, or death- in-family leave when a holiday occurs may take the holiday at
a subsequent date convenient to the department.
   (j)   Death or discharge. Since final settlement of monies due an employee
separated from the payroll because of death or discharge is paid in a lump sum,
no holiday occurring after the date of death or discharge will be included in
the determination of the settlement. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 24622; 24873; 28024;
28794; 29480; 32005; 32342; 32865)
SEC. 34-26.   COURT LEAVE.
   (a)   Eligibility. Court leave is a privilege extended to every permanent
employee.
   (b)   When granted. An employee shall be granted court leave when:
      (1)   summoned for jury duty; or
      (2)   subpoenaed to appear as a witness.
   (c)   Personal litigation. An employee may not be granted court leave when
the employee is involved in personal litigation, except as permitted under
Subsection (b) of this section.
   (d)   Notice to supervisor. The employee must notify the employee’s
supervisor upon receipt of a summons or subpoena for which court leave is
requested.
   (e)   Fees. All fees paid and expenses reimbursed by the court may be
retained by the employee, provided that the city did not furnish travel, meals,
lodging, or miscellaneous expenses.
   (f)   Standard work day credit. An employee on court leave is credited with
a standard work day on the payroll. No allowance will be made for overtime the
employee might have earned if the employee had worked.
   (g)   Return to work. When an employee on court leave is excused by proper
court authority, the employee shall report back to the employee’s place of
employment when as much as two hours working time remains. (Ord. Nos. 19340;
24873)
SEC. 34-27.   DEATH-IN-FAMILY LEAVE.
   (a)   Eligibility. An allowance of three work days with pay is extended to
every permanent employee when a member of the employee's immediate family dies.
   (b)   Other than immediate family. Death of a relative not included in the
immediate family may be considered individually and up to three days leave time
allotted as the circumstances warrant.
   (c)   Multiple deaths. If multiple deaths occur within a family
simultaneously, special exceptions to the normal allowance of three days may be
made by the department director. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 24873; 29480; 31745)
SEC. 34-28.   LEAVE WITHOUT PAY.
   (a)   Eligibility. Leave without pay is granted as a matter of
administrative discretion. No employee may demand leave without pay as a matter
of right, but it may be granted to any employee.
   (b)   When granted. An employee may be granted leave without pay for the
following reasons:
      (1)   To participate in training that would result in increased job
ability.
      (2)   To achieve an educational level necessary to advancement in the
city.
      (3)   To perform a service that will contribute to the public welfare.
      (4)   To recover from an illness or disability, not believed to be of a
permanent or disqualifying nature, for which sick leave and wage
supplementation benefits have been exhausted or are not available.
      (5)   When return to work would threaten the health of others.
      (6)   To provide necessary care for a family member who is ill or
incapacitated.
      (7)   For an excused absence during the initial six months of employment.
      (8)   For an excused, but noncompensable, absence of less than a day for
a nonexempt employee.
      (9)   To permit vacation.
      (10)   To perform duties in the military service as authorized by Section
34-30 of this chapter and administrative directives established pursuant to
that section.
      (11)   To take family and medical leave.
      (12)   At the discretion of the department director, as other
circumstances may warrant granting leave without pay.
   (c)   Allowable length of leave.
      (1)   An employee’s department director may authorize leave without pay
for a period not to exceed six consecutive calendar weeks. Leave without pay in
excess of six consecutive calendar weeks must be requested by the department
director and approved by the director of human resources. The city manager must
approve leave without pay in excess of 13 consecutive calendar weeks.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Paragraph (1) of this subsection, leave without pay
for an employee performing duties in the military service is governed by
Section
34-30 of this chapter and administrative directives established pursuant to
that section.
   (d)   Service credit.
      (1)   An employee who is on leave without pay from work for more than six
consecutive calendar weeks loses service credit for that period in excess of
the six calendar weeks, except to the extent that the leave without pay is
authorized by the City’s Family and Medical Leave provisions.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Paragraph (1) of this subsection, service credit
for an employee performing duties in the military service is governed by
Section 34- 40 of this chapter and administrative directives established
pursuant to that section.
   (e)   Accrued leave. An employee granted leave without pay forfeits use and
accrual of sick leave, vacation leave, holiday leave, death-in-family leave,
and court leave, except to the extent that the leave without pay is authorized
by federal or state law.
   (f)   Termination. An employee granted leave without pay must physically
return to work to retrieve sick leave credit, but will be paid for any vacation
leave balance due if the employee terminates. Payment of the vacation leave
balance will be at the pay rate in effect at the beginning of the leave without
pay. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 19473; 20716; 22026; 22195; 24873; 29480; 31745)
SEC. 34-29.   LEAVE WITH PAY (EXCUSED ABSENCE).
   (a)   Discretionary. Certain authorized absences not provided for under
regular leave policies fall within the category of administrative discretion.
This leave with pay is referred to as administrative leave and is recorded as
such in payroll records.
   (b)   When granted. A department director may administratively excuse an
employee for the time necessary:
      (1)   to take a civil service examination;
      (2)   to take a physical examination required by the city;
      (3)   to make an oral appeal before the civil service board, accident
review board, or any other board or committee (except the city council) whose
function may affect the employee’s work status;
      (4)   to vote in a city, state, or national election;
      (5)   for urgent personal reasons; or
      (6)   for other circumstances at the department director’s discretion.
   (c)   Pending disciplinary action. An employee charged with a violation of a
city, state, or federal law, rule, or policy, which if proven would justify
formal disciplinary action, may be placed on leave with pay pending the outcome
of any investigation to determine the exact nature and extent of the violation
and pending the imposition of any disciplinary action taken for the violation.
Formal disciplinary action includes reprimand, suspension, demotion, or
discharge. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 24873)
SEC. 34-30.   MILITARY SERVICE/MILITARY LEAVE.
   (a)   Federal and state regulations. The terms used in this section, and in
other provisions of the city’s military service/military leave policy, that are
not defined in this chapter have the meanings given them in the Uniformed
Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act; Chapter 431 of the Texas
Government Code, as amended; and Chapter 613 of the Texas Government Code, as
amended. All interpretations and applications of this section and other
provisions of the city’s military service/military leave policy must be made in
compliance with the minimum requirements of those federal and state laws. If
any provision of this section or of any other provision of the city’s military
service/military leave policy conflicts with a provision of the federal or
state law governing military service and military leave, the federal or state
law prevails.
   (b)   Nondiscrimination. The city does not discriminate with regard to
hiring, reemployment, retention, promotion, or any benefit of employment
because of an applicant’s or employee’s membership, application for membership,
or performance of duty in the military service.
   (c)   Military leave. The city will grant military leave to city employees
in compliance with the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights
Act, as amended, and Chapters 437 and 613 of the Texas Government Code, as
amended. No procedure or requirement adopted by administrative directive may
conflict with the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act, as
amended, or with Chapters 437 or 613 of the Texas Government Code, as amended.
   (d)   Responsibility. Responsibility for administering the city’s military
service/military leave policy rests with:
      (1)   the department director and the civil service board for an employee
in a classified position;
      (2)   the department director and the director of human resources for an
employee in an unclassified position; and
      (3)   the department director for an employee in a non-civil service
position. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 22195; 22296; 22318; 24873; 30657; 31745)
SEC. 34-31.   INJURY LEAVE.
   (a)   After the first day, time off from work for disability or medical
treatment for an injury occurring while the employee was in the course of
employment with the city may be charged to injury leave.
   (b)   Disciplinary action against an employee should be delayed until the
employee returns from injury leave, unless the disciplinary action is for a
criminal offense committed by the employee.
   (c)   Merit increases may not be granted while an employee is on injury
leave whether or not the employee is receiving wage supplementation payments.
(Ord. 25389)
SEC. 34-31.1.   MANDATORY CITY LEAVE.
   (a)   Eligibility. In a fiscal year in which mandatory city leave is
authorized, every permanent employee will receive a bank of paid leave in
accordance with policies approved by city council ordinance or resolution. This
leave will be provided to and may be used by all permanent employees, including
those in the initial six months of city employment.
   (b)   Carry-over provisions. Mandatory city leave must be used in the fiscal
year in which it is established. Any mandatory city leave that is not used by
the end of the fiscal year will be forfeited, and no compensation will be
provided for the unused leave.
   (c)   Mandatory city leave usage. Mandatory city leave use is based on an
employee’s regular work day and the number of hours the employee would have
worked that day. For the purpose of calculating overtime, mandatory city leave
hours are included as hours worked.
   (d)   Increments. With departmental approval, a city employee may take
mandatory city leave in one-hour increments.
   (e)   Official mandatory city leave days.
      (1)   Official mandatory city leave days established. At the
recommendation of the city manager, the city council may, by ordinance or
resolution, establish fixed official mandatory city leave days when city
offices are officially closed. Except as specifically provided otherwise in
this subsection, an employee must use mandatory city leave on these days.
      (2)   Worked official mandatory city leave days. In a department in which
employees regularly work on an official mandatory city leave day, the
department shall arrange schedules to allow each employee who works on an
official mandatory city leave day a substitute day either before or after the
official mandatory city leave day, but within a reasonable period of time. This
subsection does not apply to sworn fire department shift personnel.
      (3)   Official mandatory city leave day during vacation or sick leave.
When an official mandatory city leave day occurs during an employee’s vacation
leave or sick leave, the employee will be charged for mandatory city leave and
no deduction from the employee’s vacation or sick leave balance will be made
for the official mandatory city leave day.
      (4)   Official mandatory city leave day during injury leave. Any employee
who is on injury leave when an official mandatory city leave day occurs will be
paid workers’ compensation and will be charged for mandatory city leave up to
the number of hours needed to supplement the employee’s pay. If the employee is
on wage supplementation, no wage supplementation payments will be received for
the official mandatory city leave day. Any unused mandatory city leave hours
may be taken on a subsequent date convenient to the department.
      (5)   Official mandatory city leave day during other leave. An employee
on military leave, court leave, or death-in-family leave when an official
mandatory city leave day occurs may take the mandatory city leave on a
subsequent date convenient to the department.
      (6)   Official mandatory city leave during suspension. An employee on
suspension when an official mandatory city leave day occurs will not be paid
for the official mandatory city leave day but may take the mandatory city leave
on a subsequent date convenient to the department.
      (7)   Official mandatory city leave during leave without pay. An employee
on leave without pay when an official mandatory city leave day occurs may take
the mandatory city leave on a subsequent date convenient to the department.
   (f)   Floating mandatory city leave days.
      (1)   At the recommendation of the city manager, the city council may, by
ordinance or resolution, establish floating mandatory city leave days that may
be used at an employee’s discretion with a supervisor’s approval. These days
are in addition to any official mandatory city leave days established for the
fiscal year.
      (2)   A supervisor may grant floating mandatory city leave at a time
during the year that will best serve the public interest. Preference may be
given to an employee on the basis of length of service.
      (3)   An employee on injury leave who is not receiving wage
supplementation may use mandatory city leave like other paid leave to
supplement the employee’s pay.
   (g)   Lump sum payment of mandatory city leave. No payment will be provided
for unused mandatory city leave when an employee terminates employment,
regardless of the reason for the termination.
   (h)   Mandatory city leave adjustment for changes in work schedules. A sworn
employee of the fire department will have any mandatory city leave balance
adjusted proportionately to reflect differences in work schedules when:
      (1)   the employee transfers to or from the emergency response bureau of
the fire department; or
      (2)   the employee’s full-time regular work schedule is increased or
decreased.
   (i)   Family leave. An employee who is eligible for family leave under
Section
34-24.1(b) may be required to deduct hours from the employee’s mandatory city
leave balance to cover all or part of any absence from work for a family leave
purpose described in Section
34-24.1(c). (Ord. 28024)
ARTICLE IV.
BENEFITS.
SEC. 34-32.   HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS.
   (a)   The city extends participation in health benefit plans to every
permanent full-time employee and to every city council member. Other
classifications of employees are eligible to participate in the city's health
benefit plans in accordance with federal law and as described in the applicable
plan documents.
   (b)   Eligibility, premium rates, and procedures for participation in the
health benefit plans for active employees, retired employees, and city council
members are defined in plan documents adopted by the city council and on file
with the department of human resources. The city may change the health benefit
plans at any time, subject to applicable law.
   (c)   Notice of retirees' rights to purchase continued health benefits.
      (1)   Under Chapter 175 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, a
person who retires from the city and is entitled to receive city retirement
benefits is entitled to purchase retiree health benefits coverage from the city
for the retiree and any eligible dependents at the retiree's own cost.
      (2)   The city may make retiree health benefits available to retirees and
their eligible dependents under one or more separate plans, the terms and
conditions of which may vary as the city specifies. Health benefits for
employees who have separated from employment with the city will be made
available through a plan available for retirees who are under the age of 65
(the "pre-65 plan") and through a separate plan available for retirees aged 65
or older (the "post-65 plan"). Eligibility to participate in any such plans,
the coverage options available, the costs of enrollment and participation, and
other terms, conditions, and limitations will be set forth from time to time in
written documents that are consistent with this chapter.
      (3)   To enroll in the city's retiree health benefits upon separation
from employment, an employee who is not 65 years of age or older must be
enrolled in the city's health benefit plan for active employees and must be
eligible to receive an immediately-distributable pension benefit under the
Employees' Retirement Fund or Dallas Police and Fire Pension System, in each
case on the employee's separation date. An employee is not required to have
commenced receipt of pension benefits in order to enroll in the city's pre-65
plan. An enrollment election for the city's pre-65 plan must be submitted to
the city within 30 days of the separation date to be effective. An otherwise-
eligible employee who fails to timely enroll in the city's retiree health
benefits or who subsequently terminates coverage will not be eligible to
reenroll thereafter except through the "come-back option" available under the
city's post-65 plan.
         (A)   In accordance with Chapter 615 of the Texas Government Code, as
amended, the surviving spouse of a sworn employee of the police or fire
department, who is killed in the line of duty, is entitled to purchase or
continue to purchase health insurance benefits from the city and enroll in the
pre-65 plan until the date the surviving spouse becomes eligible for federal
Medicare benefits. The surviving spouse is entitled to obtain the coverage at
the rate paid by current employees of the city.
         (B)   A city employee whose employment ends as a result of disability
that entitles the employee to a disability retirement under the applicable city
pension plan may enroll in the pre-65 plan regardless of the employee's age.
      (4)   To enroll in the city's retiree health benefits upon separation
from employment, an employee who is aged 65 or older must be enrolled in the
city's health benefit plans for active employees or the pre-65 plan on the
employee's separation date and must timely enroll in Parts A and B of the
Medicare program when initially eligible. To be effective, an enrollment
election for the city's post-65 plan must be submitted to the city within 30
days of the date on which the employee initially satisfies the foregoing
eligibility requirements. An otherwise-eligible employee who fails to timely
enroll in the city's retiree health benefits or who subsequently terminates
coverage will not be eligible to reenroll thereafter.
      (5)   A retiree who is age 65 may enroll in the city’s post-65 plan after
separating from employment under the "come-back option" if, within 30 days of
timely enrolling in the Medicare program, the retiree submits an enrollment
request to the city, is eligible to receive an immediately-distributable
pension benefit under the Employees’ Retirement Fund or Dallas Police and Fire
Pension System, and provides satisfactory evidence of continuous comprehensive
health plan coverage for the 36-month period immediately preceding the
enrollment request. An employee is not required to have commenced receipt of
pension benefits in order to enroll in the city’s retiree health benefit plan.
A retiree who enrolls in the city’s post-65 plan under the come-back option and
subsequently terminates coverage will not be eligible to reenroll thereafter.
The come-back option is available beginning with the 2022 calendar year
benefits enrollment period to retirees who meet the eligibility criteria on or
after the enrollment period begins. A retiree’s legally-recognized spouse may
be enrolled in the post-65 plan under the come-back option at the same time as
the retiree’s enrollment, but no spousal enrollment independent of the retiree
is permitted.
      (6)   All costs of participation in the city's retiree health benefits
will be paid solely by individual enrollees based on the coverage elected
except that the city will subsidize 50 percent of the costs of coverage for a
retiree (but not coverage for a spouse or any dependents) enrolled in the pre-
65 plan who was first hired by the city prior to January 1, 2010 until the
earlier of:
         (A)   the date on which the retiree voluntarily terminates coverage
under the pre-65 plan;
         (B)   the date on which the retiree enrolls in the city's post-65
plan; or
         (C)   the date in which the retiree's eligibility to participate in
the city's pre-65 plan otherwise ends.
         (D)   No city-paid premium subsidy will be provided for any spousal or
dependent coverage elected under the city's retiree health benefit plans. The
employee's most recent date of hire or rehire with the city will be used for
purposes of determining eligibility for the foregoing city subsidy.
      (7)   The city will not subsidize any premium or cost associated with
enrollment or participation in the Medicare program (including any premiums for
Medicare Advantage coverage) by current or retired city employees or their
dependents except that the city will pay the monthly premiums for coverage
under Part A of the Medicare program for city employees:
         (A)   whose original date of hire with the city was prior to April 1,
1986;
         (B)   who are continuously enrolled in the Medicare program from their
initial eligibility date;
         (C)   for whom insufficient Medicare taxes were withheld during city
employment to qualify for cost-free Part A coverage; and
         (D)   who have been continuously enrolled in the city's health
benefits plan for active employees, the pre-65 plan, or the post-65 plan, as
applicable during city employment and following separation from employment.
      (8)   The city will not subsidize any premium or cost under the city's
retiree health benefit plans for:
         (A)   any employee who is hired or rehired on or after January 1,
2010;
         (B)   any dental or vision coverage;
         (C)   any spousal or dependent coverage;
         (D)   the come-back option;
         (E)   enrollment in Part B of the Medicare program; or
         (F)   any retiree aged 65 or older enrolled in a pre-65 plan. (Ord.
Nos. 19340; 20088; 22026; 22296; 22318; 24873; 28024; 29883; 31745; 32004;
32604)
SEC. 34-33.   LIFE INSURANCE.
   (a)   Every permanent employee is a participant in the group life insurance
program. The city will pay the full cost of the basic term life insurance
coverage for a permanent full-time employee and one-half the cost for a
permanent part-time employee.
   (b)   An employee has the option to elect additional life insurance
coverage. The employee shall pay the full cost of additional life insurance
coverage. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 24873)
SEC. 34-34.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 24873)
ARTICLE V.
RULES OF CONDUCT.
SEC. 34-35.   FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
   (a)   City management may not discharge an individual, fail or refuse to
hire an individual, or otherwise discriminate against an individual with
respect to compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because
of the individual's race, color, age, religion, sex, marital status, sexual
orientation, gender identity and expression, genetic characteristics, national
origin, disability, military or veteran status, political opinions, or
affiliations, nor shall city management take retaliatory action against an
employee who makes a protected complaint of discrimination based on these
categories. Nothing in this subsection extends any employee benefits, including
but not limited to paid or unpaid leave, medical benefits, or pension benefits,
to any individual who is ineligible for those benefits under any other
provision of this chapter, the city's master health plan, the employees'
retirement fund program, or the police and fire pension system or under any
other city ordinance or resolution or state or federal law.
   (b)   City management may not limit, segregate, or classify employees or
applicants for employment in a way that would deprive or tend to deprive an
individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect an
employee’s status because of the individual’s race, color, age, religion, sex,
marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, genetic
characteristics, national origin, disability, military or veteran status,
political opinions, or affiliations. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 22195; 22296; 22318;
24873; 29480; 31745)
SEC. 34-36.   RULES OF CONDUCT.
   (a)   Performance standards.
      (1)   Every employee is expected to consistently maintain satisfactory
performance standards. Continuing performance deficiencies, unlike the isolated
rule violations noted in Subsections (b) and (c) of this section, should first
be addressed by the mutually cooperative efforts of the supervisor and the
employee.
      (2)   If performance standards are not met, the employee is subject to a
formal disciplinary action of reprimand, suspension, demotion, or discharge.
The specific action taken determines what, if any, appeal rights are available
to the employee.
   (b)   Unacceptable conduct. The following types of conduct are unacceptable
and may be cause for corrective discipline in the form of reprimand,
suspension, demotion, or discharge depending upon the facts and circumstances
of each case. The examples given are typical but not all-inclusive.
      (1)   Unsatisfactory attendance is exemplified by, but is not limited to,
the following violations:
         (A)   unexcused absence or tardiness, including during telework;
         (B)   failure to give notice of an absence or tardiness to the
supervisor from within two hours before to within 30 minutes after starting
time, as prescribed by departmental procedure;
         (C)   excessive separate absences or tardiness;
         (D)   absence or tardiness that causes service reduction or
disruption; or
         (E)   excessive amounts of time off the job, regardless of the reason.
      (2)   Position abandonment occurs when an employee is absent from a
position for three consecutive work days without authorization, or refuses an
order to report to work. The employee is deemed to have abandoned the position
and may be discharged.
      (3)   Inability to come to work occurs when an employee is absent due to
an extended illness or injury after sick leave and/or wage supplementation have
been exhausted.
      (4)   Inability or unwillingness to perform assigned work satisfactorily
is exemplified by, but is not limited to, the following violations:
         (A)   failure to follow written or verbal instructions;
         (B)   arguing over assignments or instructions; or
         (C)   other deficiencies indicating the employee’s failure to
adequately perform the responsibilities of the position.
      (5)   Indifference towards work is exemplified by, but is not limited to,
the following violations:
         (A)   inattention, inefficiency, loafing, sleeping, carelessness, or
negligence;
         (B)   failure to remain at one's work station, leaving work without
permission, or taking excessive time for eating or break periods;
         (C)   performance of personal business, including but not limited to
use of work time to study or complete school assignments when school work is
not part of the employee's work duties and excessive use of personal cell
phones or other electronic devices while on duty;
         (D)   interference with the work of others; or
         (E)   discourteous or irresponsible treatment of the public or other
employees.
      (6)   Sabotage is exemplified by, but is not limited to, the following
violations:
         (A)   deliberate damage to or destruction of city equipment or
property;
         (B)   defacing of city property;
         (C)   unauthorized alteration, removal, destruction, or disclosure of
city records;
         (D)   advocacy of or participation in unlawful trespass or seizure of
city property;
         (E)   encouraging or engaging in slowdowns, sit-ins, strikes, or other
concerted actions or efforts to limit or restrict employees from working;
         (F)   refusal to cross picket lines;
         (G)   interference with the public use of or access to city services,
properties, or buildings; or
         (H)   threats to commit any act of sabotage as defined in this
paragraph.
      (7)   Safety violations are exemplified by, but are not limited to, the
following violations:
         (A)   failure to follow city or departmental safety rules and
regulations;
         (B)   failure to use required safety apparel;
         (C)   removal or circumvention of a safety device;
         (D)   lifting in an unsafe manner;
         (E)   operation of a vehicle or other equipment in an unsafe manner;
         (F)   smoking, including the use of tobacco products and e-cigarettes,
in a prohibited area;
         (G)   endangering of one's own safety or that of others by careless or
irresponsible actions or negligence;
         (H)   failure to report an on-the-job injury, vehicle accident, or
unsafe work conditions;
         (I)   failure of a supervisor to remove from the workplace or to
assist to a safe location an employee whose mental capabilities are impaired
due to injury, illness, alcohol or drug use, or emotional distress;
         (J)   failing a city-required drug or alcohol test; or
         (K)   texting or emailing while operating a motor vehicle on city
business.
      (8)   Dishonesty is exemplified by, but is not limited to, the following
violations:
         (A)   acceptance of money or anything of value from a person subject
to the regulatory decision or supervision of the employee;
         (B)   cheating, forging, or willful falsification of official city
reports or records;
         (C)   false reporting of the reason for paid leave of absence; or
         (D)   any other falsifying action detrimental to the city or fellow
employees.
      (9)   Theft, regardless of item value, is exemplified by, but is not
limited to, the following violations:
         (A)   unauthorized taking of city property or the property of others,
including items from the trash;
         (B)   unauthorized use of city or employee funds;
         (C)   using or authorizing the use of city equipment or employee
services for other than official city business; or
         (D)   using or authorizing the use of city equipment or employee
services without proper authority.
      (10)   Insubordination is exemplified by, but is not limited to, the
following violations:
         (A)   willful failure or refusal to follow the specific orders or
instructions of a supervisor or higher authority; provided that:
            (i)   if the employee believes an instruction or order is improper,
the employee should obey the instruction or order and file a grievance later;
or
            (ii)   if the employee believes the instruction or order, if
followed, would result in physical injury to the employee or others or damage
to city equipment, the employee should request approval by the next higher
level of supervision before performing the work, unless the danger complained
about is inherent to the job;
         (B)   pursuit of a denied request to a higher authority without
revealing the lower level disposition; or
         (C)   failure to submit to a drug and/or alcohol test when ordered to
do so.
      (11)   Abuse of drugs or alcohol.
         (A)   Abuse of drugs or alcohol is exemplified by, but is not limited
to, the following violations:
            (i)   an employee is unable to perform duties in an effective and
safe manner due to:
               (aa)   ingestion, inhala-tion, or injection of a drug; or
               (bb)   ingestion of an alcoholic beverage;
            (ii)   an employee possesses, ingests, inhales, or injects into the
employee’s body a drug:
               (aa)   during working hours;
               (bb)   in a city vehicle; or
               (cc)   on city property;
            (iii)   an employee possesses or ingests an alcoholic beverage:
               (aa)   during working hours;
               (bb)   in a city vehicle; or
               (cc)   on city property, except at an authorized city event; or
            (iv)   an employee tests positive on a drug or alcohol test.
         (B)   In this paragraph:
            (i)   “Drug” means a controlled substance as defined by Chapter 481
of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
            (ii)   “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, or any beverage
containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, that is
capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted.
         (C)   An employee or a city council member may be required to take a
drug or alcohol test, administered in accordance with directives established by
the city manager and reviewed by the city attorney, if there is reasonable
suspicion that:
            (i)   the employee or city council member has ingested, inhaled, or
injected a drug into the employee’s or city council member’s body or ingested
an alcoholic beverage; and
            (ii)   the presence of the drug or alcoholic beverage in the body
of the employee or city council member has made the employee or city council
member unfit for work, compromised the performance of the job duties of the
employee or city council member, or created a safety hazard.
         (D)   An employee who is ordered to submit to a drug and/or alcohol
test and refuses to do so, or submits a false specimen for testing, will be
discharged for insubordination.
         (E)   An employee who tests positive for drugs or alcohol may be
discharged.
      (12)   Disturbance is exemplified by, but is not limited to, the
following violations:
         (A)   fighting or boisterous conduct;
         (B)   deliberate causing of physical injury to another employee or
citizen;
         (C)   intimidation, including but not limited to bullying and online
harassment;
         (D)   unnecessary disruption of the work area;
         (E)   use of profane, obscene, abusive, threatening, or loud and
boisterous language or gestures;
         (F)   harassment, including but not limited to sexual harassment, or
workplace violence as defined in the administrative directives of the city;
         (G)   spreading of false reports; or
         (H)   other disruption of the harmonious relations among employees or
between employees and the public.
      (13)   Abuse of city property.
         (A)   Abuse of city property is exemplified by, but is not limited to,
the following violations:
            (i)   negligent damage or destruction of city equipment or
property;
            (ii)   waste of materials or negligent loss of tools or materials;
            (iii)   improper maintenance of equipment; or
            (iv)   damage caused by use of tools or equipment for purposes
other than that for which the tool or equipment was intended.
         (B)   In addition to being subject to appropriate disciplinary action,
an employee shall be responsible for the repair or replacement of any item
willfully or recklessly damaged by the employee. Failure to reimburse the city
is cause for discharge.
      (14)   Misconduct is any conduct or criminal offense, during or off
working hours, that, on becoming public knowledge, could have an adverse effect
on the city or on the confidence of the public in city government.
      (15)   Disregard of public trust is any conduct, during or off working
hours, that, on becoming public knowledge, could impair the public’s confidence
or trust in the operation of city government.
      (16)   Possession of weapons.
         (A)   Possession of a weapon capable of causing serious bodily injury
is prohibited on city property, unless specifically authorized and work
related.
         (B)   In this paragraph, a weapon capable of causing serious bodily
injury means, but is not limited to:
            (i)   any firearm;
            (ii)   any prohibited knife, including but not limited to:
               (aa)   a knife with a blade over five and one-half inches;
               (bb)   a hand instrument designed to cut or stab another by
being thrown;
               (cc)   a dagger, including but not limited to a dirk, stiletto,
or poniard;
               (dd)   a bowie knife;
               (ee)   a sword; and
               (ff)   a spear;
            (iii)   a switchblade knife;
            (iv)   any club, including but not limited to:
               (aa)   a blackjack;
               (bb)   a nightstick;
               (cc)   a mace; and
               (dd)   a tomahawk;
            (v)   any explosive weapon or device;
            (vi)   a firearm silencer;
            (vii)   knuckles;
            (viii)    ammunition;
            (ix)   a zip gun;
            (x)   any chemical dispensing device;
            (xi)   any caustic or corrosive liquid, such as acid or lye,
capable of causing serious bodily harm; and
            (xii)   a taser.
         (C)   All other terms used in this paragraph have the meanings
respectively given to them in the Texas Penal Code, as amended.
         (D)   An employee’s personal belongings located on city property may
be searched if there is reasonable suspicion that the employee is in possession
of a weapon capable of causing serious bodily injury on city property.
         (E)   Small personal canisters of pepper spray are permitted.
         (F)   Notwithstanding Paragraph (16)(A) of this subsection, an
employee who holds a license to carry a concealed handgun, or who otherwise
lawfully possesses a firearm or ammunition, may possess the firearm or
ammunition in a locked, privately-owned vehicle in a city parking lot, a city
parking garage, or any other parking area provided by the city for its
employees.
         (G)   Every employee should refer to specific procedures,
requirements, and definitions regarding possession of weapons that are
additionally outlined in the administrative directives of the city.
      (17)   Failure to maintain dress, grooming, and personal hygiene
standards appropriate to the employee’s work situation.
      (18)   Violation of an administrative directive of the city or a
departmental rule or procedure.
      (19)   Failure to report a violation is exemplified by, but not limited
to, failure to report to the proper authority any known violation described in
this subsection within 10 working days after obtaining knowledge of the
violation.
   (c)   Conflict of interest and undue political influence.
      (1)   Conflict of interest rules. Conflict of interest rules prohibit
activities that tend to compromise an employee’s allegiance to the city. These
rules are set forth in
Chapter 12A, “Code of Ethics,” of this code and in Section 11, Chapter XXII of
the city charter.
      (2)   Undue political influence in a city council election. To avoid
undue influence of a city employee on the outcome of a Dallas city council
election, and to avoid undue influence of city council members or candidates on
a city employee, an employee or employee association shall comply with the
regulations set forth in
Chapter 12A, “Code of Ethics,” of this code, Section 16(b), Chapter XVI of the
city charter, and any applicable court decisions.
      (3)   Non-city council elections. In an election other than a Dallas city
council election, an employee shall comply with the regulations set forth in
Chapter 12A, “Code of Ethics,” of this code, Section 16(c), Chapter XVI of the
city charter, and any applicable court decisions.
   (d)   Disciplinary and legal actions. Where the evidence supports a
violation of this section, disciplinary action may be taken independently of
and prior to any legal action or conviction. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 20251; 22296;
22318; 24873; 28024; 28425; 28794; 31745; 32604)
ARTICLE VI.
DISCIPLINE, GRIEVANCE, AND APPEAL PROCEDURES.
SEC. 34-37.   DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Guidelines. The director of human resources is authorized and directed
to promulgate guidelines and procedures, consistent with the city charter,
ordinances, and civil service rules and regulations, as are reasonably
necessary and appropriate to implement the rules of employee conduct and
discipline contained in this chapter.
   (b)   Departmental rules. Because of the variety of services performed by
the city, it may be necessary for departments to establish codes of conduct,
rules, orders, directives, and procedures to accomplish departmental
responsibilities. An employee who violates a departmental code of conduct,
rule, order, directive, or procedure is subject to disciplinary action.
Departments may designate the level of supervisory or departmental authority at
which disciplinary action may be taken or recommended. The provisions of this
chapter and the procedures set forth in the administrative directives of the
city take precedence over departmental rules.
   (c)   Pending investigations. When an employee is suspected of a violation
of a city, state, or federal law, rule, order, directive, procedure, or
regulation that, if proven, would justify disciplinary action, an investigation
may be conducted to determine the exact nature and extent of the alleged
violation, and the employee may be placed on administrative leave with pay
pending the outcome of the investigation and the imposition of disciplinary
action.
   (d)   Disciplinary action; procedures and notices.
      (1)   Formal disciplinary action includes reprimand, suspension,
demotion, or discharge. Removal from a position as a result of a reorganization
or reduction in force is not a disciplinary action. Letters of counseling or
advice are not considered to be disciplinary action but are meant for the
purpose of advising the employee of:
         (A)   deficiencies in the employee’s conduct or performance;
         (B)   possible violations caused by the employee’s conduct or
performance; or
         (C)   ways in which the employee’s conduct or performance should be
improved.
      (2)   The procedure for a formal disciplinary action of reprimand,
suspension, demotion, or discharge includes the following:
         (A)   Written notice must be given to the employee stating:
            (i)   the type of disciplinary action taken, i.e., reprimand,
suspension, demotion, or discharge;
            (ii)   the specific rule violated;
            (iii)   the specific incident causing the action; and
            (iv)   the employee’s right to appeal, if applicable, to a specific
office within a specified time.
         (B)   Before an action of demotion or discharge is taken, an employee
who has an internal right of appeal to a civil service trial board or to an
administrative law judge must be given an opportunity to respond to the
allegations, both in writing and orally, before the person having authority to
take the action.
      (3)   The disciplinary procedures set forth in Paragraph (2) of this
subsection do not apply to:
         (A)   a department director, assistant department director, or other
managerial personnel designated by the city council in accordance with Section
11, Chapter XVI of the city charter;
         (B)   a permanent appointee who has not completed an initial
probation, if applicable, as described in Section
34-11(d) of this chapter; or
         (C)   a non-civil service employee.
      (4)   A suspension imposed under this subsection may not exceed 45
working days for a single disciplinary action. Any employee who merits a
suspension longer than 45 working days should be discharged. This subsection
does not imply that a discharge that, upon appeal, has been reduced to a
suspension cannot exceed 45 working days. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 19562; 21304;
22026; 24873; 26182; 28425)
SEC. 34-38.   GRIEVANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to every permanent city employee
except the following:
      (1)   A department director, assistant department director, or other
managerial personnel designated by the city council in accordance with Section
11, Chapter XVI of the city charter.
      (2)   A non-civil service employee.
   (b)   Purpose. The grievance and appeal procedures described in this section
are provided for the purpose of giving an employee the opportunity to:
      (1)   present a grievance concerning the employee's working conditions
that the employee claims have been adversely affected by a violation,
misinterpretation, or misapplication of a specific law, ordinance, resolution,
policy, rule, or regulation;
      (2)   appeal a disciplinary action; or
      (3)   appeal a job performance rating or merit rating.
   (c)   Terms and conditions.
      (1)   An employee who may appeal a grievance or disciplinary action may
have two levels of appeal hearings but no more than a total of four hearings.
Appeals of demotions or terminations to the civil service trial board or an
administrative law judge are counted as one level of appeal hearing.
      (2)   A grievance or a disciplinary appeal may be heard during regularly
scheduled working hours without loss of pay to the employee, provided the
privilege is not abused.
      (3)   Preparation of a grievance or a disciplinary appeal, except for
seeking assistance from the department of human resources, is not permitted
during the employee’s working hours.
      (4)   A sworn member of the police department or fire department may
appeal a grievance only through Step 3, except that the grievance may be
appealed beyond Step 3 if it involves:
         (A)   a claim of discrimination because of the employee’s race, color,
age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, genetic
characteristics, national origin, disability, or military or veteran status as
it affects the employee’s training, promotion, advancement, or transfer; or
         (B)   a claim relating to an interpretation or application of a civil
service rule.
      (5)   Except for the final step in appealing a demotion or discharge, a
hearing under these procedures is an informal discussion held without the
taking of a written record. During any appeal hearing, a participant may take
written notes. An employee must be willing to discuss the evidence and answer
questions concerning the grievance or appeal at each step. Failure to discuss
the facts of the case at any informal level of these procedures will constitute
withdrawal of the grievance or appeal and will cause the last decision rendered
to become nonappealable.
      (6)   An employee may seek assistance or representation in presenting a
grievance or an appeal at any step. Guidance and assistance on the grievance or
appeal procedures may be obtained from the department of human resources. If
another employee is selected to provide assistance or representation on the
grievance or appeal, that employee is not eligible for regular pay but may be
released on vacation leave or leave without pay, depending upon departmental
procedure. The supervisor may also obtain assistance or representation.
      (7)   The days used to establish time limits in this section are working
days. Time limits begin to run the working day following the incident, event,
hearing, or notice. Unless otherwise provided, the time limits for grievance or
appeal requests require that the grievance or appeal request actually be
received within that time period by the office designated as the next step for
the grievance or appeal.
      (8)   Unless due to reasons beyond the employee’s control, if an employee
fails to file a grievance or an appeal within the time limits prescribed in
Subsection (f) of this section or fails to personally appear at a hearing, the
matter will be considered as having been accepted and the last decision
rendered will be nonappealable.
      (9)   If the hearing of a grievance or an appeal is not held within 20
working days after the date the request is received (unless the hearing date is
extended by mutual agreement or for extraordinary circumstances such as a death
in the family or documented illness), the employee requesting the hearing may
proceed to the next level of appeal. The city manager, park board, civil
service board, trial board, and administrative law judge hearing processes are
excluded from this time limitation.
      (10)   If a disposition of a grievance or an appeal is not issued within
the specified time limit, the employee may proceed to the next step, if
applicable, by filing a grievance or appeal request to the next step within 20
working days after the date of the last hearing in the grievance or appeal
process. If the employee fails to timely file a grievance or appeal request to
the next step, the last disposition of the grievance or appeal is
nonappealable.
      (11)   Any time limit specified in the procedures under this section may
be extended by mutual agreement.
      (12)   A grievance filed against a department other than the employee’s
own department must be brought to the director of the charged department and is
initiated at Step 3 of these procedures. The charged department is responsible
for keeping the employee’s own department informed of progress at each step of
the grievance or appeal and for supplying the employee’s department with copies
of the findings.
      (13)   An employee who has not completed probation, when required, after
appointment or reappointment to city employment may not file an appeal of a
disciplinary action. An employee who has not completed probation, when
required, after a promotion may not appeal a demotion.
      (14)   An employee shall not be subject to retaliation for using the
grievance or appeal procedures.
      (15)   An appeal concerning a job performance rating or merit rating may
not proceed beyond Step 3 unless the person issuing the job performance rating
is a department director. In that case, the employee may appeal to an assistant
city manager or, if the department reports to a board or commission, to a
designated board or commission member. For purposes of this paragraph,
"issuing" refers to the initial job performance rating.
      (16)   An appeal of a reprimand may not proceed beyond Step 3 unless the
person issuing the reprimand is a department director. In that case, the
employee may appeal to an assistant city manager or, if the department reports
to a board or commission, to a designated board or commission member. For
purposes of this paragraph, "issuing" refers to the initial job performance
rating.
      (17)   The right to grieve ends if the employee terminates employment
with the city.
      (18)   An employee may not grieve a position classification.
      (19)   The city vehicle collision appeal process will be administered in
accordance with any applicable provisions of this chapter and with specific
procedures and requirements outlined in the administrative directives of the
city.
      (20)   An employee who files a grievance and subsequently files an appeal
of the disposition of that grievance shall submit a copy of the original
grievance at all levels of appeal.
      (21)   At every grievance appeal level, the hearing officer shall only
hear matters contained in the original grievance.
   (d)   Grievance. A grievance and request for a hearing must be submitted in
writing and must contain the following information:
      (1)   a brief explanation of the incident causing the grievance,
including the date of occurrence;
      (2)   a brief statement showing how the employee’s working conditions
were adversely affected by the incident;
      (3)   the specific violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of the
specific law, ordinance, resolution, policy, rule, or regulation of which the
employee is complaining;
      (4)   the remedy or solution sought; and
      (5)   the signature of the aggrieved employee.
   (e)   Disciplinary appeal. An appeal of a disciplinary action and request
for a hearing must be submitted in writing to the person designated in the
disciplinary notice, and must contain the following information:
      (1)   the disciplinary action being appealed and the effective date of
the disciplinary action;
      (2)   the specific reason the discipline is judged to be unjust or
otherwise in error;
      (3)   the remedy or solution sought; and
      (4)   the signature of the disciplined employee.
   (f)   Grievance and appeal procedure steps:
      (1)   Step 1. An employee who has a grievance shall, within 10 working
days from the date of the occurrence that caused the grievance, or from the
date the employee first had knowledge of the occurrence, request in writing a
discussion of the grievance with the employee’s immediate supervisor. The
employee must also send a copy of the grievance to the department of human
resources. A careful review of the charges and evidence or of the action or
omission will be conducted. The supervisor shall respond in writing to the
employee, stating the disposition of the grievance, within 10 working days
after the discussion. If the grievance alleges a violation of the
administrative directives on harassment and/or workplace violence and the
immediate supervisor is a direct party in the alleged incident, the employee
may file the grievance with the next higher level of supervision above the
immediate supervisor. This step does not apply to the appeal of a disciplinary
action.
      (2)   Step 2. If a grievance is not resolved or the employee wishes to
appeal a disciplinary action to Step 2, the employee must, within 10 working
days after receipt of the supervisor’s written disposition of a grievance or of
the disciplinary notice, submit a written request for a hearing to the person
designated to hear the grievance or appeal at this level. A hearing shall be
conducted within a reasonable time of receipt of the request and a written
disposition issued within 10 working days after the date of the hearing. At the
discretion of the department director, this step may be completely omitted or
may be modified to require two separate hearings before different mid-managers
in the department.
      (3)   Step 3. If a grievance or an appeal is not resolved and the
employee wishes to proceed to Step 3, the employee must, within 10 working days
after receipt of the disposition in the previous step, submit a written request
for a hearing to the department director. A hearing must be conducted within a
reasonable time after receipt of the request, and a written disposition must be
issued within 10 working days after the hearing.
      (4)   Step 4.
         (A)   If a grievance or an appeal is still not resolved and the
employee wishes to proceed to Step 4, the employee must, within 10 working days
after receipt of the disposition in the previous step or of the disciplinary
notice, submit a written request for a hearing to the designated assistant city
manager or, in the case of a sworn member of the police department appealing a
discharge, to the city manager, in care of the director of human resources of
the city. A hearing must be conducted within a reasonable time after receipt of
the request, and a knowledgeable representative of the department must be
present and, in the case of a sworn member of the police department appealing a
discharge, the police chief must also be present and will be represented by a
representative of the city attorney. At the hearing, the assistant city manager
or, in the case of a sworn member of the police department appealing a
discharge, the city manager may, at his or her discretion, allow witnesses on
behalf of the employee and the city. A written disposition must be issued
within 10 working days after the hearing. If the employee introduces new and
relevant evidence in a timely manner at this step, the assistant city manager
or the city manager, whichever is applicable, may recess the hearing for 10
working days to give the department an opportunity to assess the evidence and
re-examine its position.
         (B)   The assistant city manager or, in the case of a sworn member of
the police department appealing a discharge, the city manager may either affirm
the action of the department director or the director’s designee, set aside the
action of the department director or the director’s designee, or direct the
department director or the director’s designee to enter a new order that the
assistant city manager or the city manager, whichever is applicable, determines
is just and equitable. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code or the
city charter, the assistant city manager or the city manager, whichever is
applicable, is not limited in determining the extent of any discipline ordered.
   (g)   Exception to Step 4 procedure. An employee of the employees’
retirement fund or the police and fire pension system shall bring a grievance
or an appeal respectively to the employees’ retirement fund board or the police
and fire pension board instead of to an assistant city manager in Step 4 of
these procedures. Step 4 does not apply to an employee of the city auditor’s,
city secretary’s, or civil service office.
   (h)   Step 4 procedure for suspensions. When an employee requests a Step 4
hearing for the appeal of a suspension before a designated assistant city
manager, the employees’ retirement fund board, or the police and fire pension
board, whichever is applicable, the following procedures apply in addition to
those prescribed in Subsection (f)(4) of this section, except that the
employees’ retirement fund board and the police and fire pension board may
adopt procedures in lieu of those set forth in this subsection to be followed
in hearings before their boards:
      (1)   At the hearing, the assistant city manager, the employees’
retirement fund board, or the police and fire pension board, whichever is
applicable, shall hear witnesses on behalf of the employee and the city and
shall allow the introduction of documentary evidence.
      (2)   In accordance with Section 18, Chapter III of the city charter, the
assistant city manager, the employees’ retirement fund board, and the police
and fire pension board are granted the power to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of testimony and evidence, administer oaths, and
punish for contempt in the same manner as provided by law for judges of the
municipal court. At the request of an appealing employee or the city, the
assistant city manager, the chair of the employees’ retirement fund board, or
the chair of the police and fire pension board, whichever is applicable, shall
issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and the production of records
at the hearing.
      (3)   The city or the appealing employee must deliver a written request
for a subpoena to the assistant city manager, the chair of the employees’
retirement fund board, or the chair of the police and fire pension board,
whichever is applicable, at least 10 working days before the hearing. The
request for a subpoena must contain:
         (A)   the name of the witness;
         (B)   the address of the witness;
         (C)   if the witness is a city employee, the name of the employee’s
department; and
         (D)   the specific identification of books, papers, documents, or
other tangible things sought to be subpoenaed.
      (4)   The party requesting a subpoena shall notify the subpoenaed witness
of postponements, rescheduling, and appearance times.
      (5)   A subpoena for an active city employee may be served through the
director of the employee's department. The assistant city manager assigned to
the appeal hearing should forward subpoenas for non-city employees to the
Dallas City Marshal for service on the witness. A witness served with a
subpoena who fails to appear at the hearing or fails to produce requested
evidence may be punished for contempt.
      (6)   The disposition of a suspension appeal by the assistant city
manager, the employees’ retirement fund board, or the police and fire pension
board, whichever is applicable, is nonappealable.
   (i)   Final decision.
      (1)   The disposition of a grievance or an appeal by the assistant city
manager, city manager, employees' retirement fund board, secretary of the civil
service board, city auditor, or city secretary is nonappealable, except when
the grievance or appeal involved a:
         (A)   claim of discrimination because of an employee's race, color,
age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, genetic
characteristics, national origin, disability, or military or veteran status as
it affects the employee's training, promotion, advancement, or transfer, which
may be appealed to the civil service board;
         (B)   civil service rule challenge, which may be appealed to the civil
service board; or
         (C)   demotion or discharge, which may be appealed to the trial board
or an administrative law judge, unless provided otherwise in the city charter.
      (2)   The disposition of a grievance or an appeal by the police and fire
pension board is nonappealable, except when the grievance or appeal involved:
         (A)   a claim of discrimination because of an employee’s race, color,
age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, genetic
characteristics, national origin, disability, or military or veteran status as
it affects the employee’s training, promotion, advancement, or transfer, which
may be appealed to the civil service board; or
         (B)   a civil service rule challenge, which may be appealed to the
civil service board.
   (j)   Nothing in this section conveys upon, implies, or intends to imply
that an employee has a property interest in continued employment or a contract
of employment with the city based on any right to grieve or appeal provided by
this section or on the nondiscrimination policy stated in Section
34-35 of this chapter. Nothing in this section or in the nondiscrimination
policy creates any right or remedy under any law or limits any existing right
or remedy provided under any law.
   (k)   For purposes of this section only, a reference to an assistant city
manager also refers to a non-sworn managerial chief designated by the city
manager, including, without limitation, deputy city manager, chief of economic
development and housing, chief of community services, chief financial officer,
and chief of staff to the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 19562; 21674; 22026;
22195; 22296; 22318; 24873; 24930; 25389; 26182; 26693; 28024; 29480; 30657;
31745; 32604)
SEC. 34-39.   APPEALS TO THE CIVIL SERVICE BOARD.
   (a)   General provisions, applicability, jurisdiction, and quorum.
      (1)   To the extent that a rule adopted by the civil service board and
approved by the city council conflicts with a provision of this chapter, this
chapter prevails.
      (2)   In this section:
         (A)   BOARD means the civil service board of the city.
         (B)   SECRETARY means the secretary of the civil service board.
      (3)   This section does not apply to:
         (A)   a department director, an assistant department director, or
other managerial personnel designated by the city council in accordance with
Section 11, Chapter XVI of the city charter;
         (B)   a non-civil service employee; or
         (C)   applicants for employment.
      (4)   The civil service board has jurisdiction to hear the following
matters:
         (A)   A grievance of a current employee that is not settled at the
final grievance and appeal procedure step and that involves a claim of
discrimination because of an employee’s race, color, age, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity and expression, genetic characteristics, national
origin, disability, or military or veteran status as it affects the employee’s
training, promotion, advancement, or transfer, but only if the request for a
grievance hearing:
            (i)   is filed in writing with the civil service board secretary
within 10 working days after the date of the employee’s receipt of the letter
of the last disposition of the grievance;
            (ii)   contains the following information:
               (aa)   a brief explanation of the incident causing the
complaint, including the date of occurrence;
               (bb)   a brief statement showing how the incident harmed the
employee;
               (cc)   the type of discrimination alleged;
               (dd)   the remedy sought;
               (ee)   the signature of the employee; and
               (ff)   a certificate showing the date of service to the
secretary; and
            (iii)   has a copy of the original grievance attached to the
request.
         (B)   A grievance that is not settled at the final grievance and
appeal procedure step and that involves an interpretation or application of a
civil service rule, but only if the request for a grievance hearing:
            (i)   is filed in writing with the secretary within 10 working days
after the date of the employee’s receipt of the letter of the last disposition
of the grievance; and
            (ii)   contains the following information:
               (aa)   a brief explanation of the incident causing the
complaint, including the date of occurrence;
               (bb)   a brief statement showing how the incident harmed the
employee;
               (cc)   the provision of the civil service board’s code of rules
and regulations that is in question;
               (dd)   the remedy sought;
               (ee)   the signature of the employee; and
               (ff)   a certificate showing the date of service to the
secretary; and
            (iii)   has a copy of the original grievance attached to the
request.
      (5)   The civil service board does not have jurisdiction to hear:
         (A)   a grievance of an individual whose employment with the city has
terminated, even if the original grievance was filed when the individual was a
city employee; and
         (B)   a grievance on a matter that was not included in the original
grievance filed by an employee.
      (6)   Any four members of the civil service board constitute a quorum for
purposes of conducting any meeting or hearing under this section. All decisions
or actions of the board under this section must be made by a majority of the
board members present at a meeting or hearing.
   (b)   Prehearing deadlines.
      (1)   To the fullest extent possible, within fifteen working days after
the date of service of the request to the secretary of the civil service board,
as shown on the certificate attached to the request under Subsection
34-39(a)(4)(A),
34-39(a)(4)(B), or
34-39(a)(4)(C), the secretary shall do the following:
         (A)   Set a hearing before the civil service board within 60 to 90
calendar days after receipt of the request by the secretary; however, the
secretary of the civil service board may, with the approval of the civil
service board chair, schedule a hearing outside of 60 to 90 calendar days from
the date of the request.
         (B)   Prepare a “statement of questions,” which must be styled,
“Matter of (name of employee)” and include the following language:
            (i)   If the grievance involves a claim of discrimination, the
statement of questions must read “Did the employee establish, by a
preponderance of the evidence, the existence of discrimination based on the
employee’s (choose appropriate category - race, color, age, religion, sex,
sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, genetic characteristics,
national origin, disability, or military or veteran status) as it affects the
employee’s (choose appropriate category - training, promotion, advancement, or
transfer)?”
            (ii)   If the grievance involves a claim of misinterpretation or
misapplication of a board rule, the statement of questions must specify each
rule alleged to have been violated.
            (iii)   The statement of questions may not include any issue not
included in the original grievance.
         (C)   Transmit to each party notice of the hearing and the statement
of questions.
      (2)   Objections.
         (A)   Within 10 working days after the date of service as shown on the
certificate of service on the statement of questions, the parties shall file
any objections to the statement of questions with the secretary.
         (B)   Within five working days after the date of service as shown on
the certificate of service on the objections, a response may be filed.
         (C)   Objections may be resolved at the hearing immediately before
evidence is accepted.
      (3)   Continuances.
         (A)   At least 15 working days before a hearing or two working days
after a party learns of the facts requiring a continuance, whichever date is
earlier, a motion for continuance of the hearing may be filed.
         (B)   Within five working days after the date of service as shown on
the certificate of service on the motion for continuance, a response may be
filed.
         (C)   Other than in cases in which the parties agree to abate a
hearing to await the final adjudication of underlying criminal charges, the
parties may agree to a continuance, in which case, the hearing will be
continued for up to 60 calendar days. Agreed continuances in excess of 180 days
from the date of the original setting of the hearing must be approved by the
civil service board chair, or his or her designee who shall be a member of the
civil service board.
         (D)   If the parties do not agree to a continuance, the continuance
may be granted by a majority of the board members present at a meeting or
hearing at which the motion for continuance is considered.
      (4)   Exchange of information. At least 10 working days before the
hearing, each party shall:
         (A)   exchange witness lists;
         (B)   exchange exhibits;
         (C)   stipulate to undisputed facts;
         (D)   stipulate to the admissibility of exhibits; and
         (E)   file with the secretary a position statement that must include
a:
            (i)   statement of the party’s position on the issues in the
statement of questions;
            (ii)   designation of undisputed facts;
            (iii)   list of witnesses and the estimated time required for the
direct examination of each witness; and
            (iv)   list of exhibits.
      (5)   Request for subpoenas. At least 30 working days before the hearing,
each party may file with the secretary a request for subpoena of witnesses and
documents, in accordance with the following:
         (A)   The request for subpoena of witnesses and documents must
include:
            (i)   the name and address of each witness to be subpoenaed;
            (ii)   if a witness is a city employee, the name of the employee’s
department; and
            (iii)   if documents are being subpoenaed, the specific
identification of books, papers, documents, or other tangible things sought to
be subpoenaed.
         (B)   The party requesting the subpoena shall notify the subpoenaed
witness of postponements, rescheduling, and appearance times.
         (C)   The board has the power to compel the attendance of witnesses
and the production of testimony and evidence, to administer oaths, and to
punish for contempt in the same manner as provided for municipal judges.
         (D) Either party may object to a subpoena request within seven working
days after receiving notice of the subpoena request. Objections to subpoenas
must be in writing, submitted to the secretary, and copied to the opposing
party, who has three working days after receipt of the objections to respond in
writing to the substantive reasons for the objection.
         (E)   The secretary shall forward the written objections and the
response to the objections, if any, to the civil service board chair for
resolution. If the civil service board chair is unavailable, the objections
must be ruled upon by his or her designee, who shall be a member of the civil
service board.
         (F)   Once the scope of the subpoena is determined by the civil
service board chair, or if no objections are filed, each party shall organize
and number the responsive information (“the released documents”) before turning
it over to the secretary. The released documents must be provided within an
amount of time determined by the civil service board chair or, if no objections
are filed, in an amount of time determined by the secretary. The secretary
shall provide a complete copy of the released documents to both parties of the
hearing, at the expense of the party who issued the subpoena for the documents.
         (G)   The individual picking up the released documents must sign for
the produced information. The requesting party has three working days to
submit, in writing, any objections to the completeness of the released
documents. The producing party has three working days to respond, in writing,
to the substantive reasons for the requesting party’s objections. The secretary
shall maintain one complete copy of the released documents, to allow the civil
service board chair to fully assess and rule on any objections to the
completeness of compliance with the subpoena.
         (H)   The secretary shall forward the objections and any response to
the objections to the civil service board chair for resolution. If the civil
service board chair is unavailable, the objections will be ruled upon by his or
her designee, who shall be a member of the civil service board.
         (I)   Decisions rendered by the civil service board chair (or his or
her designee, if applicable) regarding subpoenas or responsive information are
final and are not subject to further appeal.
         (J)   After all decisions have been rendered by the civil service
board chair regarding the scope of documents to be released pursuant to a
subpoena, the secretary shall provide a complete copy of the released documents
to both parties of the hearing, at the expense of the party who issued the
subpoena for the documents.
      (6)   Challenge of board members.
         (A)   At least 10 working days before the hearing, a motion to
challenge a board member may be filed with the secretary and served upon all
parties.
         (B)   Within five working days after the date of service as shown on
the certificate of service on the motion to challenge a board member, a
response may be filed.
         (C)   A challenge may not be made after the hearing begins, unless the
challenge is based on a board member’s:
             (i)   ineligibility to hear the matter; or
             (ii)   conduct during the hearing.
         (D)   If the challenged member does not voluntarily withdraw, the
board, by a majority vote, not counting the vote of the challenged member, may
remove the member.
      (7)   Service of subpoenas.
         (A)   At least five working days before the hearing, the secretary
shall cause all subpoenas to be personally served.
         (B)   The secretary shall designate a person to deliver the subpoenas
and that person shall sign each subpoena stating that the witness was served.
         (C)   The subpoena of an active city employee may be served through
the director of the employee’s department.
      (8)   Computation of time.
         (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed in this section, the
day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins to run
is not included.
         (B)   The last day of the time period is included, unless it is a
Saturday, Sunday, or official holiday observed by the city, in which event the
period runs until 5:15 p.m. of the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or
official holiday observed by the city.
         (C)   Except as otherwise specified, time periods will be calculated
based on calendar days.
   (c)   Hearings.
      (1)   Any four members of the board constitute a quorum for a hearing
under this section. The board chair (or, in the chair’s absence, the vice chair
or longest serving board member present) shall preside at any hearing and make
rulings regarding evidence or procedure. Upon motion of any board member, the
board, by majority vote, may overrule or modify any ruling by the chair.
      (2)   The employee has the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the city discriminated against the employee or misapplied or
misinterpreted a rule as alleged.
      (3)   If the board, by majority vote, determines, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the city discriminated against the employee or misapplied or
misinterpreted a rule as alleged, the board shall direct such relief as it
deems just and equitable.
      (4)   The appealing employee:
         (A)   may request the hearing or deliberations, which are usually open
to the public, to be closed; and
         (B)   may not be compensated for time away from the employee’s city
position while attending a hearing, unless so ordered by the board.
      (5)   The board may exclude:
         (A)   redundant, irrelevant, or cumulative evidence;
         (B)   evidence that is not competent or properly authenticated;
         (C)   any exhibit not previously exchanged; and
         (D)   the testimony of a witness not previously identified as a
witness.
      (6)   The secretary shall maintain a record of the hearing and shall, at
the city’s expense, appoint a court reporter to make a record of the hearing.
      (7)   The board shall release city employee witnesses as soon as possible
to return to city business.
      (8)   Placing witnesses under the rule.
         (A)   Upon request by either party, the witnesses on both sides shall
be sworn and removed from the hearing room so they cannot hear the testimony as
delivered by any other witness in the case.
         (B)   Witnesses shall be instructed that they are not to converse with
each other or with any other person about the case, other than the attorneys in
the case.
      (9)   After the parties have rested, the board may request a party to
produce additional evidence as the board deems necessary to decide the issues
before it.
   (d)   Disposition.
      (1)   Dismissal. A grievance or any part of a grievance must be dismissed
for, but not limited to, any of the following reasons:
         (A)   The appealing employee fails to appear in person at the hearing,
unless:
            (i)   good cause for the failure to appear is shown; and
            (ii)   the city would not be unduly prejudiced if the grievance is
not dismissed.
         (B)   The appealing employee fails to introduce sufficient evidence to
prove the alleged discrimination or misapplication or misinterpretation of a
rule.
         (C)   The board cannot grant the relief that the appealing employee
has requested.
         (D)   The board lacks jurisdiction.
      (2)   Board orders.
         (A)   The disposition of a grievance must be reduced to writing by the
secretary and transmitted to the parties within three working days after the
board has announced its ruling. This writing is the order of the board.
         (B)   The order is final unless a motion for rehearing is filed within
10 working days after the date on the written order.
      (3)   Relief. The board may grant the prevailing party relief that is
just and equitable as is consistent with the city charter and other applicable
law.
      (4)   Costs. The board may not authorize payment of attorney’s fees,
expenses, or costs or provide payment of damages beyond payment of salary and
benefits that would have ordinarily been paid to the appealing employee.
   (e)   Post-hearing deadlines.
      (1)   Within 10 working days after the date on the written order, a
motion for rehearing may be filed by either party.
      (2)   A motion for rehearing may be granted by the board only if the
order:
         (A)   exceeds the board’s authority;
         (B)   contains provisions im-permissible under applicable law;
         (C)   is unclear; or
         (D)   incorrectly states the dis-position of the matter.
   (f)   Other matters.
      (1)   If a court of law rules on an issue involved in the grievance, the
board’s order must conform with the court’s ruling or must be vacated in
deference to the court’s ruling, whichever is applicable.
      (2)   The board may order, with the consent of the parties, that any
matters having common issues of fact be consolidated.
      (3)   No party or party representative shall communicate with any board
member regarding the issues involved in the grievance except at the hearing.
      (4)   The board, by majority vote, may seek advice regarding its
jurisdiction or the nature and extent of its authority from the city attorney.
      (5)   A party may be heard through a representative if that
representative is designated:
         (A)   in writing filed with the secretary and served on all parties;
         (B)   on the record at the hearing before evidence is accepted; or
         (C)   through the signature of the representative on any paper filed
with the secretary on behalf of the party.
      (6)   The secretary shall ensure that the board receives any materials
filed by the parties.
      (7)   Any paper served by a party on the secretary must include a
certificate showing service to all other parties.
      (8)   Service upon the city must be accomplished by serving the assistant
city attorney assigned to the hearing.
      (9)   Nothing in this section may be construed to authorize the practice
of law except as permitted by the Supreme Court of Texas.
      (10)   By presenting to the board (whether by signing, submitting, or
later advocating) a request for a hearing, a complaint, a written or oral
motion, or any other document, the party is certifying that it is acting in
good faith.
   (g)   Nothing in this section conveys upon, implies, or intends to imply
that an employee has a property interest in continued employment or a contract
of employment with the city based on any right to grieve or appeal provided by
this section or on the nondiscrimination policy stated in Section
34-35 of this chapter. Nothing in this section or in the nondiscrimination
policy creates any right or remedy under any law or limits any existing right
or remedy provided under any law. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 20988; 22195; 24873; 24930;
25051; 26182; 28024; 29480)
SEC. 34-40.   APPEALS TO THE TRIAL BOARD OR ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE.
   (a)   General provisions, applicability, and jurisdiction.
      (1)   To the extent that a rule adopted by the civil service board, civil
service trial boards, or administrative law judges and approved by the city
council conflicts with a provision of this chapter, this chapter prevails.
      (2)   In this section:
         (A)   BOARD means the civil service board of the city.
         (B)   TRIAL BOARD means a civil service trial board.
         (C)   SECRETARY means the secretary of the civil service board, who
will also serve as secretary to each trial board and each administrative law
judge.
      (3)   This section does not apply to:
         (A)   a department director, an assistant department director, or
other managerial personnel designated by the city council in accordance with
Section 11, Chapter XVI of the city charter; or
         (B)   a non-civil service employee.
      (4)   A civil service trial board and an administrative law judge have
jurisdiction to hear an appeal by an employee if the appeal:
         (A)   involves a demotion or discharge, unless provided otherwise in
the city charter;
         (B)   is filed in writing with the secretary within 10 working days
after the date of the employee’s receipt of the letter of the last disposition
of the appeal;
         (C)   contains the following information:
            (i)   the type of disciplinary action being appealed and the
effective date of the action;
            (ii)   the specific reason the discipline is unjust or otherwise in
error;
            (iii)   the remedy sought;
            (iv)   the signature of the employee; and
            (v)   a certificate showing the date of service to the secretary;
and
         (D)   has a copy of the disciplinary action attached to the appeal.
      (5)   Designating whether an appeal is heard by a trial board or an
administrative law judge.
         (A)   An employee must specify in the appeal filed with the secretary
whether the appeal will be heard by a trial board or an administrative law
judge. This choice is final.
         (B)   All appeals will be heard by a trial board unless otherwise
specified by the appealing employee.
         (C)   By choosing to have a hearing before an administrative law
judge, the appealing employee agrees to pay one-half of the administrative law
judge’s fee for the hearing, based on a rate established by contract with the
city. Before a hearing will be held before an administrative law judge, the
employee must deposit with the civil service board secretary a cash amount
equal to one-half the estimated fee of the administrative judge as determined
by the secretary based on the estimated length of the hearing. If the deposit
exceeds the actual cost of the hearing, the employee shall be refunded the
difference. If the deposit is insufficient to cover the actual cost of the
hearing, the employee must pay the additional amount.
   (b)   Selection of a trial board or an administrative law judge.
      (1)   For hearings before a trial board, the secretary shall select trial
board members according to a rotation schedule established by the chair of the
civil service board. The trial board must be composed of a civil service board
member and two adjunct members of the civil service board.
      (2)   For hearings before an administrative law judge, the secretary
shall select the administrative law judge according to a rotation schedule
established by the chair of the civil service board. An administrative law
judge who is involved in litigation against the city may not hear an appeal.
      (3)   The secretary shall promptly designate a replacement if a trial
board member or an administrative law judge is unable to serve at a hearing and
shall inform all parties of the replacement. A substitute trial board member or
administrative law judge must be selected in accordance with the rotation
schedule established under Paragraph (2) of this subsection.
      (4)   The civil service board member serving on a trial board shall
preside as the chair at any hearing before the trial board and shall make any
rulings regarding evidence or procedure. The chair’s rulings may be overruled
or modified by a majority vote of the other trial board members hearing the
matter.
      (5)   The administrative law judge shall preside at any hearing before
the administrative law judge and shall make any rulings regarding evidence or
procedure.
   (c)   Prehearing deadlines.
      (1)   To the fullest extent possible, within fifteen working days after
the date of service of the request to the secretary, as shown on the
certificate attached to the request under Subsection (a)(4)(C) of this section,
the secretary shall do the following:
         (A)   Set a hearing before a trial board or an administrative law
judge within 60 to 90 calendar days after receipt of the request by the
secretary; however, the secretary of the civil service board may, with the
approval of the trial board chair or the administrative law judge, schedule a
hearing outside of 60 to 90 calendar days from the date of the request.
         (B)   Prepare a “statement of questions,” which must be styled,
“Matter of (name of employee)” and must specify the rules alleged to have been
violated as stated in the letter of demotion or discharge.
         (C)   Designate the trial board members who will hear the appeal or,
if elected by the employee, the administrative law judge.
         (D)   Transmit to each party notice of the hearing, the statement of
questions, and the names of the trial board members or the name of the
administrative law judge, whichever is applicable.
      (2)   Objections.
         (A)   Within 10 working days after the date of service as shown on the
certificate of service on the statement of questions, the parties shall file
any objections to the statement of questions with the secretary.
         (B)   Within five working days after the date of service as shown on
the certificate of service on the objections, a response may be filed.
         (C)   Objections may be resolved at the hearing immediately before
evidence is accepted.
      (3)   Continuances.
         (A)   At least 15 working days before a hearing or two working days
after a party learns of the facts requiring a continuance, whichever date is
earlier, a motion for continuance of the hearing may be filed.
         (B)   Within five working days after the date of service as shown on
the certificate of service on the motion for continuance, a response may be
filed.
         (C)   Other than in cases in which the parties agree to abate a
hearing to await the final adjudication of underlying criminal charges, the
parties may agree to a continuance, in which case, the hearing will be
continued for up to 60 calendar days. Agreed continuances in excess of 180 days
from the date of the original setting of the hearing must be approved by the
administrative law judge or the trial board chair, or his or her designee, who
shall be a member of the trial board.
         (D)   If the parties do not agree to a continuance:
            (i)   for a hearing before a trial board, the continuance may be
granted by a majority of the trial board members present at a meeting or
hearing at which the motion for continuance is considered; or
            (ii)   for a hearing before an administrative law judge, the
secretary shall request a ruling from the administrative law judge on the
motion for continuance.
      (4)   Exchange of information. At least 10 working days before the
hearing, each party shall:
         (A)   exchange witness lists;
         (B)   exchange exhibits;
         (C)   stipulate to undisputed facts;
         (D)   stipulate to the admissibility of exhibits; and
         (E)   file with the secretary a position statement that must include:
            (i)   a statement of the party’s position on the issues in the
statement of questions;
            (ii)   a designation of undisputed facts;
            (iii)   a list of witnesses and the estimated time required for the
direct examination of each witness; and
            (iv)   a list of exhibits.
      (5)   Request for subpoenas. At least 30 working days before the hearing,
each party may file with the secretary, and copy the opposing party, a request
for subpoena of witnesses and documents, in accordance with the following:
         (A)   The request for subpoena of witnesses and documents must
include:
            (i)   the name and address of each witness to be subpoenaed;
            (ii)   if a witness is a city employee, the name of the employee’s
department; and
            (iii)   if documents are being subpoenaed, the specific
identification of books, papers, documents, or other tangible things sought to
be subpoenaed.
         (B)   The party requesting the subpoena shall notify the subpoenaed
witness of postponements, rescheduling, and appearance times.
         (C)   The trial board or the administrative law judge has the power to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of testimony and
evidence, to administer oaths, and to punish for contempt in the same manner as
provided for municipal judges.
         (D)   Either party may object to a subpoena request within seven
working days after receiving notice of the subpoena request. Objections to
subpoenas must be in writing, submitted to the secretary, and copied to the
opposing party, who has three working days after receipt of the objections to
respond in writing to the substantive reasons for the objections to the
requested subpoenas.
         (E)   The secretary shall forward the objections and the response to
the objections, if any, to the administrative law judge or trial board chair
for resolution. If the trial board chair is unavailable, the objections must be
ruled upon by his or her designee, who shall be a member of the trial board.
         (F)   Once the scope of the subpoena is determined by the
administrative law judge or trial board chair, or if no objections are filed,
each party shall organize and number the responsive information (“released
documents”) before turning it over to the secretary. The released documents
must be provided within the amount of time determined by the administrative law
judge or trial board chair or, if no objections are filed, in an amount of time
determined by the secretary. The secretary shall release a complete copy of the
released documents to both parties of the hearing, at the expense of the party
who issued the subpoena for the documents.
         (G)   The individual picking up the released documents must sign for
the produced information. The requesting party has three working days to
submit, in writing, any objections to the completeness of the released
documents. The producing party has three working days to respond, in writing,
to the substantive reasons for the requesting party’s objections. The secretary
shall maintain one complete copy of the released documents, to allow the
administrative law judge or trial board chair to fully assess and rule on any
objections to the completeness of compliance with the subpoena.
         (H)   The secretary shall forward the objections and any response to
the objections to the administrative law judge or trial board chair for
resolution. If the trial board chair is unavailable, the objections shall be
ruled upon by his or her designee, who shall be a member of the trial board.
         (I)   Decisions rendered by the administrative law judge or trial
board chair (or his or her designee, if applicable) regarding subpoenas or
responsive information are final and are not subject to further appeal.
         (J)   After all decisions have been rendered by the administrative law
judge or trial board chair regarding the scope of documents to be released
pursuant to a subpoena, the secretary shall release a complete copy of the
released documents to both parties of the hearing, at the expense of the party
who issued the subpoena for the documents.
      (6)   Challenge of a trial board member or an administrative law judge.
         (A)   At least 10 working days before the hearing, a motion to
challenge a trial board member or an administrative law judge may be filed with
the secretary and served upon all parties.
         (B)   Within five working days after the date of service as shown on
the certificate of service on the motion to challenge a trial board member or
an administrative law judge, a response may be filed.
         (C)   A challenge may not be made after the hearing begins, unless the
challenge is based on:
            (i)   the ineligibility of a trial board member or an
administrative law judge to hear the matter; or
            (ii)   the conduct of a trial board member or an administrative law
judge during the hearing.
         (D)   If a challenged trial board member does not voluntarily
withdraw, the trial board, by a unanimous vote, not counting the vote of the
challenged member, may remove the member.
         (E)   If a challenged administrative law judge does not voluntarily
withdraw, the administrative municipal judge of the municipal court of record
may remove the member.
         (F)   If a challenge results in withdrawal of a trial board member or
an administrative law judge, the hearing may be continued to a date certain.
         (G)   If a challenge results in withdrawal of a trial board member of
an administrative law judge, the secretary shall promptly designate a
replacement and inform all parties of the replacement.
         (H)   A challenge to a substituted trial board member or
administrative law judge must be submitted as soon as possible.
      (7)   Service of subpoenas.
         (A)   At least five working days before the hearing, the secretary
shall cause all subpoenas to be personally served.
         (B)   The secretary shall designate a person to deliver the subpoenas
and that person shall sign each subpoena stating that the witness was served.
         (C)   The subpoena of an active city employee may be served through
the director of the employee’s department.
      (8)   Computation of time.
         (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed in this section, the
day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins to run
is not included.
         (B)   The last day of the time period is included, unless it is a
Saturday, Sunday, or official holiday observed by the city, in which event the
period runs until 5:15 p.m. of the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or
official holiday observed by the city.
         (C)   Except as otherwise specified, time periods will be calculated
based on calendar days.
   (d)   Hearings.
      (1)   A hearing must be conducted in two phases, as follows:
         (A)   Phase I.
            (i)   In Phase I, the trial board, by majority vote, or the
administrative law judge shall determine, by a preponderance of the evidence,
whether the employee committed any of the alleged rule violations.
            (ii)   If the trial board, by majority vote, or the administrative
law judge determines that the employee committed none of the alleged rule
violations, the trial board or administrative law judge may take whatever
action is just and equitable, and the hearing will be closed.
            (iii)   If the trial board, by majority vote, or the administrative
law judge determines that the employee committed at least one of the alleged
rule violations, the hearing will proceed to Phase II.
         (B)   Phase II.
            (i)   In Phase II, the trial board or the administrative law judge
shall hear evidence concerning the appropriateness of the discipline imposed
for the sustained rule violations.
            (ii)   The trial board, by majority vote, or the administrative law
judge may either sustain, reverse, modify, or amend the disciplinary action as
is determined just and equitable, provided that the disciplinary action must be
sustained if a reasonable person could have taken the same disciplinary action
against the employee.
            (iii)   The trial board or the administrative law judge may
consider only the evidence relating to the violations sustained in Phase I and
the employee’s previous employment record with the city, but may not consider
the employee’s subsequent performance with the city.
      (2)   The appealing employee:
         (A)   may request the hearing or deliberations, which are usually open
to the public, to be closed; and
         (B)   shall not be compensated for time away from the employee’s city
position while attending a hearing, unless so ordered by the trial board or the
administrative law judge.
      (3)   The trial board or the administrative law judge may exclude:
         (A)   redundant, irrelevant, or cumulative evidence;
         (B)   evidence that is not competent or properly authenticated;
         (C)   any exhibit not previously exchanged; and
         (D)   the testimony of a witness not previously identified as a
witness.
      (4)   The secretary shall maintain a record of the hearing and shall, at
the city’s expense, appoint a court reporter to make a record of the hearing.
      (5)   The trial board or the administrative law judge will release city
employee witnesses as soon as possible to return to city business.
      (6)   Placing witnesses under the rule.
         (A)   Upon request by either party, the witnesses on both sides shall
be sworn and removed from the hearing room so they cannot hear the testimony as
delivered by any other witness in the case.
         (B)   Witnesses shall be instructed that they are not to converse with
each other or with any other person about the case, other than the attorneys in
the case.
      (7)   After the parties have rested, the trial board or the
administrative law judge may request a party to produce additional evidence as
the trial board or administrative law judge deems necessary to decide the
issues before them.
   (e)   Disposition.
      (1)   Dismissal. An appeal must be dismissed for, but not limited to, any
of the following reasons:
         (A)   The appealing employee fails to appear in person at the hearing,
unless:
            (i)   good cause for the failure to appear is shown; and
            (ii)   the city is not unduly prejudiced.
         (B)   The trial board or the administrative law judge lacks
jurisdiction.
         (C)   The appealing employee fails to pay the amount owed to the
administrative law judge prior to the beginning of the hearing.
      (2)   Board orders.
         (A)   The disposition of an appeal must be reduced to writing by the
secretary and transmitted to the parties within three working days after the
trial board or the administrative law judge has announced the ruling. This
writing is the order of the trial board or the administrative law judge.
         (B)   The order is final unless a motion for rehearing is filed within
10 working days after the date on the written order.
      (3)   Relief. The trial board or the administrative law judge may grant
the prevailing party relief that is just and equitable as is consistent with
the city charter and other applicable law.
      (4)   Costs. The trial board or the administrative law judge may not
authorize payment of attorney’s fees, expenses, or costs or provide payment of
damages beyond payment of salary and benefits that would have ordinarily been
paid to the appealing employee.
   (f)   Post-hearing deadlines.
      (1)   Motion for rehearing.
         (A)   Within 10 working days after the date on the written order, a
motion for rehearing may be filed by either party.
         (B)   A motion for rehearing may be granted by the trial board or the
administrative law judge only if the order:
            (i)   exceeds the authority of the trial board or the
administrative law judge;
            (ii)   contains provisions impermissible under applicable law;
            (iii)   is unclear; or
            (iv)   incorrectly states the disposition of the matter.
         (C)   A motion for rehearing must be considered by the same trial
board or administrative law judge who heard the appeal, except that if any
trial board member or the administrative law judge is unavailable, the
secretary shall designate a replacement.
      (2)   Appeals to state district court.
         (A)   Either party may appeal the order of the trial board or
administrative law judge to state district court within one year after:
            (i)   the date on the last written order, if no rehearing is
requested;
            (ii)   the date on the written order denying the rehearing, if a
rehearing is requested and denied; or
            (iii)   the date on the written order issued after the rehearing,
if a rehearing is requested and granted.
         (B)   The appeal to the district court must be decided upon review of
the record of the hearing.
         (C)   An appeal by the city must be approved by the city manager and
the city attorney.
         (D)   The appealing party shall, at its expense, furnish to the court
a copy of the complete hearing record presented to the trial board or the
administrative law judge, including a certified copy of the transcript taken by
the court reporter, pleadings, hearing transcripts, exhibits, orders, and all
evidence admitted during the hearing. The appealing party is responsible for
paying the court reporter's fees for preparing the official hearing transcript.
         (E)   If the appealing party fails to provide the district court with
any material required by Paragraph (2)(D) of this subsection, the appeal must
be dismissed.
         (F)   Any appeal to state district court must be initiated by a
citation and service of process pursuant to Texas Rule of Civil Procedure 106.
   (g)   Other matters.
      (1)   Reserved.
      (2)   If a court of law rules on an issue involved in the appeal, the
order of the trial board or administrative law judge must conform with the
court’s ruling or must be vacated in deference to the court’s ruling, whichever
is applicable.
      (3)   The chair of the civil service board may order, with the consent of
the parties, that any matters having common issues of fact be consolidated.
      (4)   No party or party representative shall communicate with any trial
board member or administrative law judge regarding the issues involved in the
appeal except at the hearing.
      (5)   The trial board, by majority vote, or the administrative law judge
may seek advice regarding its jurisdiction or the nature and extent of its
authority from the city attorney.
      (6)   A party may be heard through a representative if that
representative is designated:
         (A)   in writing filed with the secretary and served on all parties;
         (B)   on the record at the hearing before evidence is accepted; or
         (C)   through the signature of the representative on any paper filed
with the secretary on behalf of the party.
      (7)   The secretary shall ensure that the trial board or the
administrative law judge receives any materials filed by the parties.
      (8)   Any paper served by a party on the secretary must include a
certificate showing service to all other parties.
      (9)   Service upon the city must be accomplished by serving the assistant
city attorney assigned to the hearing.
      (10)   Nothing in this section may be construed to authorize the practice
of law except as permitted by the Supreme Court of Texas.
      (11)   By presenting to the trial board or the administrative law judge
(whether by signing, submitting, or later advocating) a request for a hearing,
a complaint, a written or oral motion, or any other document, the party is
certifying that it is acting in good faith. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 20526; 21304;
21674; 22612; 24873; 24930; 26182; 27098; 28024; 29480; 31745)
SEC. 34-41.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 26182)
ARTICLE VII.
WAGE SUPPLEMENTATION.
SEC. 34-42.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 25389)
SEC. 34-43.   WAGE SUPPLEMENTATION PLAN.
   (a)   Administration. The director of risk management is authorized and
directed to develop and distribute necessary administrative directives for the
fair and efficient administration of the injured employees’ wage
supplementation plan. Department directors shall authorize wage supplementation
for their employees in accordance with the administrative directives.
Determinations and decisions made by department directors are final,
conclusive, and binding on all parties.
   (b)   Eligibility.
      (1)   A permanent employee who, as the result of an injury sustained in
the course of employment with the city, is being paid weekly workers’
compensation payments, or would be paid workers’ compensation payments if the
disability continued for a period of more than seven days, may receive
payments, as injured employee wage supplementation, separate and distinct from
and in addition to the weekly workers’ compensation payments. An injured
employee must complete an “Initiation of Wage Supplementation Form” provided by
the city before being granted partial or full-day injury leave. An injured
employee has 60 days from the receipt of the “Initiation of Wage
Supplementation Form” to make any final election to accept or reject wage
supplementation.
      (2)   To be eligible for wage supplementation payments, an injured
employee who lives within the city’s certified worker’s compensation network
service area must choose a treating physician who is a member of the network.
An injured employee who lives outside the city’s certified worker’s
compensation network service area has the right to treatment by a physician of
the employee’s choice under Section 408.022 of the Workers’ Compensation Act,
as amended, and treatment by a physician outside of the network will not
disqualify that employee from receiving wage supplementation payments.
   (c)   Amount. The employee may receive full wage supplementation for the
first seven days of time lost from the employee’s position. After seven days,
the wage supplementation will be in an amount that is approximately equal to
the difference between any workers’ compensation payments and the employee’s
regular pay.
   (d)   Discontinuation. In no event may wage supplementation to any employee
be continued:
      (1)   after a compromise settlement agreement or an agreed judgment has
been effected;
      (2)   after weekly indemnity workers’ compensation payments have ceased;
      (3)   after 52 weeks of payments for each occurrence of an injury for
which an employee received, or was eligible to receive, wage supplementation
payments on or after October 1, 2003;
      (4)   after an impairment rating has been assessed; or
      (5)   whenever the employee owes the city reimbursement for overpaid wage
supplementation.
   (e)   Medical statement required. Wage supplementation must be supported by
appropriate medical statements from a treating physician, whether partial or
full-day leave is granted. A request for an extension of wage supplementation
beyond four weeks must be accompanied by a current medical narrative or report.
   (f)   Grounds for denial and termination. Wage supplementation benefits may
not be paid to any injured employee who:
      (1)   is assigned a preventable classification for the cause of the
injury;
      (2)   engages in any work, whether for pay or as a volunteer, while off
work due to an injury for which the employee is requesting or receiving wage
supplementation;
      (3)   after being injured, terminates employment or is involuntarily
terminated from employment for any reason;
      (4)   fails or refuses to comply with the instructions or advice of a
treating physician or other physician performing an independent medical
examination for the city regarding treatment of the injured condition;
      (5)   fails to act in a manner that is conductive to or consistent with
being off work convalescing from a job-related injury;
      (6)   refuses to perform limited, partial, or part-time duty when
authorized by a treating physician or other physician performing an independent
medical examination for the city;
      (7)   refuses to accept or perform a different job with the city that, in
the opinion of a treating physician or other physician performing an
independent medical examination for the city, is within the employee’s physical
capacity and for which the employee is qualified or will be trained;
      (8)   refuses to submit to any independent medical examination or
treatment required by the city in accordance with workers’ compensation laws;
      (9)   refuses to return to regular duty after being released for regular
duty by a treating physician or other physician performing an independent
medical examination for the city;
      (10)   is injured as the result of:
         (A)   the breaking of rules, regulations, or laws by the employee; or
         (B)   the gross negligence of the employee.
      (11)   fails to use city or department-mandated safety equipment or
follow city or department-mandated safety procedures when the injury was
sustained;
      (12)   fails to report the injury within 24 hours after its occurrence,
unless the employee can show good cause for the delay;
      (13)   fails to keep the employee’s immediate supervisor and workers’
compensation representative informed, on a monthly basis and in accordance with
departmental procedure, of medical examinations and treatments and related
dates, future medical treatments, status regarding return to limited and full
duty, and changes in the employee’s ability to work;
      (14)   submits a workers’ compensation claim that is denied; or
      (15)   sustains an injury while participating in any sports activity,
regardless of whether the activity was organized or unorganized or sanctioned
or unsanctioned by the department.
   (g)   Use of vacation and sick leave. An employee who is denied, has
refused, or has exhausted wage supplementation while receiving workers’
compensation payments may take accrued sick leave or vacation leave, but only
in an amount necessary to make up the difference between workers’ compensation
payments and the employee’s regular rate of pay.
   (h)   Leave without pay. An employee who has used all of the employee’s
accrued sick leave and wage supplementation payments, while still off work and
receiving workers’ compensation payments, may be granted leave of absence
without pay in accordance with Section
34-28 of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 24873; 24930; 25389; 25630; 28024; 29480)
SEC. 34-44.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 24873)
SEC. 34-45.   BENEFIT POLICY FOR OFF-DUTY SECURITY OR TRAFFIC CONTROL SERVICES.
   (a)   The city will pay to a police officer who is injured while performing
off-duty security or traffic control services for a private individual or
organization, benefits that are equal to the benefits that the city would be
required to pay the officer if the officer had been injured while on duty with
the city if:
      (1)   the injury occurs:
         (A)   while the officer is in the act of enforcing a federal or state
law or a city ordinance; or
         (B)   solely because of the officer’s status as a peace officer; or
         (C)   while the officer is in the act of directing traffic on a public
street or in an area immediately adjacent to a public street where traffic flow
on the public street is affected by the officer’s action; and
      (2)   the officer has followed the procedures required in the general
orders of the police department for obtaining approval for off-duty employment;
and
      (3)   the officer cooperates with the city attorney in proceedings to
recover workers’ compensation benefits from the employer for whom the officer
was working at the time of the injury; and
      (4)   the officer agrees that if workers’ compensation benefits are
received from the off-duty employer, the officer will reimburse the city for
benefits that the city paid under this policy that were intended to be
equivalent to workers’ compensation benefits.
   (b)   If the benefits paid to an officer under this policy that were
intended to be equivalent to workers’ compensation benefits exceed the amount
the officer is awarded as workers’ compensation benefits from the off- duty
employer, the officer is not required to reimburse the city for the excess.
   (c)   The determination of whether an officer is entitled to benefits and
the extent of benefits under this policy will be made by the director of risk
management. (Ord. Nos. 19340; 22026; 24873; 25389; 30216)
CHAPTER 35
RESERVED
(Repealed by Ord. 26136)
CHAPTER 36
POLES AND WIRES
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
36-1.   Compliance with chapter.
Sec.
36-2.   Consent of city required to erect poles, wires, etc.
Sec.
36-3.   When alleys to be used rather than streets.
Sec.
36-4.   Removal upon abandonment.
Sec.
36-5.   Reserved.
Sec.
36-6.   Location of poles and other fixtures.
Sec.
36-7.   Crossarms.
Sec.
36-8.   Height of wires.
Sec.
36-9.   Change of location of poles or change of height of wires.
Sec.
36-10.   Rights nontransferable.
Sec.
36-11.   City may prescribe further regulations.
Sec.
36-12.   Initials of owners required on poles.
Sec.
36-13.   Poles to be perpendicular.
Sec.
36-14.   Line of poles to be on one side of street.
Sec.
36-15.   Permission required for electric light or power conductors on fixtures
maintained for other wires.
Sec.
36-16.   Minimum distance of wires from buildings, poles, etc.
Sec.
36-17.   Minimum distance of wire on crossarm from pole.
Sec.
36-18.   Minimum height of wires above roofs.
Sec.
36-19.   Supports of conductors.
Sec.
36-20.   Joints.
Sec.
36-21.   Wires to be stretched and attached to insulators.
Sec.
36-22.   Connections with conductors to be made at right angles.
Sec.
36-23.   Wires crossing other wires.
Sec.
36-24.   Wires along walls.
Sec.
36-25.   Wires entering buildings.
Sec.
36-26.   Guard irons and guard wires.
Sec.
36-27.   Reserved.
Sec.
36-28.   Street lights - Minimum height above sidewalk.
Sec.
36-29.   Same - Frames and exposed parts to be insulated.
Sec.
36-30.   Standard of insulation resistance.
Sec.
36-31.   Copper wire standards; submission of samples for tests.
Sec.
36-32.   Safety cutouts for conductors.
Sec.
36-33.   Inspection of work.
Sec.
36-34.   Reserved.
Sec.
36-35.   Secondary generators and converters.
Sec.
36-36.   Minimum distance of wires from fire alarm wire.
Sec.
36-37.   Minimum distance of poles from fireplugs.
Sec.
36-38.   Linemen and lampmen to wear badges.
Sec.
36-39.   Apparatus with exposed parts.
Sec.
36-40.   Use of poles by another company.
Sec.
36-41.   Penalty for violations.
Sec.
36-42.   Attachment of wires to buildings.
ARTICLE II.
POLES AND WIRES – REPORTS, RECORDS, AND INSPECTIONS.
Sec.
36-43.   Reports required.
Sec.
36-44.   City may order audit of books and records.
Sec.
36-45.   Inspection of poles and wires; notice to remove, replace, or alter.
Sec.
36-46.   Article not a grant of additional privileges.
Sec.
36-47.   Effect of article on other ordinances.
Sec.
36-48.   Rights reserved by the city.
Sec.
36-49.   Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 36-1.   COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.
   No person shall erect or construct a pole, pier, abutment or other necessary
fixture, appurtenance or appliance for electric light or power purposes within
the city for electric light or power purposes or maintain any such pole, pier,
abutment, wire or other such necessary fixture, appurtenance or appliance
within the city, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Code 1941, Art. 105-1)
SEC. 36-2.   CONSENT OF CITY REQUIRED TO ERECT POLES, WIRES, ETC.
   No person shall erect or construct any pole, pier, abutment, wire or other
necessary fixture, appurtenance or appliance set out in Section
36-1, for magnetic telegraph or telephone purposes, for electric light or power
purposes or for any other purpose whatever along any of the streets or alleys
of the city without first obtaining the consent of the city council so to do.
(Code 1941, Arts. 104-1, 105-2)
SEC. 36-3.   WHEN ALLEYS TO BE USED RATHER THAN STREETS.
   Whenever, in the judgment of the city council, the use of any public alley
for such purposes is practicable, poles, wires or other necessary fixtures for
telegraph, telephone or electric light purposes shall be placed upon and along
such alley, instead of upon and along the streets next adjoining and parallel
thereto. When such poles or fixtures are set in an alley they shall be located
as near the side lines of the alley as practicable and in such manner as not to
incommode the public or the adjoining property holders. (Code 1941, Art. 104-2)
SEC. 36-4.   REMOVAL UPON ABANDONMENT.
   All persons who have erected or constructed any poles or fixtures in the
city or who may hereafter erect or construct them and who have ceased to use
them for the purposes originally intended or who may hereafter so cease to use
them shall take down and remove such poles, wires and fixtures when notified by
the city manager, upon the order of the city council. It shall be the duty of
such persons to commence removal within five days after notice and to complete
the same without delay. Upon failure to do so, such persons are guilty of an
offense. In addition, the chief of police, upon the order of the city council,
shall proceed to take down and remove such poles, wires and fixtures at the
cost and expense of such persons and the same shall be a charge against them
and may be sued for and recovered by the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction. (Code 1941, Art. 104-10; Ord. 19963)
SEC. 36-5.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 36-6.   LOCATION OF POLES AND OTHER FIXTURES.
   When poles or other fixtures are erected on the street they shall be placed,
if practicable, on the outer edge of the sidewalk just inside of the curbstone
on a line dividing the lots of property owners, but in no case shall they be
placed so as to interfere with or damage the curbstone, trees or other public
or private property. (Code 1941, Art. 104-3)
SEC. 36-7.   CROSSARMS.
   Crossarms shall be of a uniform length determined by the supervisor of
public utilities, strengthened by braces and painted the same color as the
pole. The crossarms of each company shall bear the same characteristic mark.
(Code 1941, Arts. 104-3, 105-6)
SEC. 36-8.   HEIGHT OF WIRES.
   Wires shall be run at a safe height from the ground.
   The trolley wires of all streetcar systems shall not be lower than 18 feet
from the track at all places other than railroad crossings and at all railroad
crossings such trolley wires shall not be lower than 22 feet. (Code 1941, Arts.
104-3, 104-4)
SEC. 36-9.   CHANGE OF LOCATION OF POLES OR CHANGE OF HEIGHT OF WIRES.
   (a)   The right is hereby reserved to the city council to, at any time,
direct a change in the location of any poles erected in the city for any
purpose and to change the height at which wires shall be run on such poles;
provided, that before any such alteration or change is made, at least five
days’ notice in writing shall be given the person or his agent to be affected
by the proposed change and he shall be allowed a reasonable opportunity to
appear before the city council and be heard upon the merits of the proposed
change.
   (b)   When the city council orders any change or alteration in the location
of poles or fixtures or in the height of wires, it shall be the duty of the
person so ordered to commence the same within five days after notice and
complete the same without delay. Upon failure so to do, such person shall be
guilty of an offense and punished as provided in this code. (Code 1941, Arts.
104-5, 104-7; Ord. 19963)
SEC. 36-10.   RIGHTS NONTRANSFERABLE.
   All rights and franchises granted by this chapter are granted with the
express understanding that the same are not transferable, but are given only to
the persons petitioning for and receiving the grant. All attempted transfers of
the same, without the consent of the city council first had and obtained, shall
be null and void and shall work a forfeiture of all rights originally granted.
(Code 1941, Art. 104-9)
SEC. 36-11.   CITY MAY PRESCRIBE FURTHER REGULATIONS.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be so construed as to in any manner
affect the right of the city in the future to prescribe any other mode of
conducting such wires over or under its streets. (Code 1941, Art. 104-11; Ord.
21186)
SEC. 36-12.   INITIALS OF OWNERS REQUIRED ON POLES.
   All poles shall be branded or stamped with the initials of the company
owning them at a point not less than five nor more than seven feet above the
surface of the sidewalk. (Code 1941, Art. 105-3)
SEC. 36-13.   POLES TO BE PERPENDICULAR.
   All poles shall be erected and maintained in a perpendicular position. (Code
1941, Art 105-4)
SEC. 36-14.   LINE OF POLES TO BE ON ONE SIDE OF STREET.
   Each line of poles shall be run on one side of the street only, except when
absolutely necessary to change to the other side, but this may be done only by
the permission of the city council. (Code 1941, Art. 105-5)
SEC. 36-15.   PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR ELECTRIC LIGHT OR POWER CONDUCTORS ON
FIXTURES MAINTAINED FOR OTHER WIRES.
   Electric light or power conductors shall not be placed upon fixtures erected
or maintained for wires used for telegraph, telephone, fire alarm or other
signalling purposes, except by the permission of the city council. (Code 1941,
Art. 105-7)
SEC. 36-16.   MINIMUM DISTANCE OF WIRES FROM BUILDINGS, POLES, ETC.
   No wire shall be stretched within four inches of any pole, building, or
other object without being attached thereto and insulated therefrom. (Code
1941, Art. 105-8)
SEC. 36-17.   MINIMUM DISTANCE OF WIRE ON CROSSARM FROM POLE.
   No electric light or power wire on a crossarm shall be less than one foot
distant from the pole or other central support. (Code 1941, Art. 105-9)
SEC. 36-18.   MINIMUM HEIGHT OF WIRES ABOVE ROOFS.
   Wires over roofs must be at least seven feet above flat roofs at the lowest
point of sag and one foot above the ridge of other roofs. (Code 1941, Art. 105-
10)
SEC. 36-19.   SUPPORTS OF CONDUCTORS.
   All supports of electric conductors shall be constructed of durable material
and shall be capable of sustaining a load or pressure of at least 12 times that
which is normally upon them. (Code 1941, Art. 105-11)
SEC. 36-20.   JOINTS.
   All joints must be so made that a perfectly secure and unvarying connection,
fully equal to the cross section of the wire, will be secured. (Code 1941, Art.
105-12)
SEC. 36-21.   WIRES TO BE STRETCHED AND ATTACHED TO INSULATORS.
   All wires shall be stretched and fastened to glass, porcelain or other
insulator approved by the supervisor of public utilities. (Code 1941, Art. 105-
13)
SEC. 36-22.   CONNECTIONS WITH CONDUCTORS TO BE MADEATRIGHT ANGLES.
   All connections with lines of electric light or power conductors shall,
whenever possible, be made at right angles to the same, and must run
horizontally to the building, except so far as would conflict with Section
36-26, and then to point of entrance. (Code 1941, Art. 105-14)
SEC. 36-23.   WIRES CROSSING OTHER WIRES.
   Whenever it shall become necessary for any electric or power company to
carry its wires across the lines of any fire alarm, telegraph, telephone or
other electric light or power company, it shall be at a distance therefrom of
not less than three feet. (Code 1941, Art. 105-15)
SEC. 36-24.   WIRES ALONG WALLS.
   In running along walls all wires shall be rigidly attached to the same by
nonconducting fastenings and shall not hang from projecting insulators in
loops. All arc light wires shall be placed not less than one foot apart and
incandescent light wires not less than six inches apart. The use of porcelain
knobs or insulators on the outside of buildings is prohibited except in dry
places, when an improved insulator must be used on the walls. (Code 1941, Art.
105-16)
SEC. 36-25.   WIRES ENTERING BUILDINGS.
   All wires must enter buildings through an approved cutout switch and must be
encased in a continuous piece of hard insulating tubing, so inclined as to
oppose the entrance of water. The outer end of such tubing shall be sealed with
some plastic insulating material so as to exclude all moisture. (Code 1941,
Art. 105-17)
SEC. 36-26.   GUARD IRONS AND GUARD WIRES.
   Where angles occur in a line subjecting the supports to increased strain,
guard irons must be placed at the outside ends of the crossarms. Guard wires
must be placed wherever their presence would prevent fire alarm, telegraph,
telephone or other wires from coming into accidental contact with electric
light or power wires. The cost of such guard irons and wires shall be borne by
the person making the last construction. (Code 1941, Art. 105-18)
SEC. 36-27.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 36-28.   STREET LIGHTS - MINIMUM HEIGHT ABOVE SIDEWALK.
   Incandescent street lights must be so placed as to have a clear space of not
less than nine feet between the light and the sidewalk. (Code 1941, Art. 105-
20)
SEC. 36-29.   SAME - FRAMES AND EXPOSED PARTS TO BE INSULATED.
   Incandescent street lights must have the frames and exposed parts carefully
insulated from the circuit. (Code 1941, Art. 105-21)
SEC. 36-30.   STANDARD OF INSULATION RESISTANCE.
   The resistance of the insulation on the circuits must be maintained at a
standard provided by the supervisor of public utilities and every facility for
testing circuits shall be accorded him. (Code 1941, Art. 105-22)
SEC. 36-31.   COPPER WIRE STANDARDS; SUBMISSION OF SAMPLES FORTESTS.
   All copper wire must be at least 95 percent conductory. Samples of wires to
be used or in actual use shall be submitted to the city electrician for tests
of conductivity at any time when required. (Code 1941, Art. 105-23)
SEC. 36-32.   SAFETY CUTOUTS FOR CONDUCTORS.
   Every system of conductors shall be protected by a safety cutout that will
interrupt the passage through the conductors of a current stronger than they
can safely carry. (Code 1941, Art. 105-24)
SEC. 36-33.   INSPECTION OF WORK.
   Immediately after the erection of any wiring or other outdoor construction
for electric light or power or before the concealment or use of any inside
wiring, the person erecting the same shall notify the city electrician that
such work is ready for inspection. No use shall be made of such wiring or its
appurtenances for the purposes aforesaid until approved by the supervisor of
public utilities and a permit therefor is issued by him. No changes in such
system shall be made without a permit therefor from the supervisor of public
utilities. (Code 1941, Art. 105-25)
SEC. 36-34.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 36-35.   SECONDARY GENERATORS AND CONVERTERS.
   Secondary generators or converters shall not be placed or maintained inside
any building used for any other purpose. (Code 1941, Art. 105-27)
SEC. 36-36.   MINIMUM DISTANCE OF WIRES FROM FIRE ALARM WIRE.
   No electric light or power wire shall be erected or maintained within three
feet of any fire alarm wire. (Code 1941, Art. 105-28)
SEC. 36-37.   MINIMUM DISTANCE OF POLES FROM FIREPLUGS.
   No pole for any wire of any kind shall be erected nearer than five feet to
any fireplug. (Code 1941, Art. 105-28)
SEC. 36-38.   LINEMEN AND LAMPMEN TO WEAR BADGES.
   Every lineman and lampman shall wear a badge in plain sight, indicating his
number and the person by whom he is employed. In case of fire such badge shall
serve as a pass to admit the wearer inside fire lines. (Code 1941, Art. 105-29)
SEC. 36-39.   APPARATUS WITH EXPOSED PARTS.
   No switch, lamp, motor, dynamo or other conductor having exposed uninsulated
parts shall be erected or maintained where any person unacquainted with the
dangers of the same could easily come in contact therewith. (Code 1941, Art.
105-30)
SEC. 36-40.   USE OF POLES BY ANOTHER COMPANY.
   In granting permits to erect poles for purposes of electric light or power
the city reserves the right, if the interests of the city so demand, to
authorize other companies to use the same poles for the same purposes upon the
payment to the owners thereof of a proper compensation which shall be
determined between the parties concerned or by the city council in default of
such agreement. All permits will be subject to this condition, and in accepting
a permit the applicant accordingly binds himself thereto. (Code 1941, Art. 105-
31)
SEC. 36-41.   PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Every violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is an offense, and
the person guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section
13-1. Every day’s failure or refusal to comply with any of such provisions
shall constitute a separate offense. In case of wilful and continued violation
of the provisions of this chapter by any person, the city council shall have
the power to revoke and repeal any ordinance under which such person may be
acting, and to revoke and repeal all permits, privileges and franchises granted
to the person. (Code 1941, Art. 105-32; Ord. 19963)
SEC. 36-42.   ATTACHMENT OF WIRES TO BUILDINGS.
   No telephone, telegraph, electric light or other company or any person,
agent or employee of any such companies shall attach or in anywise connect any
wire or wires to, along, across or over any house, store or building of any
description in the city without first obtaining the written consent or
permission of the owner of such house, store or building and also a permit from
the building inspector for such connection or attachment. (Code 1941, Art. 105-
33)
ARTICLE II.
POLES AND WIRES – REPORTS, RECORDS, AND INSPECTIONS.
SEC. 36-43.   REPORTS REQUIRED.
   Every person using or maintaining any telegraph, telephone, electric light,
or other poles in any of the streets, highways, parks, or public places within
the city shall annually, on March 10, file with the city secretary a sworn
report containing a list of all such poles so used, possessed, or maintained by
the person, giving the accurate location of each pole, the number and character
of wires carried on each pole, and the names of the owners of such poles and of
the persons using the poles. Every person owning or using any wire run in
conduits beneath the surface of the streets, highways, alleys, parks, or public
places within the city shall include in the sworn report a statement as to the
number and length of the wires then owned or used by the person and run in such
underground conduits. (Code 1941, Art. 106-1; Ord. 28424)
SEC. 36-44.   CITY MAY ORDER AUDIT OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   The city council may have the books and records of the person rendering the
statement required in Section
36-43 examined by a bookkeeper employed by the city to ascertain whether such
statement is accurate, but nothing in this article prevents the city from
ascertaining the facts by any other method. (Code 1941, Art. 106-2; Ord. 28424)
SEC. 36-45.   INSPECTION OF POLES AND WIRES; NOTICE TO REMOVE, REPLACE, OR
ALTER.
   The police chief, fire-rescue chief, and director of transportation and
public works, or their designated representatives, shall each have the power
and duty to examine and inspect from time to time all poles and every wire or
cable in the streets, alleys, highways, or public places within the city when
such wire is designed to carry an electric current. They shall notify each
person owning or using such poles when any pole is unsafe, and notify each
person owning or operating any such wire or cable whenever its attachments,
insulation, supports, or appliances are unsuitable or unsafe, and require that
such poles, wires, or cables must be properly replaced, renewed, altered, or
constructed. They shall require the owner of any pole or wire abandoned for use
to remove the pole or wire. (Code 1941, Art. 106-7; Ord. Nos. 22026; 28424;
30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 36-46.   ARTICLE NOT A GRANT OF ADDITIONAL PRIVILEGES.
   Nothing in this article grants any privilege or authority for any other term
than already vested in persons now using and occupying the streets, alleys, and
public places of the city. (Code 1941, Art. 106-9; Ord. 28424)
SEC. 36-47.   EFFECT OF ARTICLE ON OTHER ORDINANCES.
   Nothing in this article relieves any person of any condition, restriction,
or requirement imposed by the ordinance in which it has been authorized to
place in the streets, highways, alleys, or public places of the city its
conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus or imposed by this code or other
ordinances previously enacted by the city. (Code 1941, Art. 106-10; Ord. 28424)
SEC. 36-48.   RIGHTS RESERVED BY THE CITY.
   The city reserves the right to promulgate at any time other restrictions and
regulations as to the erection and maintenance of poles, wires, and other
apparatus used in connection with the transmission of electricity and, from
time to time, to require such poles as it deems proper to be removed and the
wires on the poles to be run in conduits upon such terms as the city deems
proper. (Code 1941, Art. 106-11; Ord. 28424)
SEC. 36-49.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
CHAPTER 37
POLICE
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
37-1.   Composition of police force.
Sec.
37-2.   Duties and powers of policemen.
Sec.
37-3.   Certificate of appointment; oath.
Sec.
37-4.   Assignment of men to beats; reports by chief; other duties of chief.
Sec.
37-5.   Arrest without warrant - Authority.
Sec.
37-6.   Same - When offense committed in officer’s presence.
Sec.
37-7.   Same - Person arrested to be brought before court.
Sec.
37-8.   Impersonation of police; blowing whistles, etc.
Sec.
37-9.   Moral character of policemen; references; bond.
Sec.
37-10.   Courtesy to city officers, etc.
Sec.
37-11.   Grounds for dismissal.
Sec.
37-12.   Restoration to prior rank upon dismissal from certain offices.
Sec.
37-13.   Beating or striking prisoner or other person.
Sec.
37-14.   Badges - Required to be worn.
Sec.
37-15.   Same - Description - Breast badge.
Sec.
37-16.   Same - Same - Cap badge.
Sec.
37-17.   Same - Additional colors and attachments.
Sec.
37-18.   Reserved.
Sec.
37-19.   Same - Loss or destruction; return of badges upon leaving department.
ARTICLE II.
CHIEF OF POLICE.
Sec.
37-20.   Qualifications; appointment; term.
Sec.
37-21.   Member of police department.
Sec.
37-22.   Oath and bond.
Sec.
37-23.   Powers and duties generally.
Sec.
37-24.   May close barrooms, etc.
Sec.
37-25.   Reports of breaches of the peace, etc.; abatement of nuisances.
Sec.
37-26.   Attendance at meetings of city council; summoning members, etc., to
same.
Sec.
37-27.   Deposit of moneys collected.
Sec.
37-28.   Keeper of the city prison.
Sec.
37-29.   Execution of processes; assistance to city attorney.
Sec.
37-30.   Release of prisoners without bond or before payment of fine.
ARTICLE III.
COMMUNITY POLICE OVERSIGHT BOARD.
Sec.
37-31.   Board created; appointment; term; meetings.
Sec.
37-31.1.   Definitions.
Sec.
37-31.2.   Duties.
Sec.
37-31.3.   Community engagement.
Sec.
37-32.   Functions.
Sec.
37-32.1.   Division referrals.
Sec.
37-32.2.   Mediation procedures.
Sec.
37-32.3.   Procedures for external administrative complaint review.
Sec.
37-33.   Procedures for critical incident review.
Sec.
37-34.   Confidentiality.
Sec.
37-35.   Witnesses.
Sec.
37-36.   Technical resource panel.
Sec.
37-37.   Administrative assistance.
Sec.
37-38.   Funding.
Sec.
37-38.1.   Transparency.
Sec.
37-38.2.   Chief of police.
ARTICLE IV.
RESERVED.
Secs. 37-39 thru 37-42.   Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
RESERVED.
Secs. 37-43 thru 37-59.   Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
RESERVED.
Secs. 37-60 thru 37-73.   Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
PERSONNEL OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
Sec.
37-74.   Offices created; enumeration; several offices of same grade.
ARTICLE VIII.
POLICE RESERVE BATTALLION.
Sec.
37-75.   Established.
Sec.
37-76.   Under control of chief of police.
Sec.
37-77.   Voluntary; limited in number.
Sec.
37-78.   Training.
Sec.
37-79.   Call to active service by chief of police.
Sec.
37-80.   Authority to carry weapons at the direction of the chief of police.
Sec.
37-81.   Supplementary capacity.
Sec.
37-82.   Uniforms.
Sec.
37-83.   No compensation; medical expenses.
Sec.
37-84.   Status as peace officers.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 37-1.   COMPOSITION OF POLICE FORCE.
   The police force of the city shall consist of the chief of police and such
number of officers and policemen as the city council may from time to time
authorize by ordinance. (Code 1941, Art. 109-1)
SEC. 37-2.   DUTIES AND POWERS OF POLICEMEN.
   It shall be the duty of the policemen to obey the orders of the city manager
and the chief of police, communicated to them in person or delivered to them in
writing, and to keep a faithful ward and watch in the districts which may be
assigned to them. They shall be further authorized to go into any dwelling
house, store, grocery or other place in which any person may have taken refuge
or be, who has, during the night, in their presence or hearing, committed a
felony or breach of the peace, where any felony or breach of the peace is about
to be committed or any noise, alarm, outcry or disturbance is being made. (Code
1941, Art. 109-2)
SEC. 37-3.   CERTIFICATE OF APPOINTMENT; OATH.
   Upon the appointment of any officer or member of the police force, it shall
be the duty of the city secretary to issue to him a certificate of such
appointment and upon receiving same such person shall, before entering upon the
duties of his office, take and subscribe to the oath of office required by the
constitution of the state, before any officer legally authorized to administer
oaths, which oath shall be endorsed on the certificate of appointment and filed
with the city secretary. (Code 1941, Art. 109-3)
SEC. 37-4.   ASSIGNMENT OF MEN TO BEATS; REPORTS BY CHIEF; OTHER DUTIES OF
CHIEF.
   The chief of police shall assign to each man his round of duty and may order
any of them to render service in any ward wherever and whenever, in his
opinion, the occasion shall require it. He shall report in writing to the city
manager the time actually served by each policeman, the time absent and such
other information as he may deem proper or may from time to time be required by
the city manager. He shall also see that the policemen are equipped with the
proper arms and equipment which any emergency shall require. He shall see that
they perform their duties and he shall report each failure promptly to the city
manager. He shall, as far as practicable, cause all orders of the city manager
to be faithfully executed. (Code 1941, Art. 109-4)
SEC. 37-5.   ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT - AUTHORITY.
   All policemen in the city, in the exercise of their sound discretion, may
arrest, without a warrant therefor, any person found in suspicious places or
any person found under circumstances reasonably tending to show that such
person has been guilty of some felony, breach of the peace, a violation of this
code or some other municipal ordinance or is about to commit some offense
against some state law or against this code or some other municipal ordinance.
(Code 1941, Art. 109-5; Ord. 4290)
SEC. 37-6.   SAME - WHEN OFFENSE COMMITTED IN OFFICER’S PRESENCE.
   It shall be the duty of every policeman to make arrests, without a warrant,
when a state law or city ordinance has been violated in his presence. But in
making such arrest and in conveying the offender to the city jail, he shall use
only such force as is necessary to effect his purpose. (Code 1941, Art. 109-9)
SEC. 37-7.   SAME - PERSON ARRESTED TO BE BROUGHT BEFORE COURT.
   In all cases of the arrest of any person without a warrant, the policeman
making the arrest shall bring such person forthwith before the municipal court,
if in session, and if not in session, the policeman shall commit such person to
the city jail, there to be safely kept in custody until such court shall be in
session, when such person shall be taken forthwith before such court, there to
be tried according to law; provided, that the chief of police or any policeman
may take good and sufficient bail from such offender for his appearance before
the municipal court. (Code 1941, Art. 109-6)
SEC. 37-8.   IMPERSONATION OF POLICE; BLOWING WHISTLES, ETC.
   No person shall falsely represent himself to be a police officer of
policeman, wear any badge used to designate a policeman or make use of or blow
any whistle similar to that used by the city police. (Code 1941, Art. 109-7)
SEC. 37-9.   MORAL CHARACTER OF POLICEMEN; REFERENCES; BOND.
   No person shall be appointed a member of the police force who does not have
a good moral character. When required by the chief of police or the governing
body, an appointee to the police force shall furnish references and may be
required to give bond in the sum of $250. (Code 1941, Art. 109-8)
SEC. 37-10.   COURTESY TO CITY OFFICERS, ETC.
   It shall be the duty of all policemen to treat all city officers, as well as
other persons with whom they come in contact in the discharge of their duties,
in a courteous and respectful manner. (Code 1941, Art. 109-10)
SEC. 37-11.   GROUNDS FOR DISMISSAL.
   Any member of the police force of the city shall be subject to dismissal for
any one of the following grounds:
      (a)   Being found loafing in a saloon or other public house.
      (b)   Being found in a state of intoxication or a single act of
drunkenness.
      (c)   Neglect of duty or misconduct in office.
      (d)   Violation of the lawful orders of the city manager, chief of police
or some other officer having authority to command. (Code 1941, Arts. 109-11,
109-12)
SEC. 37-12.   RESTORATION TO PRIOR RANK UPON DISMISSAL FROM CERTAIN OFFICES.
   If any person acting as inspector of police or deputy chief of police be
selected from the ranks of the police department and after such appointment
shall be dismissed or reduced from such position of inspector or deputy chief
on account of unfitness for discharge of the duties of such positions and not
for any cause justifying entire dismissal from the service, such person shall
be restored to the rank and grade held by him prior to his appointment as
inspector or deputy chief. (Ord. 3551)
SEC. 37-13.   BEATING OR STRIKING PRISONER OR OTHER PERSON.
   No police officer shall beat or strike any prisoner in his custody or any
other person with a gun or club, unless the same be absolutely necessary to
protect himself from serious bodily injury. Any police officer violating the
provisions of this section shall be subject to dismissal. (Code 1941, Art. 109-
13)
SEC. 37-14.   BADGES - REQUIRED TO BE WORN.
   Every member of the police department of the city shall wear the badges
designated for such department. (Code 1941, Art. 109-15; Ord. 5614)
SEC. 37-15.   SAME - DESCRIPTION - BREAST BADGE.
   There is hereby designated a breast badge, to be worn by each member of the
police department, which shall be roughly oblong in shape, three inches long at
its greatest length and two and one-sixteenth inches wide at its greatest
width, or two and one-half inches long at greatest length and one and seven-
eighths inches wide at its greatest width. It shall consist of a five pointed
star set against a field of blue flowed enamel, with two circular ropes in the
blue flowed enamel field. Such star shall have a large printed “D” in the
center and the two horizontal points of the star shall be capped with circles.
Above such star shall be printed the word “Police” in a convex arc. Just below
the left horizontal point of the star shall be printed the word “Dallas” and
below the right horizontal point of the star shall be printed the word “Texas”.
Between the two lower points of the star shall be the number of the badge
wearer, and just below such number at the base of the badge shall be printed
the rank of the policeman in a concave arc.
   All lettering and numerals except the “D” in the center of the star shall be
recessed in black enamel. Blue flowed enamel is to be recessed in 15 separate
places on the badge, such points to be on each side of the coiled ropes between
the points of the star. (Code 1941, Art. 109-15; Ord. Nos. 5614; 11743)
SEC. 37-16.    SAME - SAME - CAP BADGE.
   There is hereby designated a cap badge which shall be worn by all members of
the police department, which shall be roughly oblong in shape and shall be two
and three-quarters inches long at its greatest length and two and one-sixteenth
inches across at its greatest width, or two and three-eighths inches long at
its greatest length and one and three-fourths inches wide at its greatest
width. It shall consist of a five pointed star in the center thereof on a
background of a circular sea with white capped waves. Directly above such star
and centered on the upper point of the star shall be the word “Police” printed
in a convex arc. The crown of such badge shall be a spread eagle. Between the
left horizontal point of the star and the left lower point of the star shall be
printed the word “Dallas” and between the right horizontal point of the star
and the right lower point of the star shall be printed the word “Texas”.
Directly beneath and between the two lower points of the star shall be the
number of the badge wearer. The base of such badge shall consist of a wreath
each side of which flares upward around the center piece of the badge to touch
each wing of the eagle. Across the base of such wreath shall be printed the
rank of the policeman.
   All lettering and numerals on the cap badge shall be recessed in black
enamel. Blue flowed enamel shall be recessed under the wings of the eagle
between each star point and between the badge number and the leaves of the
wreath. In the area between each of the star points the metal is to show
through the blue flowed enamel to designate the white capped waves. (Code 1941,
Art. 109-15; Ord. Nos. 5614; 11743)
SEC. 37-17.   SAME - ADDITIONAL COLORS AND ATTACHMENTS.
   All other details of color and attachments on police badges shall be as
agreed upon by the purchasing agent of the city and the chief of police of the
city. (Code 1941, Art. 109-15; Ord. 5614)
SEC. 37-18.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 21721)
SEC. 37-19.   SAME - LOSS OR DESTRUCTION; RETURN OF BADGES UPON LEAVING
DEPARTMENT.
   Any member of the police department who shall lose or destroy his badges
shall be required to pay the cost of replacing same and whenever any member
shall leave the department he shall immediately deliver his badges to the chief
of police. (Code 1941, Art. 109-15; Ord. 5614)
ARTICLE II.
CHIEF OF POLICE.
SEC. 37-20.   QUALIFICATIONS; APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   There is hereby created the office of chief of police of the city, which
shall be filled by some suitable person who is a qualified voter of the city
and who possesses all the qualifications prescribed by the city charter for a
policeman. Such officer shall be appointed by the city manager in the manner
prescribed by the city charter and shall hold his office for the period of one
year from the date of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and
qualified. The chief of police shall be appointed annually on the fourth
Tuesday in April. (Code 1941, Art. 107-1)
SEC. 37-21.   MEMBER OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The person occupying the office of chief of police shall, by virtue of such
appointment and the exercise of the duties thereof, be and become a member of
the police department and shall be subject to all the ordinances and laws
applicable to policemen, including the statutes in regard to the firemen,
policemen and fire alarm operators’ pension fund. (Code 1941, Art. 107-2)
SEC. 37-22.   OATH AND BOND.
   The chief of police shall, before entering upon the duties of his office,
take the oath of office prescribed by the state constitution and execute and
deliver to the city a good and sufficient bond in the sum of $10,000, payable
to the city, conditioned that he will faithfully and strictly perform all the
duties required of him by the constitution, the laws of the state, the charter,
this code and ordinances of the city, and such further duties as may be
prescribed by the city council. Such bond shall have two or more good and
sufficient sureties thereon. (Code 1941, Art. 107-3)
SEC. 37-23.   POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The chief of police shall be the chief police officer of the city under the
city manager. He shall, either in person or by deputy, attend all meetings of
the city council, and wait upon the municipal court and promptly and faithfully
execute all writs and processes issued out of such court. He shall have like
power with the sheriff of the county to execute search warrants and other
writs. He shall quell riots, disorders, disturbances of the peace and
violations of every kind within the city and shall take into custody all
persons thus offending, and may take good and sufficient bail for the
appearance before the municipal court of any person charged with an offense
which the municipal court has jurisdiction to try. It shall be his duty to
arrest without warrant all violators of the laws and ordinances and all who
obstruct or interfere with him in the discharge of his duties. In the
prevention and suppression of crime and the arrest of offenders, he shall have
the same powers as the sheriff of a county under the laws of the state. He
shall perform such other duties and have such other powers as the city council
may by resolution or ordinance require or confer or as may be prescribed by
state law. (Code 1941, Art. 107-4)
SEC. 37-24.   MAY CLOSE BARROOMS, ETC.
   To prevent a breach of the peace, the chief of police shall have authority
to close any barroom, ballroom, drinking house, theater or any other place or
building of public resort. In the prevention and suppression of crime and the
arrest of offenders, he shall have and execute like power, jurisdiction and
authority as the sheriff of the county under the laws of the state. (Code 1941,
Art. 107-5)
SEC. 37-25.   REPORTS OF BREACHES OF THE PEACE, ETC.; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   The chief of police shall report to the city manager all breaches of the
peace and other violations of this code and other ordinances which may come to
his knowledge. He shall be diligent in the discovery of violations of this code
and ordinances defining and providing for the abatement of nuisances and for
the protection of streets, alleys, sidewalks, shade trees, etc., and shall
promptly give notice to the author of any nuisance, as defined by law, to abate
the same and shall see that the same is promptly abated or the offender brought
to trial. (Code 1941, Art. 107-6)
SEC. 37-26.   ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS OF CITY COUNCIL; SUMMONING MEMBERS, ETC.,
TO SAME.
   The chief of police shall, in person or by deputy, attend all meetings of
the city council. When requested by the city manager, he shall summon the
councilmen, the city secretary and the city attorney to attend meetings of the
city council. (Code 1941, Art. 107-7)
SEC. 37-27.   DEPOSIT OF MONEYS COLLECTED.
   The chief of police shall promptly deposit to the credit of the appropriate
city fund all moneys collected by him by virtue of any execution and all fines
and costs that may come into his hands. (Code 1941, Art. 107-7; Ord. 29645)
SEC. 37-28.   KEEPER OF THE CITY PRISON.
   The chief of police shall be the keeper of the city prison and shall keep
the same in a clean condition. He shall safely keep all prisoners consigned to
such jail and shall appoint a member of the police force to guard all prisoners
sentenced to hard labor on the streets and public works of the city while at
work. When, by their labor, such prisoners have paid their fines and costs, he
shall discharge them. For the keeping of such persons safely he may use the
city jail. (Code 1941, Art. 107-8)
SEC. 37-29.   EXECUTION OF PROCESSES; ASSISTANCE TO CITY ATTORNEY.
   The chief of police shall execute all processes issued out of the municipal
court, attend all sessions of such court and assist the city attorney, when so
required, in the discovery of testimony in all cases in which the city is
interested. (Code 1941, Art. 107-9)
SEC. 37-30.   RELEASE OF PRISONERS WITHOUT BOND OR BEFORE PAYMENT OF FINE.
   The chief of police shall have no right to release any prisoner before
conviction without bond, nor after conviction until the fine and costs against
him are paid. He shall be subject to dismissal from office if he allows parties
after conviction to go without satisfaction of the judgment against them, as
provided therein, and every dollar of fine and costs that by his negligence or
connivance is lost to the city or to any officer shall be deducted from his
salary. (Code 1941, Art. 107-10)
ARTICLE III.
COMMUNITY POLICE OVERSIGHT BOARD.
SEC. 37-31.   BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM; MEETINGS.
   (a)   There is hereby created the community police oversight board (the
"board") to be composed of 15 members. Each city council member shall appoint
one member to the board. It is the intent of the city council that the
membership of the board be representative of the diversity of the city.
   (b)   The mayor shall appoint the board chair, and the full city council
shall appoint the vice-chair.
   (c)   Each member shall be appointed for a two-year term beginning on
October 1 of each odd-numbered year. Members shall serve until their successors
are appointed and qualified.
   (d)   The following persons shall be disqualified for appointment to and
service on the board:
      (1)   persons who are in violation of Chapter 12A, "Code of Ethics" of
the city code and persons disqualified from appointment pursuant to Section 8-
1.4 of the city code;
      (2)   persons who are currently employed by the department, or have an
immediate family member, as defined in Section 34-4(26) of the Dallas City
Code, who is an employee of the Dallas Police Department; and
      (3)   persons who are employees or business associates of either an
adversary party or a representative of an adversary party, and persons who have
a pecuniary interest, in any pending litigation or claim against the city
relating to the board or the police department or against any individual
officer or employee of the police department (unless unrelated to such
individual's office or employment).
   (e)   Any board member who is disqualified for appointment to and service on
the board under Subsection (d) shall forfeit membership on the board. Upon
determination by the board chair that a board member is so disqualified, the
chair will notify that board member and the city secretary. The city secretary
will then notify the city council that there is a vacancy on the board. A board
member required to forfeit board membership will be entitled to a public
hearing in accordance with Section 17, Chapter XXIV of the city charter.
   (f)   Under no circumstances may the city council or the board chair be
authorized to waive the requirements for appointment to and service on the
board referenced in Subsection (d).
   (g)   Each board member must attend training necessary to execute the
board's duties including training on police procedures.
   (h)   The board must meet at least once each month and at other times at the
call of the chair.
   (i)   The office of community police oversight provides support services to
the board.
   (j)   For purposes of Section 8-1.4(a)(4) of this code, the police
department is deemed a department providing support services to the board.
(Ord. Nos. 19818; 19983; 21153; 21514; 22259; 29645; 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-31.1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   BOARD means the community police oversight board.
      (2)   CHIEF means the chief of police, as described in Section 37-20, or
the chief's representative.
      (3)   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION means any information that may not be
obtained by the public under the Texas Public Information Act. When submitting
information to the board, the police department shall place identifying marks
on any confidential information.
      (4)   CRITICAL INCIDENT means an officer-involved shooting or a use of
force incident that results in serious bodily injury or death.
      (5)   DEPARTMENT means the Dallas police department.
      (6)   DIRECTOR means the director/monitor of the office of community
police oversight or the director/monitor's representative, unless otherwise
stated.
      (7)   DIVISION REFERRAL means an investigation into an external
administrative complaint that is conducted by the supervisor of an officer.
      (8)   EXTERNAL ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLAINT means a written complaint
submitted to either the office of community police oversight, the board, or the
department by a person, who is not a city employee, that alleges a complaint of
police procedures, treatment of residents, abuse, harassment, or violation of
civil rights against a city police officer that results in mediation, a
division referral, or an investigation conducted by the internal affairs
division of the department.
      (9)   INTERNAL AFFAIRS DIVISION means a staff unit of the department.
      (10)   MEDIATION means a voluntary, informal process of communication and
conciliation of minor external administrative complaints of police misconduct,
conducted by an independent, certified mediator.
      (11)   OFFICE means the office of community police oversight.
      (12)   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY means bodily injury that creates a risk of
death or that causes serious permanent or temporary disfigurement or loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, including, but not
limited to, a broken long bone, rib, or fracture of the skull; mechanical
injury of the neck and upper airways; multiple severe bruises wherever located;
a sharp or blunt injury requiring sutures or clips; or a wound leading to blood
loss requiring volume replacement. (Ord. 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-31.2.   DUTIES.
   The board shall perform the following duties to provide residents fair and
thorough oversight of the department:
      (1)   provide an accessible process that ensures fair acceptance and
processing of external administrative complaints;
      (2)   direct the director to initiate an independent administrative
investigation into a complaint by a member of the public investigated by the
internal affairs division, as set forth in Sections 37-32.3 and 37-33;
      (3)   provide a report at least annually to the appropriate council
committee in addition to any reports required under Chapter 8; and
      (4)   engage in community outreach. (Ord. 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-31.3.   COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT.
   The board shall conduct community outreach to create awareness about the
board, the office, and the complaint process. The board may also provide
outreach to promote transparency and accountability and to foster community
relationships with the police department. (Ord. 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-32.   FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   Subject to the procedural requirements set forth in Sections 37-32.3
and 37-33, the board shall have authority to:
      (1)   Review the facts and evidence pertaining to a critical incident or
external administrative complaint against a city police officer following:
         (A)   completion of all findings and recommendations of the internal
affairs division of the department;
         (B)   the final decision within the department determining what, if
any, disciplinary action will be taken; and
         (C)   if grand jury proceedings are anticipated, the conclusion of all
grand jury proceedings relating to a city police officer's conduct in the
incident or complaint.
      (2)   Accept from members of the public written complaints, on a paper or
online form provided by the director with input by the department, of police
procedures, treatment of members of the public, abuse, harassment, violation of
civil rights, serious injury, or fatality and refer the complaints to the
office and the internal affairs division of the department for investigation.
      (3)   When the board is not satisfied with the findings of the police
department internal affairs division's investigation of a critical incident or
external administrative complaint which is properly before the board, the board
may direct the director to initiate an independent investigation into the
internal affairs division investigation of a critical incident or an external
administrative complaint.
      (4)   Take sworn testimony from witnesses relating to the internal
affairs division investigation of a critical incident or external
administrative complaint pursuant to Section 37-35.
      (5)   Subpoena witnesses in accordance with Section 37-35.
      (6)   Request the city manager to review disciplinary action by the chief
in a case when the board considers it appropriate.
      (7)   Recommend to the chief and the city manager improvements in
department procedures, practices, training, and the early warning system.
   (b)   The board shall act as an advisory board to the chief, the city
manager, and the city council.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the
board shall not:
      (1)   take any action, nor recommend to or request the city council or
any other city authority to take any action, which interferes in any manner
with the appointment, removal, or discipline of any person by the city manager
or any of his subordinates;
      (2)   review the facts and evidence of a complaint nor accept a complaint
from a police officer which pertains to another police officer for which the
city personnel rules or police general orders provide a grievance or appeal
procedure.
      (3)   review the facts and evidence of a complaint nor accept a complaint
from a person concerning a matter which is the subject of pending civil
litigation to which the city or a city employee is a party. (Ord. Nos. 19818;
19983; 21131; 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-32.1.   DIVISION REFERRALS.
   The department shall take appropriate action on division referrals, provide
the director with confirmation that the matter has been addressed, and provide
the director access to relevant information. (Ord. 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-32.2.   MEDIATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this section, a complainant may
request to mediate an external administrative complaint for minor allegations
of misconduct at any time during the external administrative complaint process.
Mediation does not include negotiation of demands for monetary or equitable
relief.
   (b)   Notice. The director shall inform a complainant that mediation may be
available as an alternative to the review processes upon receiving notice of a
complaint.
   (c)   Eligibility. For an external administrative complaint to be eligible
for mediation, the following requirements must be met:
      (1)   Both the complainant and officer must agree to participate;
      (2)   The officer has not resolved a prior complaint through mediation in
the last six months;
      (3)   The director must determine that mediation is appropriate for the
alleged complaint;
      (4)   The officer must be deemed eligible for mediation by the internal
affairs division or the chief; and
      (5)   There must not be any pending claims, civil litigation, or criminal
investigations involving the alleged incident.
   (d)   Form. The director shall provide an eligible complainant a form to
request mediation.
   (e)   Administration. The director will oversee administration of the
mediation process including:
      (1)   providing a forum for the mediation; and
      (2)   scheduling the mediation within a reasonable time.
   (f)   Procedure.
      (1)    After confirmation that the complaint and the parties are eligible
for mediation the director shall contact the internal affairs division to
advise the city police officer's chain of command of the complaint and the
complainant's decision to pursue mediation.
      (2)   After receiving notification from the city police officer's chain
of command, the officer shall contact the internal affairs division to accept
or decline the opportunity to mediate the complaint.
      (3)   If the officer declines the mediation, the complainant may choose
to pursue the complaint through the external administrative process.
   (g)   Informational requests. The director and the department must comply
with the mediator's requests for information during the mediation process.
   (h)   Final administrative remedy. Mediation constitutes the final
administrative remedy.
   (i)   Confidentiality required. Participants in the mediation process shall
sign a confidentiality agreement that provides:
      (1)   That participation in mediation and any statements made during
mediation are not admissible in court.
      (2)   That documents or information created or retained pursuant to
mediation cannot be subpoenaed.
      (3)   That the mediator and participating staff may not be called as
witnesses regarding incidents discussed during mediation. (Ord. 31192, eff. 10/
1/19)
SEC. 37-32.3.   PROCEDURES FOR EXTERNAL ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLAINT REVIEW.
   (a)   Internal affairs division investigation.
      (1)   Monitoring. During the pendency of an internal affairs division
investigation into an external administrative complaint, the director may
monitor the investigation including observing witness interviews, submitting
recommendations of interview inquiries, and issuing evidentiary retention
requests. Additionally, the internal affairs division must provide the director
with timely and free access to investigative evidence and relevant police data.
At any time during the internal affairs division investigation, the director
may discuss the investigation with the chief or ask questions regarding the
investigation.
      (2)   Notification. When the internal affairs division notifies a
complainant of its findings, it shall:
         (A)   provide a form to the complainant which can be submitted to the
board or the director if the complainant desires to request review of the
findings; and
         (B)   notify the board and director of those findings and any
recommendations.
      (3)   Director-initiated independent investigations. At the close of the
internal affairs division investigation, if the director disagrees with the
findings of the investigation, the director may initiate an independent
investigation.
         (A)   When the independent investigation is complete, the director
shall present the findings of the investigation to the board.
         (B)   The board shall forward those findings and any recommendations
to the chief.
         (C)   The chief shall provide the board written acknowledgement of
receipt of the recommendations.
         (D)   The chief retains final decision-making authority regarding
disciplinary matters and the disposition of administrative and criminal
investigations.
   (b)   Complainant requests for review process.
      (1)   Within 30 days after notification of the results of the internal
affairs division investigation, a complainant may request a review of the
internal affairs division findings to the office on a form provided by the
office.
      (2)   For requests for review filed by a complainant, the director shall
review the internal affairs division investigation and present those findings
to the board.
      (3)   After the director presents the review of the internal affairs
division investigation to the board, the board may, by majority vote, direct
the director to initiate an independent investigation or may choose to take no
further action.
         (A)   When the independent investigation is complete, the director
shall present the findings of the investigation to the board and make
recommendations to the board for further action, if any.
         (B)   The board shall review the director's findings and make
recommendations as the board deems appropriate.
         (C)   When requested, the director shall forward the results of the
investigation and the recommendations of the board to the chief, the city
manager, or the appropriate city council committee.
         (D)   The chief shall provide the board written acknowledgement of
receipt of the recommendations.
         (E)   The chief retains final decision-making authority regarding
disciplinary matters and the disposition of administrative and criminal
investigations.
      (4)   Complainant request for review to the board constitutes the final
administrative remedy.
   (c)   Postponement. Board review or independent investigation of any
incident, complaint, or request for review, whether received by the board or
director, shall be postponed pending:
      (1)   completion of all findings and recommendations of the internal
affairs division;
      (2)   the final decision within the department regarding disciplinary
action, if any;
      (3)   the conclusion of any claim or civil litigation involving the
incident or complaint; and
      (4)   if grand jury proceedings are anticipated, the conclusion of all
grand jury proceedings relating to a city police officer's conduct in the
incident or complaint.
   (d)    Department monitoring. The department may monitor investigations
conducted by the office subject to the same restrictions and requirements
imposed on the director when monitoring internal affairs division
investigations. (Ord. 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-33.   PROCEDURES FOR CRITICAL INCIDENT REVIEW.
   (a)   The chief shall provide the board and the director with timely
notification of all critical incidents. The director may participate in
preliminary briefings related to the critical incident.
   (b)   The director may monitor the investigation of all critical incidents.
The purpose of monitoring critical incidents is to ensure that the
investigation is comprehensive, objective, impartial, and consistent with
appropriate investigative protocols.
      (1)   If the director is unavailable, a person approved by the city
manager may serve in this capacity during the director's absence.
      (2)   In this subsection DIRECTOR does not include the director's
representative.
   (c)   Board review or independent investigation of any incident, complaint,
or request for review, whether received by the board or director, shall be
postponed pending:
      (1)   completion of all findings and recommendations of the internal
affairs division;
      (2)   the final decision within the department determining what, if any,
disciplinary action will be taken;
      (3)   the conclusion of any claim or civil litigation involving the
incident or complaint; and
      (4)   if grand jury proceedings are anticipated, the conclusion of all
grand jury proceedings relating to the incident or complaint.
   (d)   The director may monitor the investigation including observing witness
interviews, submitting recommendations of interview inquiries, reviewing
documentary and physical evidence, and accessing relevant police data. The
director may meet with the chief throughout the investigation to ask questions
and discuss any areas of concern identified while monitoring.
   (e)   Before the conclusion of the criminal investigation, the director may
meet with the chief to hear preliminary findings and provide feedback about the
investigatory process. The director may provide the chief with a recommendation
on the outcome of the investigation.
   (f)   The chief shall review all information and determine what actions, if
any, are warranted.
   (g)   Throughout the investigation, per confidentiality requirements, the
director shall not update the board or anyone else on the status of the
investigation. The director may provide a report to the board at the conclusion
of both the criminal and the administrative investigations to attest whether
the criminal investigation was comprehensive, objective, impartial, and
consistent with appropriate investigative protocols.
   (h)   The director shall provide a report to the board, after the internal
affairs division investigation of the critical incident is complete, regarding
department compliance with Subsection (b) above.
   (i)   The board and the director may engage in community outreach as needed
after the occurrence of a critical incident.
   (j)   The chief retains final decision-making authority regarding
disciplinary matters and the disposition of administrative and criminal
investigations. (Ord. Nos. 19818; 19983; 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-34.   CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   Community police oversight board. The board in reviewing a personnel
matter shall hold closed meetings in compliance with the Texas Open Meetings
Act, acting in a nonjudicial capacity. The confidentiality of any file, record,
or other data received by the board in its review of an incident or a complaint
shall be strictly maintained by every member of the board.
      (1)   Board members commit an offense if they disclose to another person
confidential information obtained in the course of their board duties.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under Paragraph (1) that the
disclosure was made:
         (A)   to another board member or to city staff assigned to the board;
or
         (B)   as compelled testimony in a court proceeding.
      (3)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.
      (4)   Any board member who discloses confidential information to anyone
other than another board member or city staff member assigned to the board or
as compelled testimony in a court proceeding shall forfeit membership on the
board. Upon determination by the chairman of the board that a board member has
disclosed confidential information, the chairman shall notify that board member
and the city secretary. The city secretary shall then notify the city council
that there is a vacancy on the board. A board member required to forfeit board
membership under this section will be entitled to a public hearing in
accordance with Section 17, Chapter XXIV of the city charter. If requested by
the board member, the city council will immediately schedule a hearing to be
held at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. The board member may
designate either a public or closed hearing.
   (b)   Office of community police oversight. The confidentiality of any
investigative file, record, or other data received by the director or the
director's staff during the briefing, review, or monitoring of an incident or a
complaint shall be strictly maintained. The director shall not share any
confidential information with the board that is obtained during the monitoring
of a critical incident. Any staff member of the office who discloses
confidential information to another person may be subjected to disciplinary
action, up to and including termination of employment.
      (1)   The director or any member of the office commits an offense if they
disclose to another person confidential information obtained in the course or
performance of his duties.
      (2)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution under Paragraph (1) that the
disclosure was made:
         (A)   to the city manager, an assistant city manager, the director or
a staff member of the office, the chief, or employees of the department
authorized to receive the information;
         (B)   as compelled testimony in a court proceeding; or
         (C)   pursuant to a valid request from the district attorney's office.
(Ord. Nos. 19818; 19903; 19983; 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-35.   WITNESSES.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, the board shall have authority to
issue subpoenas upon a majority vote of the board.
   (b)   The board may not subpoena a city employee or police officer.
   (c)   The board may request statements from city employees or police
officers through the office. These statements must be provided to the office in
a non-public setting.
   (d)   Before a city employee or police officer is required to make a
statement to the office a Garrity warning must be issued to the employee. The
Garrity protections available to a city employee or police officer during an
administrative investigation apply to testimony or a statement made in
connection with an investigation of the director.
   (e)   Every person appearing before the board to testify concerning an
incident or a complaint being reviewed shall have the right to counsel. All
statements and testimony before the board must be given under oath. Nothing in
this article shall be construed to deprive any individual of rights given under
constitutional, statutory or common law.
   (f)   If a city police officer appears before the board, pursuant to a board
request, the officer shall be entitled to:
      (1)   payment by the city of reasonable fees for private legal counsel of
the city police officer's choice as provided for in Chapter 12A and Chapter
31A; and
      (2)   all rights afforded an individual under constitutional, statutory,
or common law to the full extent as would be afforded to that officer as a
defendant in a criminal proceeding.
   (g)   A city police officer shall not be subjected to departmental or other
administrative disciplinary action:
      (1)   for refusing to appear voluntarily before the board;
      (2)   for refusing to answer any question on constitutional grounds or
otherwise upon recommendation of legal counsel; or
      (3)   based upon the subject matter of that officer's testimony provided
to the board or to any investigator of the board.
(Ord. Nos. 19818; 19903; 19983; 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-36.   TECHNICAL RESOURCE PANEL.
   (a)   There is hereby created the technical resource panel to be composed of
three members appointed by the city manager.
      (1)   The technical resource panel is not a board or commission subject
to Chapter 8 of this code or Chapter XXIV, Section 13 of the city charter.
      (2)   The director shall assist the city manager in the recruitment of
qualified members.
   (b)   Each member of the technical resource panel shall be an individual
with at least 10 years of law enforcement experience in a recognized local,
county, state, or federal law enforcement agency and, to the extent possible,
appointments to the technical resource panel will be representative of the
ethnic diversity of the city and will include individuals with substantial
patrol officer experience.
   (c)   Active law enforcement professionals employed in Dallas County by the
state, the county, or any local government may not be members of the technical
resource panel. In addition, former city of Dallas police officers may not be
members of the technical resource panel. Members of the technical resource
panel are not required to be residents of the city nor qualified voters in the
city.
   (d)   Members of the technical resource panel shall serve three-year terms,
shall be subject to the same conflict of interest and confidentiality
restrictions as are applicable to members of the board, and shall be subject to
forfeiture of membership on the same basis as members of the board.
   (e)   Members of the technical resource panel shall attend and participate
fully in all meetings and deliberations of the board, and at the board's
discretion, attend and participate in closed sessions, but shall not be
entitled to vote as members of the board.
   (f)   The technical resource panel shall use its expertise and experience in
law enforcement matters and procedures to assist the board to the fullest
extent possible in the review and investigation of all incidents and complaints
coming before the board.
   (g)   The technical resource panel shall not have any oversight
responsibility or oversight authority with respect to the board.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits the director or the board acting
through the director from seeking additional outside technical expertise and
advice as necessary. (Ord. Nos. 19818; 19983; 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-37.   ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANCE.
   The director shall designate staff to receive and log complaints for
referral to the office or the department. The log of complaints must be
centrally located and accessible by the office and the department. Staff shall
monitor external administrative investigations conducted by the internal
affairs division; oversee mediations; independently investigate administrative
investigations upon the conclusion of an internal affairs investigation (case
disposition and discipline); monitor critical incidents investigated by the
department, and further aid the board and the technical resource panel in their
work. Additionally, the director shall assist the board with preparing the
annual report required under Section 8-1.1 and any other reports as necessary.
(Ord. Nos. 19983; 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-38.   FUNDING.
   No funding for the board, the office, or the technical resource panel,
including expenses of the board, the office, and the committee and of persons
appearing before the board, shall be included in the budget for the department,
all such funding to be provided by the city from separate sources. (Ord. Nos.
19983; 31192, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 37-38.1.   TRANSPARENCY.
   The board shall work with the office and the chief to establish metrics for
transparency related to the board's activities and performance, including
providing an annual report and an engagement calendar. (Ord. 31192, eff. 10/1/
19)
SEC. 37-38.2.   CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (a)   The chief shall provide a report to the board briefly describing all
complaints filed by members of the public with the internal affairs division
when requested to do so by the board.
   (b)   The chief shall promulgate general orders and standard operating
procedures in compliance with this article. The chief has discretion in how and
whether to implement changes recommended by the board.
   (c)   Nothing in this article should be construed as removing or limiting
the chief's authority to issue final disciplinary actions or to oversee the
administration of the department in accordance with the city charter. (Ord.
31192, eff. 10/1/19)
ARTICLE IV.
RESERVED.
SECS. 37-39 THRU 37-42.
(Repealed by Ord. 17226)
ARTICLE V.
RESERVED.
SECS. 37-43 THRU 37-59.
(Repealed by Ord. 14940)
ARTICLE VI.
RESERVED.
SECS. 37-60 THRU 37-73.
(Repealed by Ord. 15519)
ARTICLE VII.
PERSONNEL OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
SEC. 37-74.   OFFICES CREATED; ENUMERATION; SEVERAL OFFICES OF SAME GRADE.
   Editor’s Note - The number of offices of the police department are not set
out in the code but are on file in the office of the city secretary.
ARTICLE VIII.
POLICE RESERVE BATTALION.
SEC. 37-75.   ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established the reserve battalion of the city of Dallas
police department which shall be a voluntary force of reserve policemen
hereafter referred to as the “reserve battalion.” (Ord. 14267)
SEC. 37-76.   UNDER CONTROL OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The reserve battalion shall function under the general direction and control
of the chief of police, subject to the supervision of the city manager, and
also subject to such rules, regulations, and orders as may be promulgated from
time to time by the chief of police in accordance with the authority vested in
the chief of police by the city charter or ordinances of the city of Dallas.
(Ord. 14267)
SEC. 37-77.   VOLUNTARY; LIMITED IN NUMBER.
   The reserve battalion shall be an auxiliary police force composed of
volunteers who shall serve without pay. The chief of police shall establish the
size, composition, and organization of the reserve battalion, which shall not
exceed in number the total number of regular police officers authorized by
ordinance. (Ord. 14267)
SEC. 37-78.   TRAINING.
   Prior to performing any duties as a reserve police officer, each police
reserve applicant shall receive training from the Dallas police department in
accordance with the requirements of the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement
Officer Standards and Education and shall apply for certification by said
commission as a reserve police officer. The names of reserve police applicants
who have received certification from the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement
Officer Standards and Education shall be submitted to the city council for
approval. (Ord. Nos. 14267; 17393)
SEC. 37-79.   CALL TO ACTIVE SERVICE BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Members of the reserve battalion shall serve at the discretion of the chief
of police and may be called into active service at any time the chief of police
considers it necessary to have additional police officers to preserve the peace
and enforce the law. (Ord. 14267)
SEC. 37-80.   AUTHORITY TO CARRY WEAPONS AT THE DIRECTION OF THE CHIEF OF
POLICE.
   A person appointed to serve as a reserve police officer of the reserve
battalion may carry a weapon only at the express direction of the chief of
police. The chief of police may authorize a reserve police officer to carry a
weapon only when discharging official duties as a peace officer, except that
the chief of police may authorize a reserve police officer who is a peace
officer as described in Article 2.12 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure,
as amended, to carry a weapon or act as a peace officer at all times,
regardless of whether the person is engaged in the actual discharge of official
duties. (Ord. Nos. 14267; 25564)
SEC. 37-81.   SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY.
   Reserve police officers of the reserve battalion shall act only in a
supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume
the full-time duties of regular police officers. (Ord. 14267)
SEC. 37-82.   UNIFORMS.
   The chief of police may provide uniforms and equipment for the reserve
battalion from existing supplies, and may cause to be purchased special items
of identification as necessary, to include shoulder patches, badges, and cap
pieces bearing the words “Dallas Police Reserves”. (Ord. 14267)
SEC. 37-83.   NO COMPENSATION; MEDICAL EXPENSES.
   No reserve police officer appointed pursuant to this article shall be
entitled to compensation for service. A police reserve officer who sustains
injury in the course of performing official duties may receive hospital and
medical assistance in the same manner as provided for fulltime police officers;
provided, however, that nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize
or permit a member of the reserve battalion to become eligible for
participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state statute, to which
regular officers may become a member by payroll deductions or otherwise. (Ord.
14267)
SEC. 37-84.   STATUS AS PEACE OFFICERS.
   Reserve officers of the reserve battalion shall serve as peace officers
during the actual discharge of official duties, subject to all times to the
direction, control, and supervisory authority of the chief of police. (Ord.
14267)
CHAPTER 37A
POLICE AND FIRE WELFARE FUND
Sec.
37A-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
37A-2.   Creation of board.
Sec.
37A-3.   Terms of board.
Sec.
37A-4.   Powers and duties of the board.
Sec.
37A-5.   Qualified beneficiaries.
Sec.
37A-6.   Investigation and payment of grant-in- aid.
Sec.
37A-7.   Establishment of trust fund.
Sec.
37A-8.   Nonvested rights.
Sec.
37A-9.   Nonalienation of benefits.
SEC. 37A-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   (1)   BENEFACTOR means a person who donates or gives money, stocks, bonds,
or real or personal property to the fund for the benefit of qualified
beneficiaries.
   (2)   BENEFICIARY means a person designated in Section
37A-5.
   (3)   BOARD means the board of trustees of the city police and fire welfare
fund.
   (4)   DEPENDENT CHILD means an unmarried person who immediately preceding
the death of his parent, received over half of his support in each calendar
year from the parent, who died as a result of an occurrence described in
Section
37A-5(a).
   (5)   DEPENDENT PARENT means the parent of a person who died as a result of
an occurrence described in Section
37A-5(a) and who is:
      (A)   totally and permanently disabled and received over half of his
support in each calendar year from the deceased person; or
      (B)   65 years of age or older.
   (6)   DONATION means a gift or contribution in the form of money, stocks,
bonds, or real or personal property by a benefactor.
   (7)   GRANT-IN-AID means a loan or gift of money to a beneficiary.
   (8)   GUARDIAN means the court-appointed guardian or conservator of a
dependent child or dependent parent.
   (9)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, association or other legal
entity.
   (10)   QUORUM means two members of the board.
   (11)   SPOUSE means the surviving husband or wife of a person who died as a
result of an occurrence described in Section
37A-5(a). (Ord. 16126)
SEC. 37A-2.   CREATION OF BOARD.
   (a)   There is hereby created the police and fire welfare fund and the board
of trustees of the police and fire welfare fund.
   (b)   The board shall be composed of five persons consisting of:
      (1)   one person appointed by the city council who shall be a member of
the city council;
      (2)   the chief of the Dallas police department;
      (3)   the chief of the Dallas fire department;
      (4)   the city manager or his designee; and
      (5)   the city controller.
   (c)   The chief of police shall serve as chairman for a term of two years
from the effective date of this ordinance. The fire chief shall succeed the
chief of police as chairman and shall serve for a term of two years. The chief
of police and the fire chief shall then alternately serve as chairman for terms
of two years, each succeeding the other upon the expiration of their terms.
   (d)   The chairman shall call a meeting at any time there is business of the
board to be conducted. (Ord. 16126)
SEC. 37A-3.   TERMS OF THE BOARD.
   (a)   The board member appointed by the city council shall serve for a term
of two years without remuneration. The appointment shall correspond to the
appointment of other city boards and commissions as provided by the charter and
ordinances of the city of Dallas.
   (b)   The chief of police and the fire chief shall serve as long as they
hold their respective positions. (Ord. 16126)
SEC. 37A-4.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   (a)   The board shall have the power and duty to:
      (1)   administer the welfare fund;
      (2)   adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter and the Constitution and laws of this state;
      (3)   receive private funds and donations as the public may desire to
donate, with full authority to invest, re-invest, alter and change the funds of
the welfare fund;
      (4)   disburse funds or its equivalent in kind to the qualified
beneficiaries;
      (5)   appoint as administrator the administrator of the police and fire
pension fund to carry out the business of the board and who shall be the
custodian of the records of the fund and who shall serve without remuneration;
      (6)   make a final determination of the eligibility of a beneficiary for
an award or grant-in-aid from the welfare fund;
      (7)   issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and production of
records, papers, or other objects, administer oaths to witnesses, and examine
witnesses on any matter relating to an award or grant- in-aid from the welfare
fund.
   (b)   No award, grant-in-aid, or expenditure shall be made from the welfare
fund without the approval of the board.
   (c)   The board shall have complete discretionary authority to either grant
or deny an award or grant-in- aid to a potential qualified beneficiary. (Ord.
16126)
SEC. 37A-5.   QUALIFIED BENEFICIARIES.
   (a)   The following persons are hereby designated as qualified beneficiaries
for an award from the welfare fund:
      (1)   a police officer, fire fighter, park department police officer,
city marshal, deputy city marshal, security officer, or public service officer
injured while in the performance of his official duties while employed by the
city of Dallas;
      (2)   the spouse, the dependent child, or dependent parent of any city
employee designated in Subsection (1) above who lost his life while in the
performance of his official duties;
      (3)   a person injured while assisting any city employee designated in
subsection (1) above in an emergency, either voluntarily or when called upon
for assistance, or if the injury results in death, then the spouse, dependent
child, or dependent parent of the person;
      (4)   a reserve police officer or reserve fire fighter injured while
serving in his capacity as a reserve police officer or reserve fire fighter, or
if the injury results in death, then the spouse, dependent child, or dependent
parent of the reserve police officer or reserve fire fighter when the injury
results in death.
   (b)   If a surviving illegitimate child makes a claim as a qualified
beneficiary, the board may only disburse funds or property if the child
establishes his heirship in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 16126)
SEC. 37A-6.   INVESTIGATION AND PAYMENT OF GRANT-IN-AID.
   (a)   Upon a request for a grant-in-aid, the board shall initiate an
investigation of the application by an appropriate division within the
employee’s department. The investigation shall determine the qualification and
need of the applicant. After completion of the investigation, the department
head shall submit a written report to the board and shall make a recommendation
for approval or denial of the request.
   (b)   The applicant shall cooperate with the investigation and the board.
The failure of the applicant to cooperate or disclose necessary information to
the investigator or the board, or be truthful, shall be grounds for
disqualification or immediate repayment of the grant-in-aid regardless of need
or qualification.
   (c)   The beneficiary shall attempt a repayment of the grant-in-aid. The
terms and schedule of repayment either in whole or in part, shall be determined
by the board depending on the financial circumstances of the beneficiary. The
board shall have the authority to waive repayment, either in whole or in part,
depending on the financial circumstances of the beneficiary. (Ord. 16126)
SEC. 37A-7.   ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUST FUND.
   (a)   The board shall establish a separate general trust fund for deposit of
all donations and the assets of the welfare fund. The trust fund shall be
established as a separate city trust account with the city treasurer. Upon
receipt of general contributions, they shall be deposited to the credit of the
appropriate city fund.
   (b)   In the event the board receives contributions from a benefactor
designating specific qualified beneficiaries, the donations shall be deposited
in the general welfare trust fund. Upon request the city controller will
provide the board an accounting of the police and fire welfare fund.
   (c)   In the event the welfare fund receives donations from private
benefactors in the form of other valuable consideration, such as stocks, bonds,
real or personal property, the ownership of that property shall be held by the
welfare fund in trust for the qualified beneficiaries until title can be
transferred according to the directions of the benefactor. If the benefactor
makes a donation without any specific instructions, the board shall have the
power and authority to hold, transfer, convey, lend, or sell the property in a
manner the board believes is in the best interests of the beneficiaries of the
welfare fund. After approval of the board, the city controller shall have the
authority to effectuate any transaction on behalf of the board. (Ord. Nos.
16126; 29645)
SEC. 37A-8.   NONVESTED RIGHTS.
   Qualified beneficiaries, heirs, and their assigns shall not have any vested
right, title, or interest, future or otherwise, in any donation or gift to the
welfare fund. (Ord. 16126)
SEC. 37A-9.   NONALIENATION OF BENEFITS.
   Donations, gifts, and benefits payable under the welfare fund shall be
exempt from attachment, execution, garnishment, judgments and all other suits
or claims, and shall not be assignable or transferable. (Ord. 16126)
CHAPTER 38
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
CHAPTER 38A
PROMOTERS
Sec.
38A-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
38A-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
38A-3.   Commercial promoter registration.
Sec.
38A-4.   Commercial promoter registration fee.
Sec.
38A-5.   Safety plan required.
Sec.
38A-6.   Safety plan requirements.
Sec.
38A-7.   Suspension.
Sec.
38A-8.   Emergency response cost recovery.
Sec.
38A-9.   Offenses.
Sec.
38A-10.   Penalty.
SEC. 38A-1.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure promoted events are operated in a
way that safeguards the residents, visitors, and employees attending promoted
events. (Ord. 32239)
SEC. 38A-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   COMMERCIAL PROMOTER means a person engaged in the business of
commercial promotion, publicizing, planning, or production of a promoted event
who receives all or a percentage of revenues from the sale of alcohol, food,
beverages, fees charged to vendors, or fees charged to the public for
admission.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL PROMOTION includes publicizing, planning, or producing
by any means a promoted event by a commercial promoter.
      (3)   DIRECTOR means the director of the Office of Special Events or the
director's designated representative.
      (4)   OWNER means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant
in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a
part of such building or land.
      (5)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, firm, government or
governmental subdivision, partnership, joint venture, limited liability
company, or other business entity.
      (6)   PROMOTED EVENT means an indoor commercial event open to the public,
or outdoor commercial event with an expected occupancy over 100 that is open to
the public.
         (A)   Promoted events include, but are not limited to:
            (i)   music or dance shows that may include a disc jockey where
fees may be charged to vendors or members of the public for participation or
admission; or
            (ii)   concerts, outdoor activities, and theatrical and other
performances where fees are charged to vendors or members of the public for
participation or admission.
         (B)   A promoted event does not include:
            (i)   an event that requires a special event permit or has been
issued a special event permit under
Chapter 42A;
            (ii)    an event that occurs on city-owned property or at a city-
owned facility with city permission;
         (C)    an event that occurs at a location with a valid specific use
permit and a certificate of occupancy for a use that allows the event; or
         (D)   an event that is hosted by and produced for the benefit of a
registered 501(c)(3) organization under 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(c)(3).
      (7)   PROPERTY means real property and personal property.
      (8)   VENUE OPERATOR means the person with control over a location and
property where the action or event occurs. Venue operators may include
commercial promoters, business owners, or business operators. (Ord. 32239)
SEC. 38A-3.   COMMERCIAL PROMOTER REGISTRATION.
   (a)   A person engaging in commercial promotion shall register with the city
as a commercial promoter. Commercial promoter registration must be submitted on
a form provided by the director for that purpose.
   (b)   A complete commercial promoter registration application must contain
the following information:
      (1)   The legal name, street address, mailing address, electronic mailing
address, and telephone number of the registrant.
      (2)   Any aliases the registrant intends to use in connection with any
commercial promotion.
      (3)   The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, electronic mailing
addresses, and telephone numbers of all partnerships, corporations, or other
business entities (including DBAs) associated with the registrant that will
appear on any marketing materials advertising, promoting, or producing a
promoted event.
      (4)   The name, street address, mailing address, electronic mailing
address, and telephone number of a person or persons who can be contacted 24
hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of an emergency condition
involving a promoted event connected to the registrant.
      (5)   The name, street address, mailing address, electronic mailing
address, and telephone number of the registered agent for the registrant, if
any.
      (6)   Tax identification number.
      (7)   Such additional information as the registrant desires to include or
that the director deems necessary to aid in the determination of whether the
requested registration should be granted.
   (c)   A registrant shall notify the director within 30 days after any change
in the information contained in the commercial promoter registration.
   (d)   A commercial promoter registration expires two years from the date of
registration. Registrants may renew his or her registration for the next two-
year period before the expiration of the current period, but not before 30 days
prior to expiration. (Ord. 32239)
SEC. 38A-4.   COMMERCIAL PROMOTER REGISTRATION FEE.
   A fee of $175.00 must be paid to the Office of Special Events at the time of
commercial promoter registration or renewal. The registration fee must be paid
before an application is deemed complete. (Ord. 32239)
SEC. 38A-5.   SAFETY PLAN REQUIRED.
   (a)   In general. Promoted events must comply with the general safety plan
or the event-specific safety plan on file with the director. The venue operator
and the commercial promoter are responsible for operating a promoted event in
compliance with a filed safety plan.
   (b)   General safety plan.
      (1)   A venue operator may file a general safety plan with the director
that complies with Section
38A-6. A general safety plan may only serve as the safety plan for promoted
events at the venue specified in the plan and for the type of promoted event
specified in the plan.
      (2)   A general safety plan must be signed by the venue operator.
      (3)   A complete general safety plan must be submitted to the director at
least 14 days before the first promoted event at the venue location using a
general safety plan.
   (c)   Event-specific safety plan.
      (1)   If a venue does not have a general safety plan on file with the
director, or if a promoted event deviates in any way from the general safety
plan on file, the venue operator or commercial promoter must file an event-
specific safety plan with the director that complies with Section
38A-6. An event-specific safety plan may only serve as the safety plan for the
promoted event specified by date, time, and location in the plan.
      (2)   An event-specific safety plan must be signed by the venue operator
and the commercial promoter.
      (3)   A complete event-specific safety plan must be submitted to the
director at least five business days prior to the promoted event.
   (d)   Availability. The safety plan must be kept on-site during the duration
of each promoted event and be made immediately available upon request by a
representative of the city. (Ord. 32239)
SEC. 38A-6.   SAFETY PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   A safety plan must include the following:
      (1)   The legal name, street address, mailing address, electronic mailing
address, and telephone number of the property owner, venue operator, and any
commercial promoters operating at the venue.
      (2)   The registration number for each commercial promoter operating at
the venue.
      (3)   Street address of the promoted event.
      (4)   Date(s) of the promoted event (for event-specific safety plans).
      (5)   The promoted event beginning and ending times (for event-specific
safety plans).
      (6)   A description of the promoted event, including activities,
programming, entertainment, and all vendors.
      (7)   Maximum occupancy of indoor or outdoor spaces pursuant to the
Chapter 16, "Dallas Fire Code," or
Chapter 52, "Administrative Procedures for the Construction Codes of the Dallas
City Code."
      (8)   Maximum total number of tickets to be sold.
      (9)   Expected total attendance and maximum expected attendance at any
given time.
      (10)   Parking, including service vehicle loading/unloading and any valet
services used.
      (11)   A description of any infrastructure built in connection with the
promoted event such as stages and booths including the names and contact
information for all contractors and other responsible parties building the
infrastructure.
      (12)   Set-up and tear-down process and post-event outdoor clean-up plan.
      (13)   A crowd management plan that includes:
         (A)   the number, location, and responsibilities of crowd management
personnel;
         (B)   all ingress, egress, and circulation of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, including emergency access for emergency responders;
         (C)   outdoor queuing for event entry;
         (D)   indoor queuing for food, beverages, merchandise, etc.; and
         (E)   any information required by
Chapter 16, "Dallas Fire Code."
      (14)   A security management plan that includes:
         (A)   the number, location (inside and outside), and responsibilities
of security personnel, including the provider/agency and command structure;
         (B)    the hours security personnel will be on site; and
         (C)   incident report procedures.
      (15)   First aid and medical information that includes:
         (A)   name of providers, including command structure;
         (B)   number and location of personnel and first aid and medical
stations;
         (C)   location of signage directing the public to first aid and
medical stations; and
         (D)   accident/incident report procedures.
      (16)   If the promoted event includes alcohol, provide the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Commission license/permit number or specify if patrons may
bring their own alcohol.
      (17)   Noise abatement strategies.
      (18)   The number and location of metal detectors, if any.
      (19)   Whether pyrotechnics will be included in the promoted event.
      (20)   Emergency contingencies, including event stoppage and evacuation.
(Ord. 32239)
SEC. 38A-7.   SUSPENSION.
   The director may suspend a commercial promoter registration if the
registrant has received, within the preceding 60 days, two or more notices of
violation or citations related to lack of compliance with a safety plan or this
chapter. A person may not submit a new registration application while his or
her registration is suspended. (Ord. 32239)
SEC. 38A-8.   EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY.
   (a)   Purpose. This section is intended to protect the city from
extraordinary operational and financial burdens resulting from the use of city
resources in response to certain public safety incidents, demands for services,
and criminal activity related to commercial promoter events in violation of
this chapter. Emergency response cost recovery may only be used to preserve
city resources and, to the extent permitted by law, allow emergency response
cost recovery from the responsible party.
   (b)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   EMERGENCY RESPONSE means the provision, sending, or utilization of
public service, police, firefighting, paramedics, rescue service, or any other
agent of the city at a promoted event.
      (2)   EXPENSE OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE means the direct and reasonable
costs incurred by the city, or by a private person, corporation, or other
entity operating at the request of or direction of the city, through the
extraordinary use of public services, when making an emergency response to the
promoted event, including the costs of providing police, firefighting,
paramedics, or rescue services at the promoted event. These costs further
include but are not limited to all of the salaries, wages, workers'
compensation benefits, and fringe benefits of the city personnel responding to
the incident; all salaries, wages, workers' compensation benefits, and fringe
benefits of the city personnel engaged in investigation, supervision, and
preparation of post-incident reports; cost of equipment operation, cost of
materials obtained directly by the city, cost of any labor or materials, and
any property damage.
      (3)   RESPONSIBLE PARTY means:
         (A)   any person that is responsible for, in whole or in part, or
holds or promotes a promoted event, or allows a promoted event to be held, that
did not use a commercial promoter registered with the city;
         (B)    a person that is responsible for, in whole or in part, or holds
or promotes a promoted event, or allows a promoted event to be held, with a
commercial promoter registered without an approved safety plan or in violation
of an approved safety plan; or
         (C)   a person that owns the property where the emergency response is
necessary.
   (c)   Liability for expenses of emergency response. Any responsible party
who is responsible for or contributes to any circumstance that results in an
emergency response is liable for damages in the amount of the expense of the
emergency response. The city may pursue cost recovery fees and expenses for an
emergency response in connection with a promoted event that:
      (1)   is promoted by a person who is not registered as a commercial
promoter with the city; or
      (2)   operates without an approved safety plan or in violation of an
approved safety plan.
   (d)   Enforcement, billing, and collection of emergency response costs. Any
responsible party who is liable for the expense of an emergency response will
be in default if the responsible party fails to reimburse the city within 30
days of receiving notice of the expense of the emergency response. The city
will pursue collection if the responsible party who is liable for the expense
of an emergency response refuses to reimburse the city. (Ord. 32239)
SEC. 38A-9.   OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person promotes or conducts a
promoted event, or allows a promoted event to be held:
      (1)   while not registered in compliance with this chapter;
      (2)   without an approved safety plan; or
      (3)   in violation of an approved safety plan.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he or she is the individual named as
the contact person for the promoted event and fails to meet police officers or
code enforcement officers at the site of the promoted event within one hour of
being contacted by a representative of the city by telephone or email.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
    (d)   This chapter may be enforced by the director of the office of special
events, the director of the department of code compliance, the chief of police,
the fire chief, or their designated representatives. (Ord. 32239)
SEC. 38A-10.   PENALTY.
   (a)   Each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed:
      (1)   $2,000 for a violation of a provision of this chapter or a
requirement of a permit governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and
sanitation; or
      (2)   $500 for all other violations of this chapter.
   (b)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter or a requirement of
a safety plan under this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day
or part of a day during which the violation is committed or continued. (Ord.
32239)
CHAPTER 39
RESERVED
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
CHAPTER 39A
RELOCATION ASSISTANCE - EMINENT DOMAIN
Sec.
39A-1.   Purpose; scope of chapter.
Sec.
39A-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
39A-3.   Code enforcement, rehabilitation, or demolition program.
Sec.
39A-4.   Reserved.
Sec.
39A-5.   Reserved.
Sec.
39A-6.   Reserved.
Sec.
39A-7.   Appeals.
Sec.
39A-8.   Records.
SEC. 39A-1.   PURPOSE; SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a relocation assistance
program pursuant to Section 21.046 of the Texas Property Code, as amended. The
city hereby adopts, as its relocation assistance program, the URA and the
provisions in this chapter governing a code enforcement, rehabilitation, or
demolition program.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to city of Dallas
projects and code enforcement, rehabilitation, or demolition programs. The
provisions of this chapter shall be performed by the city manager. All
departments involved in land acquisition and a code enforcement,
rehabilitation, or demolition program shall cooperate to the fullest extent to
achieve the purposes of this chapter.
   (c)   Damages and costs within the purview of this chapter shall not be
considered elements of market value or damage and shall not be recoverable in
any eminent domain proceeding instituted by or against the city of Dallas.
   (d)   The city manager is hereby directed to comply with all regulations of
any agency of the federal government, relating to land acquisition, relocation
assistance, moving expenses, and replacement housing payments, when any such
agency is rendering financial assistance to any city of Dallas project. (Ord.
Nos. 13680; 30694)
SEC. 39A-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this chapter have the meanings ascribed to them in the
Federal Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies
Act of 1970, as amended, or as defined below:
   CITY MANAGER means the city manager or the city manager's designee.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT, REHABILITATION, OR DEMOLITION PROGRAM means an official
order issued by the fire marshal, building official, or the city's health
officer, or their designees, and which, notwithstanding Section 21.046(e) of
the Texas Property Code, as amended, is unrelated to real property title
acquisition.
   URA means the Federal Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property
Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, and applicable regulations.
(Ord. Nos. 13680; 20613; 29478; 30694)
SEC. 39A-3.   CODE ENFORCEMENT, REHABILITATION, OR DEMOLITION PROGRAM.
   (a)   A person is considered displaced when, as a direct result of a code
enforcement, rehabilitation, or demolition program, the person permanently
moves or discontinues a business, permanently moves personal property, or
permanently moves from a dwelling.
   (b)   A person who is displaced under this section shall be treated as a
displaced person under the URA.
   (c)   Whenever, due to a code enforcement, rehabilitation, or demolition
program, a person is required to temporarily vacate or evacuate property, the
occupant of the property may receive temporary housing payments, for a period
not to exceed 72 hours, for housing and food expenses based on the U.S. General
Services Administration's per diem standard rate for Texas for the current
year, whether or not they could qualify for permanent relocation benefits under
this chapter.
   (d)   When a person is displaced pursuant to this section, the city may, in
accordance with Section 214.001 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended,
place a lien on the property, unless it is a homestead protected by the Texas
Constitution, to recover costs incurred by the city in relocating the displaced
person.
(Ord. Nos. 13680; 30694)
SEC. 39A-4.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 30694)
SEC. 39A-5.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 30694)
SEC. 39A-6.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 30694)
SEC. 39A-7.   APPEALS.
   (a)   City manager to establish procedures. The city manager or his designee
shall establish procedures for his review of appeals under this chapter. The
procedures should provide for possible resolution of an appeal at an echelon
below the city manager with a final appeal to the city manager or his designee.
As a minimum such procedures shall provide that:
      (1)   any person making an appeal shall be given a full opportunity to be
heard;
      (2)   a decision will be reached promptly on the basis of evidence
submitted and the relocatee notified of such decision;
      (3)   the result reached will be supported by the necessary computations
and rationale and documented in the parcel file.
   (b)   Notification of appeal rights and procedures. At such time as a
relocatee indicates he is dissatisfied with a determination as to his
eligibility for a payment or of an amount of payment offered under this
chapter, he shall be promptly furnished the necessary forms and notified of the
procedures to be followed in making an appeal. (Ord. 13680)
SEC. 39A-8.   RECORDS.
   (a)   Relocatee records - general. The city manager or his designee shall
maintain relocation records showing:
      (1)   Project and parcel identification.
      (2)   Names and addresses of displaced persons and their complete
original and new addresses and telephone numbers (if available after reasonable
effort to obtain where relocatee moved without assistance).
      (3)   Personal contacts made with each relocated person, including for
each relocated person:
         (A)   date of notification of availablilty of relocation payments and
services;
         (B)   name of the official offering or providing relocation
assistance;
         (C)   whether the offer of assistance in locating or obtaining
replacement housing was declined or accepted and the name of the individual
accepting or declining the offer;
         (D)   dates and substance of subsequent followup contracts;
         (E)   date on which the relocated person was required to move from the
property acquired for the project;
         (F)   date on which actual relocation occurred and whether relocation
was accomplished with the assistance of the city, referral to other agencies or
without assistance. If the latter, an approximate date for actual relocation is
acceptable; and
         (G)   type of tenure before and after relocation.
      (4)   For displacements from dwelling:
         (A)   number in family;
         (B)   type of property (single detached, multi-family, etc.);
         (C)   value, or monthly rent;
         (D)   number of rooms occupied.
      (5)   For relocated businesses:
         (A)   type of business;
         (B)   whether continued or terminated;
         (C)   if relocated, distance moved (estimate acceptable).
      (6)   For relocated farms:
         (A)   whether continued or terminated;
         (B)   if relocated, distance moved (estimate acceptable).
   (b)   Moving expense records. The city manager or his designee shall
maintain records containing the following information regarding moving expense
payments:
      (1)   the date the removal of personal property was accomplished;
      (2)   the location from which and to which the personal property was
moved;
      (3)   if the personal property was stored temporarily, the location where
the property was stored, the duration of such storage, and justification for
the storage and the storage charges;
      (4)   itemized statement of the costs incurred supported by receipted
bills or other evidence of expense;
      (5)   amount of reimbursement claimed, amount allowed and an explanation
of any differences;
      (6)   data supporting any determination that a business cannot be
relocated without a substantial loss of its existing patronage and that it is
not part of a commercial enterprise having at least one other establishment not
being acquired by the city;
      (7)   when an “in lieu of” payment is made to a business or farm
operation, data showing how the payment was computed; and
      (8)   when moving expense payments are made in accordance with a
schedule, the data called for in (3) and (4) above need not be maintained.
Instead records showing the basis on which payment was made shall be
maintained.
   (c)   Replacement housing payment records. The city manager or his designee
shall maintain records containing the following information regarding
replacement housing payments:
      (1)   The date of the city’s receipt of each application for such
payments.
      (2)   The date on which each payment was made or the application
rejected.
      (3)   Supporting data explaining how the amount of the supplemental
payment to which the applicant is entitled was calculated.
      (4)   A copy of the closing statement to support the purchase or
downpayment, and incidental expenses when replacement housing is purchased.
      (5)   A copy of the Truth in Lending Statement or other data including
computations to support the increased interest payment.
      (6)   The individual responsible for determining the amount of the
replacement housing payment shall place in the file a signed and dated
statement setting forth:
         (A)   the amount of the replacement housing payment;
         (B)   that he has no direct or indirect present or contemplated
personal interest in this transaction nor will derive any benefit from the
replacement housing payment.
      (7)   A statement by the city manager or his designee that in his opinion
the relocated person has been relocated into adequate replacement housing.
(Ord. 13680)
CHAPTER 39B
REGULATED PROPERTY - PURCHASE AND SALE
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
Sec.
39B-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
39B-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
39B-2.1.   Hours of operation.
Sec.
39B-3.   Regulated property purchases; records.
Sec.
39B-4.   Hold notice.
Sec.
39B-4.1.   Repair of business machines; reporting requirements.
Sec.
39B-5.   Offenses.
Sec.
39B-6.   Penalty.
ARTICLE II.
LICENSING OF REGULATED PROPERTY DEALERS.
Sec.
39B-7.   License required.
Sec.
39B-8.   Issuance of license; posting.
Sec.
39B-9.   Fees.
Sec.
39B-10.   Expiration of license.
Sec.
39B-11.   Revocation.
Sec.
39B-12.   Reserved.
Sec.
39B-13.   Appeal.
Sec.
39B-14.   Transfer of license.
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED.
Secs. 39B-15 thru 39B-16.   Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
SEC. 39B-1.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to discourage an increasingly prolific and
socially deplorable business activity of dealing in stolen property by
requiring, among other regulations, the purchaser of certain regulated property
to maintain a record identifying the authorized vendor or to record and
maintain a reliable form of identification of the seller, if the seller is
other than a manufacturer or authorized vendor. Further, the chapter should
provide the police department with more adequate tools for investigations
concerning stolen property. Items of property to be included in the regulations
are limited to those items most frequently stolen and for which there is a
ready market. (Ord. Nos. 15064; 20241; 21310)
SEC. 39B-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   AUTOMOBILE ACCESSORIES means hubcaps, wheel covers, radar
detectors, tape decks and tape players, removable automobile tops, and like
items that are crafted or designed for use in or on automobiles as accessory
items. The term does not include completely assembled automobiles.
      (2)   AUTHORIZED VENDOR means a commercial supplier who deals in the
wholesale distribution of regulated property in the ordinary course of
business.
      (3)   BUSINESS MACHINE means a machine, such as, but not limited to, a
typewriter, computer, printer, adding machine, checkwriting device, cash
register, calculator, addressing machine, letter sorting or folding device, and
any item of recording, copying, or accounting equipment. The term does not
include office furniture or fixtures.
      (4)   CHIEF means the chief of police of the city of Dallas or a
designated representative.
      (5)   CRAFTED PRECIOUS METALS means jewelry, silverware, art objects, or
any other thing or object crafted, in whole or in part, from gold, silver,
platinum, palladium, irridium, rhodium, osmium, ruthenium, or their alloys, but
does not include coins, bullion, or bars of such metals.
      (6)   DEALER means any person, other than a pawnbroker, pawnshop, or
other business licensed under the Texas Pawnshop Act (Article 5069-51.01 et
seq., Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), who:
         (A)   purchases regulated property for resale or salvage use; and
         (B)   obtains more than 25 percent of the value of the person’s total
inventory of regulated property from a source other than an authorized vendor
or manufacturer.
      (7)   ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT means any electrical device including, but not
limited to, a radio, television, video recorder, home computer, video camera,
stereo, tape, or record.
      (8)   HOLD NOTICE means notification by the chief that a person may not
sell, redeem, or dispose of regulated property that:
         (A)   has been identified as potentially stolen; or
         (B)   has a defaced identification number.
      (9)   JEWELRY means gems, jewels, and objects made of precious metals
that are worn for adornment, including, but not limited to stones removed from
a mounting.
      (10)   LICENSEE means a person in whose name a license has been issued
under this chapter or a person listed as an applicant on the application for a
license.
      (11)   PASSPORT means a passport issued by the United States government
or issued by another country and recognized by the United States government.
      (12)   PERSON means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint
venture, trust, association, and any other legal entity.
      (13)   PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION CERTIFICATE means a certificate issued by
the Texas Department of Public Safety under Article 6687b, Vernon’s Texas Civil
Statutes or a similar certificate issued by another state.
      (14)   POWER TOOL means a tool powered by electrical or AC/DC current or
by liquid or gaseous fuel, including, but not limited to, pneumatic and welding
equipment.
      (15)   PURCHASE means a transaction in which a person takes title to
regulated property in exchange for valuable consideration.
      (16)   REGULATED PROPERTY means new or used:
         (A)   automobile accessories;
         (B)   business machines;
         (C)   crafted precious metals;
         (D)   electronic equipment;
         (E)   firearms as defined by state law;
         (F)   household appliances;
         (G)   jewelry;
         (H)   motorcycle accessories;
         (I)   musical instruments;
         (J)   photographic equipment;
         (K)   power tools; or
         (L)   sporting goods.
      (17)   SALVAGE USE means the extracting or isolating of one or more of
the component parts of regulated property for later use. The term specifically
includes the melting, pulverizing, compacting, or similar alteration of an item
of crafted precious metals.
      (18)   SELLER means the person in a purchase transaction who is affirming
the legal right of ownership and the right to sign over title to the property
offered for sale. (Ord. Nos. 15064; 16882; 17398; 18892; 20241; 21310)
SEC. 39B-2.1.   HOURS OF OPERATION.
   A dealer shall transact business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:
00 p.m. (Ord. Nos. 20241; 21310)
SEC. 39B-3.   REGULATED PROPERTY PURCHASES; RECORDS.
   (a)   A dealer in regulated property shall keep a sales record that
indicates the business name and address of the manufacturer or authorized
vendor from which the regulated property was purchased.
   (b)   If the regulated property was purchased from other than a manufacturer
or authorized vendor, a dealer shall:
      (1)   at the time of purchase, record in a legible manner on a
sequentially-numbered detachable ticket, approximately four inches by six
inches in dimension, which is kept in sequential order at the person’s local
place of business, the following information:
         (A)   the name and address of the dealer’s business;
         (B)   the name, address, sex, date of birth, and driver’s license
number, military identification number, passport number, or personal
identification certificate number of the seller of the regulated property;
         (C)   the date and time of purchase;
         (D)   a complete description of the property purchased, including, but
not limited to, the type of property, the brand name or manufacturer’s name,
any serial number, identifying number, or initials inscribed in or attached to
the property, and any other identifying marks or features of the property;
         (E)   the price paid or other consideration exchanged for the property
purchased; and
         (F)   the signature of the seller affirming ownership of the property
offered for sale;
      (2)   at the time of purchase, determine that the photograph on the
driver’s license, military identification card, passport, or personal
identification certificate is a photograph of the seller and make a photocopy
of the identification card or license;
      (3)   segregate the property purchased from the seller from property
purchased from other sellers and attach to the property, or to the container in
which the property is held, a tag indicating the name of the seller and the
date on which the property was purchased;
      (4)   retain possession of the purchased property at the dealer’s local
place of business and withhold the property from resale or salvage use for 21
calendar days;
      (5)   make the purchased property available for inspection at the
dealer’s local place of business by any police officer during regular business
hours while the property is in the dealer’s possession; and
      (6)   make a photograph of the seller in each purchase transaction in a
manner such that the seller’s facial features are clearly visible.
   (c) A dealer shall maintain on file the information required by Subsections
(a) and (b) for one year from the date of purchase or until the item is sold,
whichever occurs later. (Ord. Nos. 15064; 16882; 17398; 18892; 20241; 21310)
SEC. 39B-4.   HOLD NOTICE.
   (a)   When a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that regulated
property offered for sale is stolen or has had the manufacturer’s
identification number or any other identifying mark removed, defaced, or
altered, the chief may place a hold notice upon the property.
   (b)   All regulated property upon which a hold notice has been placed must
be held by the dealer at the dealer’s local place of business for 60 calendar
days, unless released sooner by the chief. After 60 calendar days with no
disposition of the property by the chief, the hold is automatically released,
and the dealer may dispose of the property. (Ord. Nos. 15064; 18892; 20241;
21310)
SEC. 39B-4.1.   REPAIR OF BUSINESS MACHINES; REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Except when the reporting requirements of Subsection (b) apply, a
person who engages in the business of servicing and repairing business machines
shall, within five working days after servicing or repairing a used business
machine, submit a report to the chief on a form and in a manner approved by the
chief. The report must include the following information:
      (1)   the name and address of the person for whom the business machine
was serviced or repaired; and
      (2)   a complete and accurate description of the business machine,
including serial numbers and other identifying marks or symbols.
   (b)   A person who services or repairs the same business machine on a
regular basis under the terms of a maintenance or service agreement shall
submit a report to the chief, on a form and in a manner approved by the chief,
within five working days after the effective date of each maintenance or
service agreement. The report must:
      (1)   include the following information:
         (A)   the name and address of the person for whom a business machine
is being serviced or repaired under the terms of a maintenance or service
agreement;
         (B)   a complete and accurate description of each business machine
covered by the maintenance or service agreement, including serial numbers and
other identifying marks and symbols; and
         (C)   the effective date and expiration date of the maintenance or
service agreement; and
      (2)   be updated each time a business machine is added to or removed from
the coverage of the maintenance or service agreement.
   (c)   The reporting requirements of this section do not apply to a person
who services or repairs a business machine for a person to whom he sold the
machine when it was new. (Ord. Nos. 18892; 20241; 21310)
SEC. 39B-5.   OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   violates Section
39B-2.1,
39B-3,
39B-4.1,
39B-7, or
39B-14 of this chapter;
      (2)   takes possession of regulated property purchased for resale or
salvage use for which he does not have records meeting the requirements of
Section
39B-3;
      (3)   fails or refuses to produce for inspection by a police officer the
records required by Section
39B-3, with respect to a particular item of regulated property, when requested
to do so at a reasonable time by the police officer;
      (4)   purchases for resale or salvage use, offers for sale, or sells
regulated property that has had the manufacturer’s identification number or any
other identifying mark removed, defaced, or altered;
      (5)   purchases regulated property for resale or salvage use from a
seller, other than a manufacturer or authorized vendor, who does not present a
valid driver’s license, military identification card, passport, or personal
identification certificate;
      (6)   purchases regulated property from a person under the age of 18
years; or
      (7)   fails or refuses to comply with a hold notice placed on regulated
property pursuant to Section
39B-4 of this chapter.
   (b)   A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an
offense under this section unless the provision defining the conduct expressly
requires a culpable mental state.
   (c)   In a prosecution under this chapter involving a record-keeping
requirement of Section
39B-3(b), it is an affirmative defense that the regulated property involved was
purchased from a manufacturer or authorized vendor.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that:
      (1)   at the time of the offense, the person had not purchased, nor
purported to purchase, regulated property for resale or salvage use on more
than 14 days of the calendar year in the city of Dallas;
      (2)   the regulated property involved was being returned for refund or
trade-in purposes to the dealer who originally sold the regulated property to
the seller; or
      (3)   the person is a pawnbroker, pawnshop, or other business licensed
under the Texas Pawnshop Act (Article 5069-51.01 et seq., Vernon’s Texas Civil
Statutes).
   (e)   An investigating police officer may inspect and copy any records
required to be kept under Section
39B-3 without obtaining a court order. In the case of records required under
Section
39B-3(b)(1), the officer may take possession and permanently retain the
original copy of each ticket on which the required information was recorded.
(Ord. Nos. 15064; 17398; 18892; 20241; 21310)
SEC. 39B-6.   PENALTY.
   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $500, and a violation constitutes a separate offense for each
item of regulated property involved. (Ord. Nos. 15064; 17398; 19963; 20241;
21310)
ARTICLE II.
LICENSING OF REGULATED PROPERTY DEALERS.
SEC. 39B-7.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, without a license issued under this
article, he:
      (1)   purchases regulated property from other than a manufacturer or
authorized vendor for resale or salvage use; or
      (2)   operates a business establishment that purports to purchase
regulated property from other than a manufacturer or authorized vendor for
resale or salvage use.
   (b)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
chief. Each applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (c)   A person who wishes to purchase regulated property for resale or
salvage use must sign the application as applicant. If the person is a legal
entity, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, association,
or joint venture, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a license as an applicant. Each
applicant must meet the requirements of Section
39B-8(a), and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that, at the time of
the alleged offense, the person was purchasing regulated property for resale or
salvage use under the specific authority of a valid license issued by the State
of Texas or the United States government. A license must still be obtained
under this section for those activities conducted by a dealer that are not
specifically authorized by a state or federal license. (Ord. Nos. 17398; 20241;
21310)
SEC. 39B-8.   ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; POSTING.
   (a)   The chief shall issue a license to an applicant within 30 days after
receipt of an application unless it is determined that one or more of the
following is true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or the applicant’s spouse.
      (3)   An applicant failed to answer or falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form provided.
      (4)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of two or
more offenses under Section
39B-5 of this chapter within two years immediately preceding the application.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.
      (5)   An applicant has not obtained a certificate of occupancy for the
premises in which the applicant intends to do business.
      (6)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
      (7)   An applicant has been convicted of a felony or a Class A
misdemeanor involving theft or fraud, including but not limited to theft,
robbery, burglary, forgery, criminal simulation, deceptive business practices,
securing execution of document by deception, or any other similar state or
federal criminal offense, and three years have not elapsed since the
termination of any sentence, parole, or probation; the fact that a conviction
is being appealed shall have no effect. If three years have elapsed, the chief
shall, in accordance with Section 4(c), Article 6252-13c of Vernon’s Texas
Civil Statutes, determine the present fitness of the applicant to be licensed
from the information and evidence presented with the application.
      (8)   An applicant has been convicted of an offense under any federal or
state law providing record-keeping or licensing requirements for persons
purchasing or selling regulated property, and three years have not elapsed
since the termination of any sentence, parole, or probation. The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.
   (b)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address
of the premises for which the license is granted. A license issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be valid only for the location stated in the application.
Should any licensee move a place of business from the place stated on the
license to a new location, the licensee shall give the chief prior written
notice and present the license to the chief to have the change of location
noted on the license.
   (c)   The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the licensed premises so that it may be easily read at any time.
(Ord. Nos. 17398; 20241; 21310)
SEC. 39B-9.   FEES.
   The annual fee for a license issued under this article is $245. (Ord. Nos.
17398; 18411; 20241; 20612; 21310; 22206)
SEC. 39B-10.   EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in Section
39B-7. To assure reissuance of a license prior to expiration, application for
renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date. (Ord. Nos.
17398; 20241; 21310)
SEC. 39B-11.   REVOCATION.
   (a)   The chief shall revoke a license if it is determined that one or more
of the following is true:
      (1)   A licensee has given a false statement as to a material matter
submitted to the chief during the application process.
      (2)   A licensee, an individual who is a business associate of the
licensee in the same or a related business or a corporate officer of the
licensee, or an employee of the licensee has been convicted within a two-year
period of two or more offenses under Section
39B-5 of this chapter. If a conviction is appealed, the time period between
conviction and final disposition on appeal of the conviction is not included in
calculating the two-year period if the conviction is affirmed.
      (3)   A licensee has been convicted of any felony or of a Class A
misdemeanor involving theft or fraud, including but not limited to theft,
robbery, burglary, forgery, criminal simulation, deceptive business practices,
securing execution of document by deception, or any other similar state or
federal criminal offense, and three years have not elapsed since the
termination of any sentence, parole, or probation. The fact that a conviction
is being appealed shall have no effect.
      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of an offense under any federal or
state law providing record-keeping or licensing requirements for persons
purchasing or selling regulated property, and three years have not elapsed
since the termination of any sentence, parole, or probation. The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.
   (b)   When the chief revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a license for one year from the
date revocation became final. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief finds
that the basis for the revocation action has been corrected or abated, the
applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the
date the revocation became final. If the license was revoked under Subsection
(a)(3) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license within
three years of the termination of any sentence, parole, or probation. (Ord.
Nos. 17398; 20241; 21310)
SEC. 39B-12.   RESERVED. 
(Ord. 21310)
SEC. 39B-13.   APPEAL.
   If the chief denies the issuance of a license, or revokes a license, a
written notice of the action and the right to an appeal shall be sent to the
applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The
aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief to a permit and license
appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. The action of the chief is final unless a timely appeal is
made. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief in revoking a
license until the permit and license appeal board makes a final decision. (Ord.
Nos. 17398; 20241; 21310)
SEC. 39B-14.   TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not:
      (1)   transfer a license issued under this chapter to another; or
      (2)   operate a business engaged in the purchase of regulated property
for resale or salvage use under the authority of a license at any place other
than the address designated in the license application. (Ord. Nos. 17398;
20241; 21310)
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED.
SECS. 39B-15 THRU 39B-16.
(Repealed by Ord. 28020)
CHAPTER 39C
RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Sec.
39C-1.   Statement of policy.
Sec.
39C-2.   City of Dallas records.
Sec.
39C-3.   Definitions.
Sec.
39C-4.   Designation of records management officer.
Sec.
39C-5.   Ownership and custody of city records.
Sec.
39C-6.   Records involved in public information requests, pending litigation,
or pending audits.
Sec.
39C-7.   Duties and responsibilities of the city council.
Sec.
39C-8.   Establishment of the records management policy committee.
Sec.
39C-9.   Duties and responsibilities of records management officer.
Sec.
39C-10.   Records management program to be developed; approval of program;
authority of program.
Sec.
39C-11.   Duties and responsibilities of department directors.
Sec.
39C-12.   Designation of records liaison officers.
Sec.
39C-13.   Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers.
Sec.
39C-14.   Records retention and disposition schedules; approval; filing with
the state.
Sec.
39C-15.   Implementation of records retention and disposition schedules;
destruction of city records under schedule.
Sec.
39C-16.   Destruction of unscheduled records.
Sec.
39C-17.   Dallas municipal archives and records center.
Sec.
39C-18.   Microfilming city records.
Sec.
39C-19.   Electronic storage of city records.
Sec.
39C-20.   Right of recovery.
Sec.
39C-21.   Penalty.
SEC. 39C-1.   STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   (a)   The city of Dallas recognizes that the citizens of Dallas have a right
to expect, and the city has an obligation to foster, efficient and cost-
effective government and further recognizes the central importance of city
records in the lives of its citizens. The city of Dallas has a responsibility
to its citizens to manage, protect, preserve, and make available city records.
   (b)   It is the policy of the city of Dallas to provide for efficient,
economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use, retention, and disposition of all records of
the city of Dallas. This policy will be implemented through a comprehensive
system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their
creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the
Local Government Records Act, the Public Information Act, the city charter, and
accepted records management practice. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-2.   CITY OF DALLAS RECORDS.
   All city records must be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance
with this chapter and all requirements, policies, and procedures established
pursuant to this chapter, and in no other manner. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-3.   DEFINITIONS.
   (1)   APPROVED RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULE means a records
retention and disposition schedule that has been:
      (A)   approved by the department director, the records management
officer, and the records management policy committee;
      (B)   adopted by the city council by resolution; and
      (C)   filed by the records management officer and approved by the
director and librarian of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission
either:
         (i)   in a detailed format determined by the director and librarian;
or
         (ii)   through a written certification of compliance filed in
accordance with state law.
   (2)   CITY RECORD means every document, paper, letter, book, map,
photograph, sound or video recording, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic
medium, or other information recording medium, regardless of physical form or
characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or
restricted under state law, that is created or received by the city of Dallas
or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of
public business. A city record does not include library or museum material
acquired solely for reference, exhibit, or display or stocks of publications,
advertisements, or other unsolicited written materials received by the city or
any of its officers or employees.
   (3)   DALLAS MUNICIPAL ARCHIVES AND RECORD CENTER (DMARC) means the facility
described in Section
39C-17 of this chapter that is used to provide centralized and secure storage
for noncurrent and permanent city records.
   (4)   DEPARTMENT means any department, office, agency, division, program,
commission, bureau, board, committee, task force, ad hoc committee, or similar
entity of the city.
   (5)   DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR means the officer who by ordinance, order, or
administrative policy is in charge of a department or an office of the city
that creates or receives city records.
   (6)   ESSENTIAL RECORD means any city record necessary to:
      (A)   the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an
emergency or disaster;
      (B)   the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city; or
      (C)   the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the citizens of
the city.
   (7)   LOCAL GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACT means Title 6, Subtitle C of the Local
Government Code, as amended.
   (8)   PERMANENT RECORD means any city record for which the retention period
on a records retention and disposition schedule is given as permanent.
   (9)   PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT means Chapter 552 of the Texas Government Code,
also known as the Texas Open Records Act.   
   (10)   RECORDS DISPOSITION means the removal of a city record from a
department or from a noncurrent records storage center and:
      (A)   for a city record that has passed its minimum legal retention
period and no longer has value to the city, the destruction of the record; or
      (B)   for a permanent city record, transfer of the record to DMARC for
archival accession.
   (11)   RECORDS INVENTORY means the process of locating, identifying, and
describing in detail the records of a department.
   (12)   RECORDS LIAISON OFFICER means any person designated under Section
39C-12 of this chapter.
   (13)   RECORDS MANAGEMENT means the planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promoting, and application of other management techniques
involved in the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and
disposal of city records for the purposes of achieving adequate and proper
documentation of the policies and transactions of city government and reducing
the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes:
      (A)   the development of records retention and disposition schedules;
      (B)   the management of filing and information retrieval systems;
      (C)   the protection of essential and permanent records;
      (D)   the economical and space-effective storage of noncurrent records;
      (E)   the control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports,
and correspondence;
      (F)   the management of manual, micrographic, electronic, and other
records storage systems; and
      (G)   the identification of functional recordkeeping requirements that
ensure city records are created to adequately document the city’s business
transactions.
   (14)   RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER means the person appointed by the city
secretary, in accordance with Chapter IIIA, Section 3 of the city charter, to
fill the position designated by the city council, pursuant to the Local
Government Records Act, to administer the city’s records management program.
   (15)   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM means the requirements, policies, and
procedures developed under Section
39C-10 of this chapter.
   (16)   RECORDS MANAGEMENT POLICY COMMITTEE means the committee established
under Section
39C-8 of this chapter.
   (17)   RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULE means a document prepared
by or under the authority of the records management officer that describes
recurring records or records series on a continuing basis, indicating for each
record or records series:
      (A)   the length of time the record or records series is to be maintained
in a department or in DMARC;
      (B)   when and if the record or records series may be destroyed or
otherwise disposed of; and
      (C)   other records disposition information that the records management
program may require.
   (18)   RETENTION PERIOD means the minimum time that must pass after the
creation, recording, or receipt of a city record, or after the fulfillment of
certain actions associated with a city record, before the record is eligible
for disposition. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-4.   DESIGNATION OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   The records management officer shall be appointed by the city
secretary to implement and administer the city’s records management program in
compliance with this chapter, the city charter, state law, and policies adopted
by the records management policy committee. The records management officer must
be a person professionally competent by experience and training to administer
the records management program.
   (b)   Upon the records management officer’s resignation, retirement,
dismissal, or removal by action, the officer’s successor shall, within 30 days
after being appointed by the city secretary, file the successor’s name with the
director and librarian of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission, as
prescribed by state law. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-5.   OWNERSHIP AND CUSTODY OF CITY RECORDS.
   (a)   Every city record is the property of the city. No city officer or
employee has, by virtue of the position of the city officer or employee, any
personal or property right to a city record even though the city officer or
employee may have developed or compiled the record. The unauthorized
alteration, destruction, deletion, removal from files, or use of a city record
is prohibited. A city record exempted from public disclosure under state or
federal law is not made subject to disclosure by its designation as city
property under this section.
   (b)   A city record may not be sold, loaned, given away, destroyed, or
otherwise alienated from the city’s custody unless in accordance with this
chapter or unless destroyed as directed by an expunction order issued by a
district court pursuant to state law. This subsection does not apply to a city
record that is temporarily transferred to a contractor for purposes of
microfilming, duplication, conversion to electronic media, restoration, or a
similar records management and preservation procedure if the transfer is
authorized by the records management officer.
   (c)   Except when a city record is transferred into the archival custody of
DMARC as provided in Subsection (e), legal custody of a city record created or
received by a department during the course of business remains with the
department director or with the department director of any designated successor
of the department. The legal custodian, as guardian of the record, does not
relinquish responsibility for the care, preservation, or legal disposition of
the record even though physical custody of the record for maintenance and
preservation purposes may be held by another department or agency. The physical
custodian of the record is also responsible for complying with all records
management program requirements, policies, and procedures. An original city
record may not leave the custody of the department concerned when being used by
a member of the public.
   (d)   Every officer or employee shall deliver to any successor all city
records pertaining to the office held by the city officer or employee.
   (e)   The legal and physical custody of a city record that has continuing
historical value to the city may be transferred to DMARC upon agreement between
the department director and the records management officer. DMARC’s custody of
the record subsequently will be known as archival custody, and ownership of the
record remains with the city.
   (f)   DMARC shall have legal and physical custody of all city records
belonging to any defunct department that does not have a named successor.
   (g)   The records management policy committee shall review and determine, as
necessary, custodial responsibilities for city-wide electronic applications.
Custodial responsibility must be determined prior to systems design or
implementation. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-6.   RECORDS INVOLVED IN PUBLIC INFORMATION REQUESTS, PENDING
LITIGATION, OR PENDING AUDITS.
   The destruction of a city record involved in a pending request under the
Public Information Act, pending litigation, or a pending audit is prohibited,
even if the destruction of the record is authorized by an approved records
retention and disposition schedule. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-7.   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The city council shall:
      (1)   establish, promote, and support an active and continuing program
for the efficient and economical management of all city records;
      (2)   cause policies and procedures to be developed for the
administration of the records management program under the direction of the
records management officer;
      (3)   facilitate the creation and maintenance of city records containing
adequate and proper documentation of the organization, functions, policies,
decisions, procedures, and essential transactions of the city and designed to
furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of
the city, the state, and persons affected by the activities of the city;
      (4)   facilitate the identification and preservation of city records that
are of permanent value;
      (5)   facilitate the identification and protection of essential records;
      (6)   approve all records retention and disposition schedules, after
review and approval of the department director, the records management officer,
and the records management policy committee, and direct the records management
officer to file approved schedules or a written certification of compliance
with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library and Archives
Commission as required by state law and this chapter; and
      (7)   be subject to the same duties and responsibilities required of a
department by this chapter, any policy or procedure established under this
chapter, and state law, and the mayor shall be subject to the same duties and
responsibilities required of a department director by this chapter, any policy
or procedure established under this chapter, and state law. (Ord. Nos. 20787;
23267)
SEC. 39C-8.   ESTABLISHMENT OF THE RECORDS MANAGEMENT POLICY COMMITTEE.
   (a)   A records management policy committee consisting of the city attorney,
the city auditor, the city manager, and the city secretary is hereby
established. Three members of the committee constitute a quorum. A member of
the committee may designate a representative to serve in the member’s place by
filing a written designation with the city secretary. Each action of the
committee requires a majority vote of the committee members present.
   (b)   The records management officer shall attend committee meetings,
participate in discussions, and serve as a nonvoting advisor to the committee.
   (c)   The city secretary shall:
      (1)   chair the committee;
      (2)   coordinate, document, and report to the city council the actions of
the committee; and
      (3)   oversee the city’s records management program as administered by
the records management officer.
   (d)   The committee shall:
      (1)   review and approve policy and procedural recommendations submitted
by the records management officer and establish other requirements, policies,
and procedures necessary for the implementation and administration of the
records management program for the city;
      (2)   review the performance of the records management program on a
regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed;
      (3)   review and approve records retention and disposition schedules
submitted by the records management officer;
      (4)   give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance
with approved records retention and disposition schedules;
      (5)   actively support and promote the records management program
throughout the city; and
      (6)   review city-wide and departmental policies as the committee
determines necessary to ensure compliance with the records management program,
this chapter, and state law. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-9.   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   In addition to other duties assigned by this chapter and state law, the
records management officer shall:
      (1)   administer the city’s records management program under the
direction of the city secretary and provide advice and assistance to department
directors in its implementation;
      (2)   recommend and prepare for approval by the records management policy
committee requirements, policies, and procedures for the city’s records
management program;
      (3)   review, approve, and submit for the approval of the records
management policy committee and the city council records retention and
disposition schedules for all departments in accordance with Section
39C-14 of this chapter;
      (4)   in cooperation with department directors, identify essential
records and establish a records disaster and recovery plan for each department
to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re- establish
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
      (5)   monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued
by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records
management program and the city’s records retention and disposition schedules
are in compliance with state regulations;
      (6)   disseminate to the city council, the department directors, and the
records management policy committee information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to city records;
      (7)   instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in records
management program policies and procedures;
      (8)   direct records liaison officers and other personnel in the conduct
of records inventories in preparation for the development of records retention
and disposition schedules as required by the records management program, this
chapter, and state law;
      (9)   ensure that the creation, maintenance, preservation, microfilming,
electronic storage, destruction, and other disposition of city records is
carried out in accordance with the requirements, policies, and procedures of
the records management program, this chapter, and state law;
      (10)   file in accordance with state law a written certification of
compliance with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library and
Archives Commission stating that the city has adopted a records retention and
disposition schedule or an amended schedule that meets minimum requirements
adopted by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission, in lieu of filing
the records retention and disposition schedule or amended schedule with the
director and librarian;
      (11)   report annually to the city council on records management program
accomplishments, issues, and compliance status;
      (12)   bring to the attention of the records management policy committee,
the city manager, and the city council any noncompliance by a department
director or other personnel with the requirements, policies, and procedures of
the records management program, this chapter, or state law;
      (13)   certify compliance of the city’s electronic recordkeeping systems
to the director and librarian of the Texas State Library and Archives
Commission as required by state law;
      (14)   develop, and submit for approval by the records management policy
committee, procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically
valuable records of the city;
      (15)   conduct periodic reviews of departmental recordkeeping practices
and records retention and disposition schedules to ensure that the schedules
are kept current;
      (16)   provide uniform standards and efficient controls over the
creation, identification, appraisal, maintenance, protection, preservation,
transfer, retention, and disposition of city records;
      (17)   conduct surveys, studies, and information systems assessments to
assist in promoting a proper and efficient records management program for the
city, including microfilming services and automated information systems, and
report the results of such surveys, studies, and assessments to the records
management policy committee;
      (18)   inspect all city records as directed by the records management
policy committee, the city secretary, or the city council, or as otherwise
necessary to ensure compliance with the records management program, this
chapter, and state law;
      (19)   review city-wide and departmental policies as the records
management officer determines necessary to ensure compliance with the records
management program, this chapter, and state law;
      (20)   in cooperation with department directors, incorporate records
management policies, objectives, responsibilities, and authorities in pertinent
departmental directives in accordance with the records management program, this
chapter, and state law;
      (21)   establish, and submit for approval by the records management
policy committee, procedures for addressing records management program
requirements at the design phase of recordkeeping systems in accordance with
the records management program, this chapter, and state law;
      (22)   review user requirements, cost feasibility studies, systems
requirements, systems specifications, bid specifications, and other systems
design documents to ensure that recordkeeping requirements and public access
requirements are incorporated into electronic recordkeeping systems at the
design phase in accordance with the records management program, this chapter,
and state law;
      (23)   establish, and submit for approval by the records management
policy committee, procedures for the use of approved general retention and
disposition schedules by city departments in accordance with the records
management program, this chapter, and state law;
      (24)   serve as the city’s liaison to the director and librarian of the
Texas State Library and Archives Commission for records management program
requirements; and
      (25)   file any revisions to this chapter with the director and librarian
of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission within 30 days after
adoption as required by state law. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-10.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM TO BE DEVELOPED; APPROVAL OF PROGRAM;
AUTHORITY OF PROGRAM.
   (a)   The records management officer and the records management policy
committee shall develop a city-wide records management program. Program
requirements, policies, and procedures must be in the form of an administrative
directive or in a form or manner determined by the records management policy
committee. The program requirements, policies, and procedures must be designed
to enable the records management officer to carry out duties as prescribed by
this chapter and state law.
   (b)   The records management program requirements, policies, and procedures
must:
      (1)   adequately protect the essential records of the city;
      (2)   properly preserve city records that are of historical value;
      (3)   establish criteria for city-wide and departmental records
management program compliance, including requirements for conducting
departmental records inventories, preparing retention and disposition
schedules, and certifying retention and disposition schedules and electronic
recordkeeping systems;
      (4)   establish functional recordkeeping requirements to improve the
efficiency of recordkeeping and to ensure the creation of adequate and proper
documentation of the city’s activities and transactions;
      (5)   create policies to implement rules adopted by the Texas State
Library and Archives Commission and required by state law, including
requirements for public access, microfilming, electronic document imaging, and
electronic storage of city records;
      (6)   create policies to address records management program requirements
and needs as technology evolves;
      (7)   provide for review by the records management officer and records
management policy committee of all electronic recordkeeping systems design
prior to purchase or implementation of the systems;
      (8)   ensure the development and maintenance of up-to-date documentation
for all electronic records systems that will adequately specify the technical
characteristics of each system necessary to reading, processing, or preserving
city records until the disposition of the records is authorized;
      (9)   provide for the creation of adequate audit trails;
      (10)   incorporate electronic records management objectives,
responsibilities, and authorities in pertinent city directives, policies, and
procedures; and
      (11)   ensure the ability to access city records regardless of form or
medium.
   (c)   The records management program requirements, policies, and procedures
are binding on all city officers and employees and on all departments, offices,
agencies, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, task
forces, ad hoc committees, and similar entities of the city. (Ord. Nos. 20787;
23267)
SEC. 39C-11.   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS.
   (a)   In addition to other duties assigned by this chapter and state law,
every department director shall:
      (1)   cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the
policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and
economical management of city records and in carrying out the requirements of
the records management program, this chapter, and state law;
      (2)   adequately document the transaction of government business and the
policies, services, programs, functions, activities, and duties for which the
department director and department staff are responsible;
      (3)   maintain city records in the department director’s custody and
carry out the preservation, microfilming, electronic storage, destruction, and
other disposition of those records only in accordance with the records
management program, this chapter, and state law;
      (4)   review and approve records retention and disposition schedules and
requests to dispose of city records that are prepared and submitted by or under
the direction of the records management officer;
      (5)   notify the records management officer within 24 hours of the
discovery of any loss, theft, or damage to a city record;
      (6)   ensure the ability to access records regardless of form or medium;
      (7)   biannually submit a records management program compliance status
report to the records management officer;
      (8)   notify the records management officer of proposed electronic
recordkeeping systems to ensure compliance with electronic recordkeeping
requirements established by the records management program, this chapter, and
state law;
      (9)   ensure electronic records in the director’s custody are migrated
forward as technology changes, for as long as the records are determined to
have value, and ensure that requests for funding for new systems or systems
enhancements address requirements for back-up, re-copying, disaster recovery,
security, public access, audit trails, and other recordkeeping requirements in
accordance with the records management program, this chapter, and state law;
      (10)   conduct a cost feasibility study that incorporates document
profiles and a work flow analysis for proposed electronic recordkeeping systems
or systems enhancements in accordance with the records management program, this
chapter, and state law;
      (11)   appoint a department records liaison officer in accordance with
Section
39C-12 of this chapter;
      (12)   incorporate records management program requirements in pertinent
departmental policies and procedures;
      (13)   in cooperation with the records management officer, identify
essential records of the department and establish a records disaster and
recovery plan to ensure maximum availability of the records to re-establish
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
      (14)   prepare and submit to the records management officer all requests
for authorization to create or store records electronically, which requests
must be submitted in a form and manner approved by the records management
officer and the records management policy committee so that they may be
submitted by the records management officer to the director and librarian of
the Texas State Library and Archives Commission as part of the city’s
certification of systems compliance as required by the records management
program, this chapter, and state law;
      (15)   submit a departmental records inventory, verified by the
departmental records liaison officer, to the records management officer in
accordance with criteria established by the records management officer and the
records management policy committee; and
      (16)   annually review departmental records retention and disposition
schedules to ensure that the schedules are kept current.
   (b)   No state law, federal law, city ordinance, or policy relating to the
duties, recordkeeping requirements, or other responsibilities of a department
director exempts the department director or city records in the department
director’s custody from the application of this chapter and the records
management program adopted under this chapter, nor may such a law or policy be
used by the department director as a basis for refusing to participate in the
records management program of the city. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-12.   DESIGNATION OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS.
   (a)   Each department director shall designate in writing to the records
management officer a member of the department director’s staff to serve as the
records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management
program in the department. If the records management officer determines that
more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department,
the department director shall designate the number of records liaison officers
specified by the records management officer. The department director may serve
as records liaison officer for a department.
   (b)   A person designated as a records liaison officer shall be thoroughly
familiar with departmental policies and activities and have full knowledge of
and access to all city records created and maintained by the department and by
all officers and employees of the department.
   (c)   If a person designated as a records liaison officer resigns, retires,
or is removed by action of the department director, the department director
shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. (Ord. Nos. 20787;
23267)
SEC. 39C-13.   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS.
   In addition to other duties assigned by this chapter and state law, a
records liaison officer shall:
   (1)   in cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and
implement the requirements, policies, and procedures of the records management
program in the department;
   (2)   disseminate information to department staff concerning the records
management program;
   (3)   in cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate the
records inventory of the department;
   (4)   verify the accuracy, content, and completeness of the records
inventory prior to submission to the records management officer;
   (5)   review departmental recordkeeping practices for compliance with the
records management program and, in consultation with the records management
officer, identify practices that require improvement for the purposes of
increasing efficiency or implementing corrective action for program compliance;
   (6)   report any noncompliance with the records management program to the
department director in writing; and
   (7)   correct and re-submit to the records management officer any records
inventory that is incomplete or inaccurate. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-14.   RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULES; APPROVAL; FILING
WITH THE STATE.
   (a)   The records management officer, in cooperation with department
directors and records liaison officers, shall prepare records retention and
disposition schedules on a department by department basis that describe, and
establish the retention periods for, all city records created or received by
each department. A records retention and disposition schedule must contain such
other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records
management program may require. Every city record identified on a records
retention and disposition schedule, in any amendment to the schedule, or in any
request for destruction of a record must be specifically described. Any records
retention and disposition schedule, amendment to a schedule, or request for
destruction of a record that contains general terms such as “miscellaneous” and
“various” to describe any record identified in such a document may not be
submitted to the city council, the records management policy committee, or the
records management officer for consideration.
   (b)   Each records retention and disposition schedule must be monitored and
amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to
ensure that the schedule is in compliance with records retention and
disposition schedules issued by the state and that the schedule continues to
reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the
records management program of the city.
   (c)   Before its adoption by the city council, a records retention and
disposition schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department director, the records management officer, and the records
management policy committee.
   (d)   After city council adoption, a records retention and disposition
schedule may not be implemented until the schedule or a written certification
of compliance has been submitted by the records management officer to and
accepted for filing by the director and librarian of the Texas State Library
and Archives Commission, as provided by state law. If a schedule or
certification of compliance is not accepted for filing, the schedule must be
amended and re-submitted to the city council for adoption to make it acceptable
for filing.
   (e)   The records management officer shall determine whether to file with
the director and librarian of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission
an approved records retention and disposition schedule or a written
certification of compliance. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-15.   IMPLEMENTATION OF RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULES;
DESTRUCTION OF CITY RECORDS UNDER SCHEDULE.
   (a)   The department director and records liaison officer of a department
for which a records retention and disposition schedule has been approved and
adopted under Section
39C-14 shall implement the schedule in accordance with the requirements,
policies, and procedures of the records management program, this chapter, and
state law.
   (b)   A department director or records liaison officer shall notify the
records management officer when a city record is eligible for disposition and
shall prepare and submit to the records management officer a records
disposition request, if required by the applicable records retention and
disposition schedule, as a condition for disposition of the city record.
   (c)   Before a city record is destroyed under an approved records retention
and disposition schedule, the records management officer must obtain
authorization for the destruction from the records management policy committee,
unless the approved schedule specifies that the record may be destroyed without
additional review or authority of the records management policy committee.
   (d)   A city record whose retention period has expired on an approved
records retention and disposition schedule must be destroyed unless:
      (1)   a request under the Public Information Act is pending on the
record;
      (2)   the subject matter of the record is pertinent to pending litigation
or a pending audit;
      (3)   the department director or a member of the records management
policy committee requests in writing to the records management officer that the
record be retained for an additional period, which request must clearly state
the reason for the continued retention; or
      (4)   the records management officer sends written notification to a
department director that the records must be held pending review for historical
appraisal. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-16.   DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORDS.
   A city record that is obsolete or that has not been identified on an
approved records retention and disposition schedule may be destroyed if:
      (1)   its destruction has been approved in the same manner required by
this chapter for the destruction of a record that is identified on an approved
records retention and disposition schedule; and
      (2)   the Texas State Library and Archives Commission has:
         (A)   through its director and librarian approved a request for
destruction authorization submitted by the records management officer; or
         (B)   by rule excepted the destruction of the record from further
notice to the director and librarian of the Texas State Library and Archives
Commission. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-17.   DALLAS MUNICIPAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS CENTER.
   (a)   The Dallas municipal archives and records center (DMARC) serves as a
centralized records storage facility for all departments for the storage of
noncurrent city records. DMARC also serves as the repository for permanent and
historical city records that are transferred to the facility by departments.
   (b)   DMARC is under the direct control and supervision of the records
management officer. The records management officer shall establish policies and
procedures regulating the operations and use of DMARC by city departments.
(Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-18.   MICROFILMING CITY RECORDS.
   (a)   City records may be microfilmed in accordance with the records
management program, this chapter, state law, and the administrative rules of
the Texas State Library and Archives Commission.
   (b)   Every department director shall coordinate the microfilming of a city
record with the records management officer. The records management officer
shall periodically review each department’s microfilm programs as to cost-
effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with the records
management program, this chapter, state law, and the administrative rules of
the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-19.   ELECTRONIC STORAGE OF CITY RECORDS.
   (a)   The creation, maintenance, preservation, electronic document imaging,
and storage of the electronic records of the city must comply with the records
management program, this chapter, state law, and the administrative rules of
the Texas State Library and Archives Commission.
   (b)   Before a city record may be stored electronically, a department
director must submit a request for authorization for the electronic storage of
the record to the records management officer as required by the records
management program, this chapter, and state law. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 22026;
23267)
SEC. 39C-20.   RIGHT OF RECOVERY.
   The city may demand and receive from any person any city record in private
possession that was created or received by the city, the removal of which was
not authorized by law. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
SEC. 39C-21.   PENALTY.
   An officer or employee who knowingly or intentionally violates a provision
of this chapter or a requirement, policy, or procedure adopted under this
chapter may be subject to prosecution and penalties under the Local Government
Records Act. (Ord. Nos. 20787; 23267)
CHAPTER 40
RAT CONTROL
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
40-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
40-2.   Places where food exposed or offered for sale.
Sec.
40-3.   Dumping or placing garbage and waste on land or water.
Sec.
40-4.   Accumulation of lumber, boxes, etc.
Sec.
40-5.   Penalty.
ARTICLE II.
BUSINESS BUILDINGS.
Sec.
40-6.   Construction of buildings to conform to chapter.
Sec.
40-7.   Inspections to determine rat infestation; order to protect against
infestation.
Sec.
40-8.   Inspections to determine compliance with chapter.
Sec.
40-9.   Minimum requirements for applying rat-stoppage to buildings.
Sec.
40-10.   Trapping and poisoning rats.
Sec.
40-11.   Protection against climbing or roof rats.
Sec.
40-12.   Authority to close building.
Sec.
40-13.   Using building so that rat harborage brought into existence.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 40-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
      (1)   BUSINESS BUILDING means any structure, whether public or private,
regardless of the type of material used in its construction, located within the
boundaries of the city that is adapted to the occupancy for transaction of
business, whether vacant or occupied, for the rendering of professional
services, for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise, or
for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, rooming houses, beer
parlors, office buildings, public buildings, stores, markets, restaurants,
grain elevators and abattoirs, warehouses, workshops and factories.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter and includes
representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director.
      (3)   OPENING means and refers to any opening in the foundation, side, or
walls of any business building, including roof, chimney eaves, grills, windows,
sidewalk grates, and sidewalk elevators, through which a rat may pass.
      (4)   PERSON means any owner, occupant, agent, individual, partnership,
or corporation, or any other person in custody of any business building.
      (5)   PREMISES means all business buildings, outhouses, sheds, barns,
garages, docks, wharves, piers, grain elevators, and abattoirs, whether public
or private, and any and all other structures used in connection with the
operation of any business building.
      (6)   RAT HARBORAGE means any condition found to exist under which rats
may find shelter or protection, and includes any defective construction that
would permit the entrance of rats into any business building.
      (7)   RAT STOPPAGE means an inexpensive form of rat-proofing designed to
prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings. It is essentially the
closing or protecting of all openings in exterior walls and foundations or the
gates in a sidewalk of business buildings with rat-proof materials installed in
such a manner as to prevent rats from gaining entrance. (Ord. Nos. 7847; 27697)
SEC. 40-2.   PLACES WHERE FOOD EXPOSED OR OFFERED FOR SALE.
   Curb or farmers’ markets in which fruit or vegetables or any other food
products are exposed and offered for sale, on racks, stands, platforms and in
vehicles outside of business buildings, shall have floors paved with concrete
or asphalt for the entire surface area of the market. Display racks, stands or
platforms on which fruit or vegetables or any other food products are displayed
or offered for sale shall be of sufficient height that all such fruit,
vegetables or other food products shall be kept at a distance of not less than
18 inches above the floor pavement and be so constructed that rats cannot
harbor therein or thereunder. (Ord. 7847)
SEC. 40-3.   DUMPING OR PLACING GARBAGE AND WASTE ON LAND OR WATER.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place on any land or on
any water or waterway within the city any dead animal, butchers’ offal,
seafood, or any waste vegetables, animal matter, or any food products
whatsoever.
   (b)   No garbage, rubbish, waste, or manure may be placed, left, dumped, or
permitted to accumulate or remain in any building or premises in the city so
that it shall or may afford food for or a harboring or breeding place for rats.
Rat burrows and other exterior harborage shall be treated under methods
directed by the director. (Ord. Nos. 7847; 27697)
SEC. 40-4.   ACCUMULATION OF LUMBER, BOXES, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any premises, improved or
unimproved, and all open lots and alleys in the city, to accumulate lumber,
boxes, barrels, bricks or stones and similar materials that may be permitted to
remain thereon and that may be used as a harborage by rats, unless same shall
be placed on open racks and elevated not less than 18 inches above the ground,
with a clear intervening space underneath, to prevent the harborage of rats.
(Ord. 7847)
SEC. 40-5.   PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, except where it
is shown that the person has endeavored to obtain the necessary materials
required to ratproof the buildings covered by this chapter and that such
materials were not available, is guilty of an offense.
   (b)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,000 and, upon a first conviction of a violation of Section
40-4 of this chapter, not less than $200.
   (c)   The minimum fine established in Subsection (b) shall be doubled for
the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and
trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any
24-month period. At no time shall the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine
established in Subsection (b).
(Ord. Nos. 7847; 19963; 20599)
ARTICLE II.
BUSINESS BUILDINGS.
SEC. 40-6.   CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS TO CONFORM TO CHAPTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct within the corporate limits
of the city any business building, curb, or farmers’ market, unless such
construction renders the business building ratproof in accordance with the
regulations prescribed by this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 7847; 27697)
SEC. 40-7.   INSPECTIONS TO DETERMINE RAT INFESTATION; ORDER TO PROTECT AGAINST
INFESTATION.
   The director is authorized to make frequent and unannounced inspections of
existing business buildings within the corporate limits of the city for the
purpose of determining any rat infestation, and order by written notice either
the owner, occupant, agent, or any other person in custody of any rat-infested
business building to protect such business building by rat-stoppage as provided
in this chapter, regardless of the need for the remodeling of or repairs to
such business buildings, and further order that such other rat control methods
be employed as may be deemed necessary by the director to maintain business
buildings free from rats. The written notice or order must specify the time, in
no event less than 15 days, for completion of such work and improvements.
Unless such work and improvements are completed in accordance with the written
order or notice by either the owner, whether individual, partnership,
corporation, occupant, agent, or any other person in custody of the business
building within the time so specified or within the time to which a written
extension has been granted by the director, then, in such event, the owner,
occupant, agent, or any other person in custody of the building shall be deemed
guilty of an offense under this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 7847; 27697)
SEC. 40-8.   INSPECTIONS TO DETERMINE COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.
   In accordance with state law, the city health officer, or his
representative, is authorized to make inspections during the course of and upon
completion of any construction, repairs, remodeling, or installation of rat-
control measures to business buildings to ensure compliance with this chapter,
and no person shall interfere with or refuse to permit such inspection. (Ord.
Nos. 7847; 17226; 27697)
SEC. 40-9.   MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLYING RAT-STOPPAGE TO BUILDINGS.
   For the purpose of obtaining maximum rat- stoppage at a minimum cost to the
owner or occupant of business buildings, the following regulations are set
forth as the minimum requirements for applying rat- stoppage to business
buildings:
   (a)   Approval of materials and method. The director shall approve all
materials used and the method of installation.
   (b)   Specifications for metal. Solid sheet metal, expanded metal, and wire
cloth specified in these regulations must have a rust-resisting, protective
coating, preferably galvanized.
   (c)   Coverings for foundation wall ventilator openings. All foundation wall
ventilator openings must be covered for their entire height and width with
perforated sheet metal plates of a thickness not less than 14 gauge, or with
expanded sheet metal of a thickness not less than 18 gauge, or with cast iron
grilles or grates, or with any other material of sufficient strength and equal
rat-resisting properties. The openings in the metal must be small enough to
prevent the ingress of rats, and in no instance larger than one- half inch.
   (d)   Miscellaneous foundation and exterior wall openings. All foundations
and exterior wall openings, excluding those used for the purpose of
ventilation, light, doors, and windows, such as those openings around pipes,
electric cables, conduits, openings due to deteriorated wall, masonry or
concrete, shall be protected against the ingress of rats by closing such
openings with cement mortar, concrete or masonry, or close-fitting sheet metal
or suitable size pipe flanges or other material with equal rat-resisting
properties, which shall be securely fastened in place.
   (e)   Doors.
      (1)   All exposed edges of the lower eight inches of wooden doors and
door jambs, serving as front, rear, or side entrances into business buildings,
from the ground, basement or cellar floors, and other doors accessible to rats,
must be protected against the gnawing of rats by covering such door and jambs
with solid sheet metal of not less than 24 gauge thickness. The same material
must be used on door sills or thresholds, or such door sills or thresholds may
be constructed of cement, stone, steel, or cast iron.
      (2)   All doors on which metal flashing has been applied must be properly
hinged to provide for free swinging. When closed, doors must fit snugly so that
the maximum clearance between any door, door jambs, and sill is not greater
than three-eighths of an inch.
      (3)   Doors, door jambs, and sills of coal chutes and hatchways that are
constructed of wood must be covered with solid sheet metal of 24 gauge or
heavier, or they may be replaced with metal chutes of 24 gauge or heavier
installed in such a manner as will prevent the ingress of rats.
      (4)   Door jambs and sills constructed of metal, concrete, masonry,
stone, or cement mortar, or cast iron and steel, when fitting closely to
exclude rats, are not required to comply with this subsection.
   (f)   Windows.
      (1)   All windows and other openings for the purpose of light or
ventilation, located in the side or rear of exterior walls and within 30 inches
above the existing ground level immediately below such opening, must be covered
for their entire height and width, including frame, with wire cloth of 19 gauge
or heavier, having a mesh of not larger than one-half inch.
      (2)   All window and other openings for the purpose of light or
ventilation in the exterior walls that may be accessible to rats by way of
exposed pipes, wires, conduits, and other appurtenances must be covered with
guards of wire cloth of 19 gauge or heavier, having a mesh of not larger than
one-half inch, or, in lieu of wire cloth covering, the pipes, wires, conduits,
and other appurtenances must be blocked from rat usage by installing sheet
metal guards of 24 gauge or heavier. Such guards when used on horizontal pipes,
wires, conduits, or other appurtenances must be placed in a vertical position
[and] be snugly fitted around the pipe, wire, conduit, or other appurtenance.
      (3)   Such guard must measure not less than 12 inches beyond and on all
sides of the pipe, wire, conduit, or other appurtenance where the intervening
space between the wall and pipe permits, and must extend 30 inches in an upward
direction and 12 inches in a downward direction, and must be securely fastened
to the pipe, wire, conduit, or other appurtenance and also the adjacent wall
wherever practicable so that the guard will remain in a vertical position at
all times.
      (4)   Such guards when used on vertical pipes, wires, conduits, or other
appurtenances must be fitted snugly around the pipe, wire, conduit, or other
appurtenance, must be placed in a horizontal position (right angle to pipe,
etc.), and must extend horizontally from the pipe, wire, conduit, or other
appurtenance for a minimum distance of 12 inches beyond and on all sides of the
pipe, wire, conduit, or other appurtenance, where the intervening space between
pipe and wall permits, and must be securely fastened to the pipe, wire,
conduit, or other appurtenance and also to the adjacent wall wherever
practicable in such manner that the guard will remain in a horizontal position
at all times.
   (g)   Light wells in sidewalks.
      (1)   Light wells with windows in exterior walls that are located below
the outside ground level must be protected from the ingress of rats by one of
the following methods:
         (A)   Installing over light wells cast iron or steel grills or steel
gratings, or other material of equal strength and rat-resisting properties,
with openings in grills or gratings not to exceed one-half inch in shortest
dimension.
         (B)   Installing securely to and completely covering existing metal
grills that are broken or have openings larger than one-half inch in shortest
dimension, or otherwise defective, with expanded metal of 18 gauge or heavier,
having openings not greater than one-half inch in shortest dimension, or with
16 gauge or heavier wire cloth with one-half inch mesh.
      (2)   At the option of the owner, the opening in the wall of the building
below the grate may be entirely closed with brick or concrete, or partially
closed and the remaining open space covered with 19 gauge or heavier wire cloth
with mesh not to exceed one-half inch.
   (h)   Wood frame exterior wall construction.
      (1)   Business buildings constructed on piers must have the intervening
space between floor level and ground protected against the ingress of rats by
installing a solid masonry or concrete curtain wall not less than four inches
thick around the entire perimeter of the business building and extending such
curtain wall to a depth of not less than 30 inches below the surface of the
ground level with a 12 inch wide, four inch deep horizontal flange of the same
material at the bottom of such concrete wall, or a solid sheet metal curtain
wall of 24 gauge or heavier may be used around the intervening space between
floor level and ground level and tying securely into the concrete chain wall at
ground level. Properly protected ventilators must be installed in chain wall.
      (2)   In lieu of the installation of curtain walls, all ground floors of
wood construction may be replaced with concrete of not less than three inches
in thickness with the exterior walls protected for a height of 12 inches above
the concrete floor with masonry, concrete, or solid sheet metal of 24 gauge or
heavier. Exterior wall protection must be securely tied into the concrete floor
at all points. (Ord. Nos. 7847; 27697)
SEC. 40-10.   TRAPPING AND POISONING RATS.
   (a)   For the purpose of eliminating all rats that may remain in any
business building after rat-stoppage has been carried into effect, all store
rooms, warehouses, or other business buildings in the city shall be provided by
the owner, occupant, agent or any other person in custody of such business
building with one or more traps, which must be kept set and freshly baited at
frequent intervals, maintained in good working condition, and inspected daily,
and any rat or rats caught in each trap must be killed, removed daily, and
disposed of in a manner acceptable to the director, and such trap or traps
reset and rebaited.
   (b)   Rats may also be destroyed by poisoning and fumigating in the manner
approved by the director, or by any other authorized agency of the United
States Public Health Service or the State Board of Health, and subject to
applicable laws and ordinances relating to poisonous substances and fumigators.
(Ord. Nos. 7847; 27697)
SEC. 40-11.   PROTECTION AGAINST CLIMBING OR ROOF RATS.
   (a)   In order to protect business buildings from what is commonly called
the climbing or roof rat, it shall be unlawful to permit fishing poles,
ladders, or any other object that a rat could climb on in order to reach the
roof of any business building to lean against the side or walls of such
business buildings.
   (b)   The owner of a business building shall protect elevator shafts, fire
escapes, and guy wires in such a manner that rats will not be able to gain
ingress into the business building.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of any person in charge of a business building to
trim the branches of all trees extending over and against any business
building, and same shall be cut and trimmed and kept trimmed and cut so that no
part of any branch or any part of said tree shall be closer than 10 feet to any
business building, and the tops of all trees shall be cut back 10 feet from a
line extending perpendicularly from any exterior wall of a business building.
(Ord. Nos. 7847; 27697)
SEC. 40-12.   AUTHORITY TO CLOSE BUILDING.
   When the director finds any building, structure, or premises so heavily
infested with rats resulting in a present menace to the public health, the
director shall have authority to close the building, structure, or premises to
any occupancy or use until rats have been eradicated or while rats are being
eradicated. (Ord. Nos. 7847; 27697)
SEC. 40-13.   USING BUILDING SO THAT RAT HARBORAGE BROUGHT INTO EXISTENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or maintain any business building
or premises in such a manner that a rat harborage is brought into existence or
maintained. (Ord. Nos. 7847; 27697)
CHAPTER 40A
RETIREMENT
Sec.
40A-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
40A-2.   Creation of the retirement fund and board of trustees; composition and
officers of the board.
Sec.
40A-3.   Terms and remuneration of the board.
Sec.
40A-4.   Powers, duties, and immunities of the board.
Sec.
40A-4.1.   Investment managers; fiduciary duties.
Sec.
40A-4.2.   Investment custody account.
Sec.
40A-5.   Administrator of the retirement fund.
Sec.
40A-6.   Employee contributions.
Sec.
40A-7.   City contributions.
Sec.
40A-7.1.   Modification of contribution rates.
Sec.
40A-8.   Effect of membership in the retirement fund.
Sec.
40A-9.   Actuarial assumptions.
Sec.
40A-10.   Credited service; computation of benefits.
Sec.
40A-10.1.   Restricted prior service credit.
Sec.
40A-11.   Credited service for employment before a break in service.
Sec.
40A-12.   Credited service for military active duty.
Sec.
40A-13.   Credited service for leave of absence.
Sec.
40A-14.   Reduction in force.
Sec.
40A-15.   Retirement.
Sec.
40A-16.   Retirement pension.
Sec.
40A-17.   Disability retirement.
Sec.
40A-18.   Disability retirement pension.
Sec.
40A-19.   Termination of a disability retirement pension.
Sec.
40A-20.   Re-employment of a retiree.
Sec.
40A-20.1.   Selection of a designee.
Sec.
40A-21.   Death benefits before retirement.
Sec.
40A-22.   Selection of death benefits prior to retirement.
Sec.
40A-23.   Death benefits after retirement.
Sec.
40A-24.   Death benefits to minors.
Sec.
40A-25.   Benefits to incompetent retirees or beneficiaries.
Sec.
40A-26.   Direct rollover.
Sec.
40A-27.   Health benefit supplements.
Sec.
40A-28.   Cost-of-living adjustment to benefits.
Sec.
40A-29.   Termination of city employment prior to retirement; benefits.
Sec.
40A-30.   Refund or forfeiture of contributions.
Sec.
40A-31.   Leave of absence.
Sec.
40A-32.   Leave for military active duty.
Sec.
40A-33.   Compliance with federal tax laws.
Sec.
40A-34.   Nonalienation and nonreduction of benefits.
Sec.
40A-35.   Amendment to this chapter.
SEC. 40A-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
      (1)   ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT means the equivalent in value on the basis of
the actuarial factors recommended by the fund’s actuary and adopted by the
board.
      (2)   ACTUARIAL VALUATION REPORT means the report issued by the fund’s
actuary and adopted by the board for any relevant period. The board shall
provide a copy of each actuarial valuation report to the city promptly after
adoption.
      (3)   ACTUARIALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION RATE means, for any fiscal
year, a rate of contribution to the fund, expressed as a percentage of members’
projected wages for such fiscal year, that is the sum of the following as
determined in the actuarial valuation report for the preceding plan year:
         (A)   the normal cost and expenses that are allocated to a valuation
period by the actuarial cost method; and
         (B)   the contribution that will amortize the difference between the
actuarial accrued liability of the fund and the actuarial value of the assets
of the fund over the period(s). For purposes of this paragraph, the unfunded
actuarial accrued liability as of December 31, 2024, will be amortized over a
closed amortization period of 30 years from December 31, 2024. In each future
valuation, new amortization layers will be amortized over a closed amortization
period that is the later of December 31, 2054 or 20 years. Each year’s new
amortization layer is the difference between the expected remaining balance of
all previous years’ layers and the actual unfunded actuarial accrued liability
for the given valuation. If the actuarial assets of the fund exceed the
actuarial liabilities for a given valuation, the outstanding layers may be
collapsed into a single layer with a closed amortization period that is the
later of December 31, 2054 or 20 years.
      (4)   ACTUARY means a person with at least five years of experience as an
actuary working with one or more public retirement systems; and is a fellow of
the Society of Actuaries, a member of the American Academy of Actuaries, or an
enrolled actuary under the Employees Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29
U.S.C. Section 1001 et seq.).
      (5)   AVERAGE MONTHLY EARNINGS means wages paid by the city, divided by
the number of months of credited service of a member or inactive member,
computed for whichever of the following periods is most beneficial to the
member or inactive member:
         (A)   For Tier A members or inactive members, the:
            (i)   three calendar years of credited service in which the member
or inactive member was paid the highest wage;
            (ii)   last 6,240 hours of credited service; or
            (iii)   length of credited service if less than three years.
         (B)   For Tier B members or inactive members, the:
            (i)   five calendar years of credited service in which the member
or inactive member was paid the highest wage;
            (ii)   last 10,400 hours of credited service; or
            (iii)   length of credited service if less than five years.
      (6)   BASE PENSION means the amount of retirement pension or death
benefits as computed under this chapter at the time of retirement or death of a
member, inactive member, or retiree.
      (7)   BENEFICIARY means a person who is entitled to payment of benefits
under this chapter upon the death of a member, inactive member, or retiree.
      (8)   BOARD means the board of trustees of the employees’ retirement fund
of the city of Dallas.
      (9)   CHILD means an unmarried person whose parent is a member, inactive
member, or retiree.
      (10)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (11)   CITY COUNCIL means the governing body of the city of Dallas,
Texas.
      (12)   COMMUTED VALUE means the present value of a series of payments to
be made in the future, the present value to be calculated using the actuarial
interest assumption prescribed in Section 40A-9 as the only discounting factor.
      (13)   CREDITED SERVICE means any period that a person is paid as an
employee of the city and contributes to the fund.
      (14)   CURRENT ADJUSTED TOTAL OBLIGATION RATE means, for any fiscal year,
the rate recommended by the fund’s actuary and adopted by the board as follows:
         (A)   During the applicable phase-in period:
            (i)   If the current total obligation rate exceeds the total
contribution rate maximum, then the current adjusted total obligation rate for
such fiscal year is equal to the total contribution rate maximum.
            (ii)   If the current total obligation rate is less than or equal
to the total contribution rate maximum, then the current adjusted total
obligation rate for such fiscal year is equal to the current total obligation
rate.
         (B)   After the applicable phase-in period, the current adjusted total
obligation rate for the fiscal year shall equal the current total obligation
rate for such fiscal year. To determine the current adjusted total obligation
rate, the applicable phase-in period means the five-year period beginning on
October 1, 2025, and ending September 30, 2030.
      (15)   CURRENT TOTAL OBLIGATION RATE means, for any fiscal year in which
a pension obligation bond credit rate is included, the contribution rate over
the period adopted by the board that incorporates the pension obligation bond
credit rate (if any) for such fiscal year and the actuarially determined
contribution rate for such fiscal year, otherwise it will be equal to the
actuarially determined contribution rate.
      (16)   DEPENDENT PARENT means a member, inactive member, or retiree’s
parent who is:
         (A)   totally and permanently disabled and who receives over half of
the support for each calendar year from the member, inactive member, or
retiree; or
         (B)   65 years of age or older.
      (17)   DESIGNEE means an estate, a person, or an entity selected by:
         (A)   a member or inactive member to receive a refund of contributions
under Section 40A-21(b);
         (B)   a member, inactive member, or retiree to receive a commuted
value lump sum payment under Section 40A-16(e) or 40A-21(c); or
         (C)   a member, inactive member, or retiree to receive the earned but
unpaid portion of the final month’s pension due under Section 40A-23(e).
      (18)   EMPLOYEE:
         (A)   means a person employed by the city on a permanent basis who
receives regular compensation from the city; and
         (B)   does not mean:
            (i)   an elective officer or nonsalaried appointive member of an
administrative board or commission;
            (ii)   a person retained under contract for a definite period or
for the performance of a particular service;
            (iii)   a person given a temporary designation for the purpose of
employment by the city;
            (iv)   a leased employee; or
            (v)   a police officer, firefighter, or fire alarm operator as
those categories are defined in the classifications of the personnel department
of the city.
      (19)   FISCAL YEAR means the city’s fiscal year, which is the 12-month
period commencing October 1 and ending the following September 30.
      (20)   INACTIVE MEMBER means a person:
         (A)   who has terminated employment with the city but who has not
retired; and
         (B)   whose contributions to the fund have not been forfeited or
withdrawn.
      (21)   INJURY means an accident resulting in damage or harm to the
physical structure of the body.
      (22)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or
its successor, as amended.
      (23)   LEASED EMPLOYEE means an individual who is not a common law
employee of the city but who provides services to the city, if:
         (A)   such services are performed pursuant to an agreement between the
city and another person;
         (B)   the individual has performed such services for the city or for
the city and a related person or persons on a substantially full-time basis for
at least one year; and
         (C)   such services are performed under the primary direction or
control of the city.
      (24)   LEAVE OF ABSENCE means:
         (A)   leave without pay granted by the city in accordance with a
uniform and nondiscriminatory leave policy; or
         (B)   leave during which a member receives worker's compensation
benefits or short-term disability benefits.
      (25)   MEMBER means an employee who is currently contributing to the
retirement fund or who is on an approved leave of absence, but does not include
a person establishing credited service under Section 40A-14 after termination
of employment because of reduction in force.
      (26)   NONSERVICE DISABILITY means total and permanent disability caused
by injury, sickness, or disease while not in the performance of official city
duties.
      (26.1)   NORMAL COST means the actuarial present value of the pension
plan benefits that are allocated to a valuation period by the actuarial cost
method.
      (27)   PARENT has the meaning ascribed to that term in Section 51.02 of
the Texas Family Code, as amended.
      (28)   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE means an employee classified as part-time by
the city under Section 34-8(c) of this code, as amended.
      (29)   PENSION means an amount payable monthly to a person eligible to
receive death or retirement benefits under the retirement fund.
      (30)   PENSION OBLIGATION BOND CREDIT RATE means, for any fiscal year,
the rate adopted by the board that is a percentage calculated by dividing the:
         (A)   debt service due during such fiscal year on any pension
obligation bonds, the proceeds of which have been deposited in the fund, by
         (B)   total members’ projected wages for such fiscal year, as reported
in the relevant actuarial valuation report.
      (31)    PENSION OBLIGATION BONDS means bonds described in Chapter 107 of
the Texas Local Government Code (or any successor law that supersedes such
chapter) and issued by the city.
      (32)   PERCENTAGE MULTIPLIER means the percentage by which the average
monthly earnings of a member or inactive member is multiplied in order to
compute benefits.
      (33)   PERMANENT BASIS means employ-ment of an individual for an unfixed
continuing period.
      (34)   PERSON means an individual.
      (35)   PLAN YEAR means the calendar year or other plan year adopted by
the board.
      (36)   PRICE INDEX means the national Consumer Price Index of Urban Wage
Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) published by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics of the U. S. Department of Labor, or its successor in function.
      (37)   QUALIFIED RECIPIENT means:
         (A)   the spouse of a deceased member or inactive member at the time
of death of the member or inactive member;
         (B)   the spouse of a deceased retiree, if the spouse was married to
the retiree at the time of retirement and at the time of the retiree’s death;
         (C)   each child of a deceased member, inactive member, or retiree
under the age of 18, if the child was alive or had been conceived at the time
of death of the member, inactive member, or retiree;
         (D)   each totally and permanently disabled child of a deceased
member, inactive member, or retiree if the child was totally and permanently
disabled before the age of 18; and
         (E)   a parent of a deceased member, inactive member, or retiree who
was a dependent parent at the time of death of the member, inactive member, or
retiree.
      (38)   RESTRICTED PRIOR SERVICE CREDIT means service credit for work as a
permanent, full-time, paid employee of a government entity, agency, authority,
or political subdivision of the United States or its states or territories,
performed before employment or re-employment by the city.
      (39)   RETIREE means a person who was once a member but who has retired
from city employment and is receiving a pension from the fund other than a
death benefit.
      (40)   RETIREMENT means terminating city employment for a reason other
than death and fulfilling all requirements for a pension under this chapter.
      (41)   RETIREMENT FUND or FUND means the employees’ retirement fund of
the city of Dallas and the program of benefits established under this chapter
and any rule or regulation established by the board.
      (42)   SERVICE DEATH means the death of a member resulting from an injury
sustained while in the performance of official city duties. A death resulting
from an injury sustained while in the performance of official city duties does
not include:
         (A)   a death caused by an act of God unless the member in the
performance of official city duties was subjected to a greater hazard from an
act of God than that to which the general public was subjected;
         (B)   a death caused by an act of a third person who causes the death
of the member because of reasons personal to the third person and not for
reasons of the member’s employment;
         (C)   a death caused while the member was attempting to injure or kill
another person;
         (D)   a suicide;
         (E)   a death while on leave of absence, unless the leave was granted
solely because of an injury sustained in the performance of official city
duties and the injury was the primary cause of death;
         (F)   a death while on leave for military active duty; or
         (G)   a death resulting from an injury in which a contributing factor
was the member’s ingestion of an alcoholic beverage or illegal ingestion,
inhalation, or injection of a controlled substance.
      (43)   SERVICE DISABILITY means total and permanent disability caused by
injury while in the performance of official city duties. An injury while in the
performance of official city duties does not include:
         (A)   an injury caused by an act of God unless the member in the
performance of official city duties was subjected to a greater hazard from an
act of God than that to which the general public was subjected;
         (B)   an injury caused by an act of a third person who injures the
member because of reasons personal to the third person and not for reasons of
the member’s employment;
         (C)   an injury in which a contributing factor was the member’s
ingestion of an alcoholic beverage or illegal ingestion, inhalation, or
injection of a controlled substance;
         (D)   an injury caused while the member was attempting to injure or
kill another person; or
         (E)   an injury that was self-inflicted.
      (44)   SPOUSE means the person to whom the member, inactive member, or
retiree is married, as evidenced by the last marriage certificate or
declaration of informal marriage on file with the retirement fund and verified
by the administrator to be valid in the jurisdiction in which the marriage was
celebrated.
      (45)   TIER A means:
         (A)   a person who was:
            (i)   employed by the city before January 1, 2017; or
            (ii)    re-employed or reinstated by the city on or after January
1, 2017, and whose credited service before January 1, 2017, has not been
canceled by withdrawal or forfeiture; and
         (B)   a beneficiary or designee of that person.
      (46)   TIER B means:
         (A)   a person who was:
            (i)   employed by the city on or after January 1, 2017; or
            (ii)    re-employed or reinstated by the city on or after January
1, 2017, and whose prior credited service has been canceled by withdrawal or
forfeiture; and
         (B)   a beneficiary or designee of that person.
      (47)   TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY means the continuing inability of a
person to obtain and retain any type of employment for compensation as a result
of a mental or physical impairment caused by an injury or illness. A person is
not under a total or permanent disability if, with reasonable effort and safety
to the person, the impairment can be diminished to the extent that the person
will not be prevented by the impairment from obtaining and retaining any type
of employment for compensation.
      (48)   TOTAL CONTRIBUTION RATE MAXIMUM means for fiscal years 2026
through 2030:
         (A)   38.22 percent (fiscal year 2026);
         (B)   39.45 percent (fiscal year 2027);
         (C)   40.68 percent (fiscal year 2028);
         (D)   41.91 percent (fiscal year 2029); and
         (E)   the actuarially determined contribution rate (fiscal year 2030
and all subsequent fiscal years).
      (49)   VESTED means that a member or inactive member has accumulated
sufficient credited service or age to have earned a nonforfeitable right to
receive a pension benefit, payable in accordance with the terms of the plan.
      (50)   WAGE:
         (A)   means:
            (i)   wages of an employee as defined in Section 3401(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code for income tax withholding, including salary continuation
payments made to an employee with a job-related injury or illness;
            (ii)    compensation that by special rule is excluded from Section
3401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code because of the nature or location of the
services performed;
            (iii)   elective contributions to a plan of deferred compensation,
including a plan established under Section 125, 401(k), or 457 of the Internal
Revenue Code, and elective reductions in compensation for qualified
transportation fringe benefits that are excluded from an employee’s gross
income by reason of Section 132(f)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code; and
            (iv)   any lump sum payment made at termination of employment for
accrued vacation leave or prorated service incentive pay; and
         (B)   does not mean:
            (i)   expense reimbursements, expense allowances, car allowances,
or moving expenses;
            (ii)   cash or noncash fringe benefits;
            (iii)   welfare benefits, including, but not limited to, health
benefits or life insurance benefits;
            (iv)   deferred compensation, unless made under a plan described in
Paragraph (A)(iii) of this subsection;
            (v)   any lump sum payment made at retirement for accrued sick
leave or attendance incentive leave;
            (vi)   workers compensation benefits, short-term disability
benefits, or catastrophic leave benefits; or
            (vii)   any compensation in excess of the limits imposed by Section
401(a)(17)(A), as adjusted in accordance with Section 401(a)(17)(B), of the
Internal Revenue Code.
(Ord. Nos. 15414; 16886; 17713; 18181; 19470; 20960; 21582; 22345; 25695;
25818; 28739; 29644; 30162; 32801)
SEC. 40A-2.   CREATION OF THE RETIREMENT FUND AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES;
COMPOSITION AND OFFICERS OF THE BOARD.
   (a)   Creation. There is hereby created the employees' retirement fund of
the city of Dallas, which is a trust fund, and the board of trustees of the
employees' retirement fund of the city of Dallas.
   (b)   Public entity. The fund is a public entity established for the
exclusive purpose of providing benefits to members and their beneficiaries.
Except as permitted under this chapter or by state law, the employees'
retirement fund of the city of Dallas is the name in which all of its business
must be transacted, all of its funds invested, and all of its cash, securities,
and property held.
   (c)   Composition of the board.
      (1)   The board shall be composed of seven members consisting of:
         (A)   three persons appointed by the city council who may be city
council members;
         (B)   three employees from different departments of the city who are
elected by members of the retirement fund and who are members of the retirement
fund; and
         (C)   the city auditor.
      (2)   If only one eligible employee is nominated for an elected board
position described in Subsection (c)(1)(B) of this section, that employee will
be declared elected to that position by the board without requiring an election
by the members of the retirement fund.
   (d)   Chair and vice chair.
      (1)   The board shall elect a chair and a vice-chair at the first regular
meeting each calendar year. The chair shall call a meeting as frequently as
necessary to conduct the business of the board, but not less than quarterly. In
the absence of the chair, the vice-chair may call meetings or preside over
meetings of the board.
      (2)   If the office of chair or vice-chair becomes vacant, the board will
elect a replacement at its next meeting. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 20960; 21582; 25695;
30162)
SEC. 40A-3.   TERMS AND REMUNERATION OF THE BOARD.
   (a)   Terms.
      (1)   Elected board members.
         (A)   On and after January 1, 2025, the three elected positions on the
board will be designated Place 1, Place 2, and Place 3, respectively, as
determined by the board.
         (B)   The elected members, including incumbents, of the board shall
serve without remuneration and for terms as follows:
            (i)   A member elected to Place 1 will serve a three-year term,
with the initial term running from January 1, 2027, through December 31, 2029.
            (ii)   A member elected to Place 2 will serve a three-year term,
with the initial term running from January 1, 2025, through December 31, 2027.
            (iii)   A member elected to Place 3 will serve a three-year term,
except that the initial term will be for two years and run from January 1,
2026, through December 31, 2028.
         (C)   A person who has served as an elected member of the board under
this subsection for three consecutive terms beginning on and after January 1,
2025, of whatever length of time, will not again be eligible to serve on the
board until at least one term has elapsed, regardless of whether service was as
a member or chair.
      (2)   Appointed board members. The appointed members of the board shall
serve without remuneration and for terms of two years. In accordance with
Section
8-1.5 (a), a person who has served as an appointed member of the board under
this subsection for four consecutive two-year terms will not again be eligible
to serve on the board until at least one term has elapsed, regardless of
whether service was as a member or chair.
   (b)   Vacancy.
      (1)   A position on the board becomes vacant if the occupant:
         (A)   was elected as an employee member and is no longer an employee;
         (B)   was appointed while serving as a city council member and is no
longer a city council member; or
         (C)   gives the chair written notice of resignation from the board.
      (2)   If a vacancy occurs on the board in a position held by:
         (A)   an elected employee member, the board shall hold an election
within 90 days after the vacancy occurs to fill the unexpired term of the
member; or
         (B)   a city council appointee, the city council shall appoint a new
member to fill the unexpired term of the member. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 20960;
21582; 25695; 30162; 32801)
SEC. 40A-4.   POWERS, DUTIES, AND IMMUNITIES OF THE BOARD.
   (a)   In addition to other powers and duties it may have under state or
federal law, the board shall have the power and duty to:
      (1)   administer the retirement fund in accordance with this chapter for
the exclusive purposes of providing benefits to members, inactive members,
retirees, and their beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of
administering the fund;
      (2)   adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter and
the constitution and laws of this state;
      (3)   invest, reinvest, alter, and change the funds of the retirement
fund with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the prevailing
circumstances that a prudent person acting in like capacity and familiar with
matters of the type would use in the conduct of an enterprise with a like
character and like aims;
      (4)   diversify the investments of the fund to minimize the risk of large
losses, unless under the circumstances it is clearly prudent not to do so;
      (5)   pay for professional services out of investments of the retirement
fund when it is actuarially determined that the payments will not have an
adverse effect on payment of benefits and when in the judgment of the board the
services are necessary;
      (6)   appoint an administrator and authorize employees to carry out the
business of the board;
      (7)   establish rates of compensation for employees of the retirement
fund, subject to the approval of the city council and in accordance with civil
service rules of the city;
      (8)   correct administrative errors and remedy any effects of those
errors;
      (9)   make a final determination of the eligibility of a member, inactive
member, retiree, or beneficiary for a normal, early, service, or disability
pension or death benefits;
      (10)   issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and the production
of records, papers, or other objects, administer oaths to witnesses, and
examine witnesses on any matter relating to the payment of benefits of the
retirement fund;
      (11)   determine the time, method, and manner of election to the board in
a manner consistent with Section
40A-3;
      (12)   prepare and adopt a budget;
      (13)   pay for fiduciary insurance out of investments of the retirement
fund when it is actuarially determined that the payments will not have an
adverse effect on payment of benefits and when in the judgment of the board the
services are necessary;
      (14)   pay for the costs of administration out of investments of the
retirement fund when it is actuarially determined that the payments will not
have an adverse effect on payment of benefits and when in the judgment of the
board the costs are necessary;
      (15)   sue and be sued in the name of the fund;
      (16)   except as provided in Sections
40A-7.1 and
40A-9, appoint an actuary and adopt actuarial assumptions for the fund;
      (17)   appoint such other professionals as it deems appropriate and
necessary;
      (18)   interpret this chapter as necessary to resolve any problems
created by any ambiguities, inconsistencies, or omissions that might be found
in this chapter;
      (19)   direct the fund’s actuarial firm to perform an annual experience
review of assumptions as part of its annual actuarial valuation;
      (20)   direct the fund’s actuarial firm to perform a complete analysis of
actuarial assumptions as frequently as the board deems necessary, but not less
frequently than every five years; and
      (21)   engage a second actuarial firm to perform an actuarial peer
review/audit as the board deems necessary.
   (b)   The board may not cause the fund to engage in a transaction if the
board knows or should know that the transaction directly or indirectly
constitutes a prohibited transaction under Section 503(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
   (c)   No expenditures may be made from the retirement fund without the
approval of the board by resolution or by adoption of its budget.
   (d)   Except as provided in Sections
40A-7.1 and
40A-9, the board shall adopt the actuarially determined contribution rate, the
current adjusted total obligation rate, the current total obligation rate, and
the pension obligation bond credit rate for each fiscal year no later than June
1 of the preceding fiscal year, and shall promptly notify the city manager of
the adoption.
   (e)   At least every five plan years, or in accordance with state law,
whichever is sooner, the board shall provide 60 days’ notice to the city
manager:
      (1)   that the board intends to engage a second actuarial firm to perform
an actuarial peer review/audit; and
      (2)   the name of the actuarial firm the board intends to engage.
   If, within the 60 days, the city manager objects to the actuarial firm
selected, the board shall seek another actuarial firm to perform the peer
review/audit and re-notify the city manager. This process shall repeat until
the city manager no longer objects to the actuarial firm the board intends to
engage. The board shall then engage such actuarial firm for such purpose.
   (f)   The board shall meet at any time after posting timely notice as
required by law. Four members of the board constitute a quorum. The approval of
four members of the board is necessary for any motion of the board to carry.
   (g)   The board is not liable for its acts and conduct or any losses
incurred in the administration of the retirement fund, the management of the
assets of the fund, or the investment of the fund if the board has met the
standards set forth in Subsections (a) and (b) of this section and in Sections
40A-4.1 and
40A-4.2.
   (h)   If the board, in good faith, is in doubt as to the construction or
interpretation of any provision of this chapter, or has any other question that
may arise during the administration of the retirement fund, the board may
resolve all such doubts and questions without obtaining a judicial
construction. All constructions and interpretations made by the board are
binding and conclusive.
   (i)   The board may consult with an actuary, attorney, physician, or
accountant, who may also be employed by the city. The board is not liable for
any act or conduct that was performed in good faith reliance on the opinion of
an actuary, attorney, physician, or accountant with respect to an actuarial,
legal, medical, or accounting matter, respectively. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 17713;
18181; 19470; 20960; 21582; 22345; 25695; 30162; 32801)
SEC. 40A-4.1.   INVESTMENT MANAGERS; FIDUCIARY DUTIES.
   (a)   The board may appoint investment managers for the fund by contracting
for professional investment management services with one or more organizations,
which may include a bank if it has a trust department, that are in the business
of managing investments.
   (b)   To be eligible for appointment under this section, an investment
manager must be:
      (1)   an organization registered under the Investment Advisors Act of
1940 (15 U.S.C. Section 80b-1 et seq.);
      (2)   a bank as defined by that Act; or
      (3)   an insurance company qualified to perform investment services under
the laws of more than one state.
   (c)   In a contract made under this section, the board shall specify any
policies, requirements, or restrictions, including criteria for determining the
quality of investments and for the use of standard rating services, that the
board may adopt for investment of the fund.
   (d)   In choosing and contracting for professional investment management
services and in continuing the use of an investment manager, the board must act
prudently and in the interest of the members, inactive members, retirees, and
their beneficiaries.
   (e)   The board is not liable for the acts or omissions of an investment
manager appointed under this section, nor is the board obligated to invest or
otherwise manage any asset of the fund subject to management by the investment
manager.
   (f)   An investment manager appointed under this section shall acknowledge
in writing the manager's fiduciary responsibilities to the fund, which include
the same duties assigned to the board in Section
40A-4(a)(1), (3), and (4).
   (g)   The investment standards provided by Section
40A-4(a) and (b) and the policies, requirements, and restrictions adopted under
this section are the only standards, policies, requirements, and restrictions
governing the investment of funds of the retirement fund by an investment
manager or by the board during a 90-day interim between professional investment
management services. Any other standard, policy, requirement, or restriction
provided by law is suspended and not applicable during a time, and for 90 days
after a time, in which an investment manager is responsible for investment of
fund assets. If an investment manager has not begun managing investments before
the 91st day after the date of termination of the services of a previous
investment manager, the standards, policies, requirements, and restrictions
otherwise provided by law are applicable until the date professional investment
management services are resumed. (Ord. Nos. 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-4.2.   INVESTMENT CUSTODY ACCOUNT.
   (a)   If the board contracts for professional investment management
services, it also shall enter into an investment custody account agreement
designating one or more banks, depository trust companies, or brokerage firms
meeting the requirements under Section 802.205(d) of the Texas Government Code,
as amended, to serve as custodian for the assets allocated to or generated
under the contract.
   (b)   Under an investment custody account agreement, the board shall require
the designated custodian to perform the duties and assume the responsibilities
for funds under the contract for which the agreement is established that are
performed and assumed, in the absence of a contract, by the custodian of system
funds. (Ord. Nos. 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-5.   ADMINISTRATOR OF THE RETIREMENT FUND.
   (a)   The administrator of the retirement fund shall carry out the business
of the board and keep a record of the proceedings of the board.
   (b)    The administrator, in accordance with civil service rules of the
city, may appoint and hire deputies and other employees.
   (c)   The administrator shall serve at the will of the board.
   (d)   The administrator is the "plan administrator," as that term is defined
in 26 U.S.C. 414(g).
   (e)   Whenever the term "executive director" is used in relation to the
retirement fund in any plan documents, contracts, resolutions, or other
documents generated by the board or the fund, or in any city
ordinances, resolutions, or contracts related to the fund, that term will mean
"administrator." (Ord. Nos. 15414; 19470; 20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-6.   EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (a)   Members. Every employee must be a member of the fund except:
      (1)   a retiree re-employed by the city, who may elect not to contribute
to the fund under Section 40A-20; or
      (2)   a leased employee who is not eligible to contribute to the fund.
   (b)   Contribution amount. For each pay period ending during a fiscal year,
each member shall contribute to the retirement fund an amount equal to 37
percent times the current adjusted total obligation rate for that fiscal year
times the member’s wages for the pay period, except that a Tier A member shall
not contribute more than 14 percent of the member’s wages per pay period to the
retirement fund and a Tier B member shall not contribute more than 13.32
percent of the member’s wages per pay period to the retirement fund.
   (c)   Deductions. The contributions by each member receiving compensation
from the city will normally be made by means of deduction on each payday.
   (d)   Discontinuing contributions.
      (1)   No member may discontinue contributions to the retirement fund
unless the member is on:
         (A)   unpaid leave for military active duty; or
         (B)   a leave of absence.
      (2)   A member who discontinues contributions to the retirement fund
under Subsection (d)(1)(B) will have any retirement or death benefits computed
based on credited service established at the date of discontinuance. (Ord. Nos.
15414; 17713; 19470; 20960; 21582; 25695; 30162; 32801)
SEC. 40A-7.   CITY CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (a)   Contribution amount. The city shall contribute to the retirement fund
an amount equal to the current adjusted total obligation rate for that fiscal
year times the members’ wages for the pay period, minus the sum of:
      (1)   the projected aggregate member contributions under Section
40A-6; and
      (2)   the pension obligation bond credit rate for that fiscal year, with
such sum divided by the members’ wages for the pay period.
   (b)   In addition to the contributions required under Subsection (a), the
city may at any time, in its sole discretion, contribute additional monies to
the retirement fund. The impact of any such additional contributions will be
reflected in the contribution rates determined by the actuarial valuation next
following the date on which any such additional contributions are made.
   (c)   The city shall provide for costs of administration of the retirement
fund, if the board determines that payment of the costs by the retirement fund
will have an adverse effect on payment of benefits and that the costs are
necessary. The city may modify any budget provision for administrative costs
that it is being asked to fund under this subsection.
   (d)   The total contributions of the employees and the city must be
forwarded by the city to the retirement fund not later than the end of each
week for all contributions made as to the pay period ending in that week.
   (e)   The city may not contribute to the retirement fund for an employee on
leave of absence or unpaid leave for military active duty.
   (f)   The city may not withdraw its contribution previously made to the
retirement fund. Nothing in this subsection prohibits the administrative
adjustment of future contributions for erroneously made prior contributions, if
the adjustment is made within 60 days after the error is made or discovered,
whichever occurs later.
   (g)    All payments and benefits provided for in this chapter must be made
from the retirement fund. There is no obligation on the part of the city, the
board, or the employees to provide for payment of benefits from any other
source, nor is there any liability on the city or the employees to make any
contribution other than those specified in this section and Section
40A-6. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 18181; 19470; 20960; 21582; 25695; 30162; 32801)
SEC. 40A-7.1.   MODIFICATION OF CONTRIBUTION RATES.
   Notwithstanding the definitions in Sections
40A-1(3),
40A-1(14),
40A-1(15),
40A-1(30), and
40A-1(48), the provisions of Sections
40A-4(d) and
40A-7, or any other provision to the contrary:
      (1)   Changes to the actuarial assumptions, including, but not limited
to, the discount rate, that in-creases the retirement fund liability must be
approved prospectively by the board and the city council.
      (2)   Settlement of any lawsuit by the retirement fund that increases the
retirement fund liability must be approved prospectively by the board and the
city council.
      (3)   Annually, the fund and the city will each calculate an actuarially
determined contribution rate for the following fiscal year. The city will
accept the rate that is determined by the fund's actuary and presented to the
board, except, if the difference between the rates that are calculated by the
actuaries of the city and the fund is greater than three percent, the fund and
the city shall engage in a 30-day reconciliation period. If, within such
period, the actuaries of the city and the fund reconcile the results of their
respective calculations of the actuarially determined contribution rate for the
applicable fiscal year, the rate that was calculated by the fund’s actuary
shall be accepted by the city and the fund. If no such resolution is reached
within the 30-day reconciliation period, an average of the rates, determined by
the actuaries of the city and the fund, will be used to determine the city's
contribution under Section
40A-7 for the upcoming fiscal year.
      (4)   After the applicable phase-in period defined in Section
40A-1(14), if in any fiscal year the actuarially determined contribution rate
(excluding the December 31, 2024 unfunded actuarially accrued liability 30-year
amortization schedule) exceeds plus or minus five percent of the actuarially
determined contribution rate (excluding the December 31, 2024 unfunded
actuarially accrued liability 30-year amortization schedule) specified by the
December 31, 2024 actuarial valuation, the excess amount will be amortized over
a period of 20 years or until December 31, 2054, whichever is later. If the
city council determines that the fund is projected to be fully funded in over
30 years, the city council may, in its sole discretion, waive this paragraph.
The board may make a recommendation to city council requesting that city
council waive this paragraph. (Ord. Nos. 25695; 30162; 32801)
SEC. 40A-8.   EFFECT OF MEMBERSHIP IN THE RETIREMENT FUND.
   A person, by becoming or remaining a member, inactive member, retiree, or
beneficiary of the retirement fund, binds the person and the person's heirs,
administrators, executors, legal representatives, beneficiaries, and survivors
to all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 19470; 20960; 21582;
30162)
SEC. 40A-9.   ACTUARIAL ASSUMPTIONS.
   (a)   Except when specifically provided in Section
40A-7.1(1) or as otherwise provided in this chapter, the board, upon
recommendation of the fund’s actuary, shall adopt and establish reasonable
actuarial assumptions, interest rates, and mortality tables to be used under
this chapter.
   (b)   When determining the commuted value of future benefits under the fund
during a particular calendar year, the five-year average of the 10-year
treasury bond (calculated as of the last business day of each of the last five
years averaged together) is the interest assumption that must be used.
   (c)   When calculating the limits under Section 415 of the Internal Revenue
Code, the applicable mortality table and applicable interest rate determined by
the United States secretary of the treasury and in effect at the time of the
calculation must be used. (Ord. Nos. 20960; 21582; 28739; 30162; 32801)
SEC. 40A-10.   CREDITED SERVICE; COMPUTATION OF BENEFITS.
   (a)   A retiree or a beneficiary is entitled to benefits of the retirement
fund on the basis of credited service established while a member.
   (b)   Credited service includes:
      (1)   the length of credited service performed by the member or inactive
member before retirement for which contributions to the fund have not been
withdrawn or forfeited;
      (2)   the length of credited service performed by the member or inactive
member prior to withdrawal or forfeiture of contributions to the fund if the
credited service has been reinstated under Section
40A-11;
      (3)   the length of credited service for military active duty under
Section
40A-12;
      (4)   the amount of vacation leave for which the member or inactive
member received lump sum payment at termination of employment;
      (5)   the amount of credited service that is established at the time of a
reduction in force in accordance with Section
40A-14; and
      (6)   the amount of credited service established by a retiree who is re-
employed by the city and elects to contribute to the fund in accordance with
Section
40A-20.
   (c)   For purposes of determining eligibility to retire, but not for
purposes of computing benefits, a part-time employee shall receive one year of
credited service upon completion of 1,000 hours of service in any 12-
consecutive-month period beginning on the employee's date of employment or
employment anniversary date.
   (d)   For the purpose of computing benefits, a member is deemed to be on
leave of absence during any portion of a work period for which the member does
not receive wages from the city, including, but not limited to, any time for
which the member does not receive wages as a result of part-time employment or
pro rata compensation. A member receiving sick leave or salary continuation
payments in an amount coordinated with workers compensation payments is deemed
to be receiving wages for that portion of time covered by sick leave and salary
continuation payments and to be on leave of absence for that portion of time
covered by workers compensation payments.
   (e)   Benefits may not exceed 100 percent of the average monthly earnings of
the member or inactive member.
   (f)   For a Tier A member or inactive member, benefits are computed at the
rate of 2-3/4 percent of the average monthly earnings of the member or inactive
member for the total amount of credited service by the member or inactive
member. Benefits will be prorated for each partial year of credited service.
   (g)   For a Tier B member or inactive member, benefits are computed at the
rate of 2-1/2 percent of the average monthly earnings of the member or inactive
member for the total amount of credited service by the member or inactive
member. Benefits will be prorated for each partial year of credited service.
   (h)   Benefits will be computed under this chapter without regard to gender.
(Ord. Nos. 15414; 16886; 18181; 20443; 20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-10.1.   RESTRICTED PRIOR SERVICE CREDIT.
   (a)   A Tier B member may be eligible for restricted prior service credit to
be used in determining a member's eligibility to vest or retire, but not toward
calculating benefits under this chapter.
   (b)   To be eligible, a Tier B member must apply for restricted prior
service credit not later than three years after the date of employment or re-
employment by the city. The application must be on a form approved by the
administrator and must be submitted to the administrator. Upon verification of
prior restricted service, the administrator shall grant the credit. (Ord.
30162)
SEC. 40A-11.   CREDITED SERVICE FOR EMPLOYMENT BEFORE A BREAK IN SERVICE.
   (a)   An eligible member whose credited service in the fund was canceled by
withdrawal or forfeiture of contributions may reinstate the credited service.
   (b)   To be eligible to reinstate credited service under this section, a
member must have:
      (1)   returned to employment with the city and resumed contributing to
the fund within six years of the end of the period of service for which credit
was canceled; and
      (2)   continuously contributed to the fund for 12 consecutive months
after returning to city employment.
   (c)   A member may reinstate credited service only during the 24-month
period beginning on the completion of 12 consecutive months of service
following a cancellation of credited service.
   (d)   A member shall have only one period of time under this section in
which to reinstate credited service canceled by any single withdrawal or
forfeiture of contributions.
   (e)   An eligible member choosing to reinstate credited service must
reinstate either all of the credited service canceled by a single withdrawal or
forfeiture or the amount of credited service canceled by a single withdrawal or
forfeiture that is needed to make the member eligible for pension benefits
equal to 100 percent of the member's average monthly earnings on the date of
reinstatement. Where reinstatement of a portion of credited service is
authorized under this subsection, the member must reinstate credited service
from the last earned to the first earned.
   (f)   An eligible member may reinstate credited service as follows:
      (1)   If credited service was canceled by withdrawal of contributions,
         (A)   a Tier A member must deposit in the fund a lump sum equal to the
amount withdrawn, or portion of the amount withdrawn where full credited
service is not to be reinstated, plus interest of 7-1/2 percent compounded
annually from the date of withdrawal to the date of reinstatement; and
         (B)   a Tier B member must deposit in the fund a lump sum equal to the
amount withdrawn, or portion of the amount withdrawn where full credited
service is not to be reinstated, plus interest at a rate equal to the highest
actuarial rate of return assumption used during the withdrawal period
compounded annually from the date of withdrawal to the date of reinstatement.
      (2)   If credited service was canceled by forfeiture of contributions,
the member must file an application for reinstatement on a form approved by the
administrator and submit the application to the administrator.
   (g)   If an eligible member has more than one break in service during which
credited service was canceled, the credited service must be reinstated from the
last canceled to the first canceled. (Ord. Nos. 154141; 19470; 20960; 21582;
30162)
SEC. 40A-12.   CREDITED SERVICE FOR MILITARY ACTIVE DUTY.
   (a)   A member with a break in service for military active duty is entitled
to credited service for the period of military active duty not exceeding five
years if the time is spent in the service of the armed forces of the United
States, provided the member satisfactorily completes active service and returns
to the service of the city after the member's discharge within the period
described by law, if any.
   (b)   Benefits of a member allowed under Subsection (a) for the period of
the break in service for military active duty is computed at the appropriate
rate of the average monthly earnings of the member on the date the break in
service for military active duty was granted for each year the member is on
military active duty.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, contributions,
benefits, and service with respect to qualified military service will be
provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (d)   If a member dies while performing qualified military service (as
defined in Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code), the beneficiaries of
the member are entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefits
relating to the period of qualified military service) that would have been
provided if the member had returned to service and then died. (Ord. Nos. 15414;
18181; 19470; 20960; 21582; 25818; 28739; 30162)
SEC. 40A-13.   CREDITED SERVICE FOR LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   Except as provided in Section
40A-12, no credited service will be given for time spent on leave of absence.
(Ord. Nos. 15414; 20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-14.   REDUCTION IN FORCE.
   (a)   The administrator must be notified in writing by the city manager, or
by any department head not under the city manager, each time an employee who is
a member is terminated as the result of a reduction in force. The determination
of the city manager, or a department head not under the city manager, as to the
date and the cause of termination is final and binding.
   (b)   A person is eligible to establish credited service under this section
if the person:
      (1)   had five or more years of credited service at the time of
termination;
      (2)   would have been eligible to retire within two years had employment
not been terminated; and
      (3)   was designated by the city manager, or by a department head not
under the city manager, as being terminated as a result of a reduction in
force.
   (c)   A person eligible under Subsection (b) may establish any amount of
credited service desired, up to a maximum of the amount of credited service
needed to take the person to the earliest retirement date, by making a lump sum
payment of the amount required by Subsection (d) within 90 days after the
person's termination date.
   (d)   The amount of contributions required to be paid to establish credited
service under Subsection (c) is equal to the employee contribution rate being
paid under Section
40A-6 plus the city contribution rate being paid under Section
40A-7 multiplied by the average monthly wage earned by the person during the
last 12 full months of service prior to termination multiplied by the number of
months of credited service to be established.
   (e)   Credited service established under this section will be credited to
the person purchasing the credited service on a month-by-month basis as if the
person had remained a city employee and a member.
   (f)   If a person who paid to establish credited service under this section
is reinstated as a member before establishing all of the service purchased,
then any unused portion of the lump sum payment will be returned to the person
without interest, and any uncredited service for which payment was made will be
canceled.
   (g)   If a person who paid to establish credited service under this section
dies before establishing all of the credited service purchased, then any unused
portion of the lump sum payment will be paid to the beneficiary, or, if there
is no beneficiary, to the decedent's estate without interest, and any
uncredited service for which payment was made will be canceled. (Ord. Nos.
20960; 21582; 22345; 30162)
SEC. 40A-15.   RETIREMENT.
   (a)   A Tier A inactive member with five or more years of credited service
or a Tier A member is eligible for:
      (1)   a normal retirement pension at age 60;
      (2)   an unreduced service retirement pension at age 50, if the member or
inactive member has 30 years of credited service; or
      (3)   a service retirement pension at any age below age 50, if the member
or inactive member has 30 years of credited service, provided that benefits
will be actuarially reduced from age 50 in accordance with Section
40A-16(c).
   (b)   A Tier A member is eligible for an unreduced service retirement
pension at or after age 50 if the person's age and years and partial years of
credited service, when added together, total at least 78.
   (c)   A Tier B inactive member with five or more years of credited service
or a Tier B member with five or more years of credited service is eligible for:
      (1)   a normal retirement pension at age 65; or
      (2)   an unreduced service retirement pension if the member or inactive
member has 40 years of credited service.
   (d)   A Tier B member with five or more years of credited service is
eligible for a retirement pension if the person's age and years and partial
years of credited service, when added together, total at least 80.
      (1)   Benefits for a member retiring under Subsection
40A-15(d) before the age of 65 will be actuarially reduced in accordance with
Section
40A-16(d).
      (2)    A member who is eligible to retire under this subsection before
the age of 65 may terminate city employment and elect to defer retirement and
the receipt of benefits until age 65, at which age the benefits received will
not be actuarially reduced under Section
40A-16(d). At any time before the age of 65, the person may revoke this
election and choose to retire and receive benefits, which benefits will be
actuarially reduced under Section
40A-16 based on the person's age on the date the revocation application is
approved by the administrator. The application for an election to defer a
retirement as described in Section
40A-15(d) of this chapter or to revoke that election must be on a form approved
by the administrator and must be submitted to the administrator. The
administrator must approve the application in accordance with rules and
procedures adopted by the board. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 16886; 18181; 19470; 20960;
21582; 22345; 30162)
SEC. 40A-16.   RETIREMENT PENSION.
   (a)   A member or inactive member eligible for a retirement pension is
entitled to a pension for life computed on the amount of credited service of
the member or inactive member.
   (b)   Except as provided in Section
40A-18(a), a member or inactive member eligible for a retirement pension is
entitled to a pension beginning from the date of eligibility, but not before
the member or inactive member's last paid day of employment with the city.
   (c)   A Tier A member or inactive member eligible for a service retirement
pension who retires before the age of 50 is entitled to the following
percentage of a benefit calculated under Section
40A-10(f):
 
Age Percentage
49  93.3
48  87.2
47  81.5
46  76.3
45  71.5
44  67.0
 
   (d)   A Tier B member eligible for an early retirement pension under Section
40A-15(d) of this chapter who retires before the age of 65 is entitled to a
benefit calculated under Section
40A-10(g) and then reduced in accordance with actuarially equivalent factors
adopted by the board and in effect at the time of the member's retirement.
These actuarially equivalent factors may not be given effect for at least six
months after their adoption by the board. Copies of the actuarially equivalent
factors must be maintained in the fund office and published on the fund's
website.
   (e)   The following retirement options are payable from the fund:
      (1)   Life with a 10 year certain option. Under this option, a retiree
will receive an unreduced pension for life. If the retiree dies before 120
monthly payments have been made, then an unreduced pension will be paid to the
designated beneficiary or beneficiaries for the remainder of 10 years from the
effective date of the retiree's retirement. Only qualified recipients of the
retiree are eligible to be beneficiaries. If the retiree dies and if all
designated beneficiaries die or cease to be eligible before 120 monthly
payments have been made, then a final payment equal to the commuted value of
the balance of the 120 monthly payments will be paid in the following order of
priority:
         (A)   to one or more designees; or
         (B)   if no designee exists, to the retiree's estate.
      (2)   Joint and one-half survivor option. Under this option, a Tier A
retiree will receive an unreduced pension for life and, after the retiree's
death, one-half of the unreduced pension will be paid for the life of one
beneficiary designated by the retiree before retirement. A Tier B retiree will
receive an actuarially reduced pension for life and, after the retiree's death,
one-half of the reduced pension will be paid for the life of one beneficiary
designated by the retiree before retirement. Only a qualified recipient of the
retiree other than one described in Section
40A-1(38)(C) is eligible to be the beneficiary. If both the retiree and the
designated beneficiary die before 120 monthly payments have been made, then a
final payment equal to the commuted value of the balance of the 120 monthly
payments will be made to one or more designees or, if no designee exists, to
the estate of the last person entitled to monthly benefits.
      (3)   Joint and full survivor option. Under this option, a retiree will
receive an actuarially-reduced pension for life and, after the retiree's death,
the same pension will be paid for the life of one beneficiary designated by the
retiree before retirement. Only a qualified recipient of the retiree other than
one designated in Section
40A-1(38)(C) is eligible to be the beneficiary. If both the retiree and the
designated beneficiary die before 120 monthly payments have been made, then a
final payment equal to the commuted value of the balance of the 120 monthly
payments will be made to one or more designees or, if no designee exists, to
the estate of the last person entitled to monthly benefits.
   (f)   Except as provided in Subsection (g), at the time of a normal, early,
service, or disability retirement, a member or inactive member may select
either a:
      (1)   joint and one-half survivor option; or
      (2)   life with a 10 year certain option.
   (g)   At the time of normal, early, service, or disability retirement, a
member who is eligible by age and years of credited service for a normal,
early, or service retirement pension or a member or inactive member who is
retiring with 15 or more years of credited service may select:
      (1)   a joint and one-half survivor option;
      (2)   a life with a 10 year certain option; or
      (3)   a joint and full survivor option.
   (h)   Each retiring member or inactive member who is married shall designate
the spouse as beneficiary under the joint and full survivor option, if eligible
to select that option, or under the joint and one-half survivor option, if not
eligible to select the joint and full survivor option. Any other designation of
a beneficiary or selection of a retirement option will be effective only if
agreed to by the spouse in writing on a form filed with the administrator.
   (i)   Except as provided in Section
40A-20, a retirement option may not be changed after the effective date of
retirement. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 18181; 19470; 20960; 21582; 22345; 25695; 30162)
SEC. 40A-17.   DISABILITY RETIREMENT.
   (a)   Any member or inactive member who is totally and permanently disabled
with a service disability is eligible for a disability retirement pension.
   (b)   Any member who is totally and permanently disabled with a nonservice
disability and who has five or more years of credited service is eligible for a
disability retirement pension.
   (c)   Any inactive member who is totally and permanently disabled with a
nonservice disability and who has 10 or more years of credited service is
eligible for a disability retirement pension.
   (d)   The board shall determine the disability of a member or inactive
member. The determination of the board is final. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 20960;
21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-18.   DISABILITY RETIREMENT PENSION.
   (a)   A member or inactive member is not eligible for a disability
retirement pension until 90 days after the member or inactive member's last
working day before being disabled, or until application is made to the board,
whichever occurs later.
   (b)   A member or inactive member eligible for a disability retirement
pension is entitled to a disability retirement pension for life with benefits
computed at the rates reflected in Section
40A-10, subject to the following minimums:
      (1)   The minimum disability retirement pension payable for a nonservice
disability is equal to 10 times the percentage multiplier used in computing
benefits of the member or inactive member on the date of retirement multiplied
by the member or inactive member's average monthly earnings.
      (2)   The minimum disability retirement pension payable for a service
disability is equal to the greater of:
         (A)   $1,000 a month, regardless of the date of retirement; or
         (B)   10 times the percentage multiplier used in computing benefits of
the member or inactive member on the date of retirement multiplied by the
member or inactive member's average monthly earnings. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 16886;
18181; 19470; 20443; 20960; 21582; 22345; 30162)
SEC. 40A-19.   TERMINATION OF A DISABILITY RETIREMENT PENSION.
   (a)   A retiree entitled to a disability retirement pension may not receive
a disability retirement pension if the retiree:
      (1)   does not submit, when requested by the administrator, a truthful
sworn affidavit stating any earnings from any gainful activity;
      (2)   is re-employed by the city or capable of performing the duties of
the position previously held with the city;
      (3)   refuses, when requested by the administrator, to submit to a
medical examination by a doctor approved by the board;
      (4)   is found to be earning or be capable of earning compensation in an
amount greater than $250 per month, whether or not such a position is
available; or
      (5)   is found to be involved in any gainful activity not commensurate
with health limits imposed by the attending physician.
   (b)   The board shall discontinue a disability retirement pension if it
determines that one of the conditions of Subsection (a) exists. The
determination by the board is final.
   (c)   A person whose disability retirement pension is discontinued under
this section is entitled to other benefits payable under the fund for all
credited service previously accrued and not canceled by forfeiture or refund of
contributions. Any refund of the person's contributions based on credited
service previously accrued will be made without interest, less any previous
retirement pension payments. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 18181; 20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-20.   RE-EMPLOYMENT OF A RETIREE.
   (a)   If a retiree is re-employed by the city in a position normally covered
by the fund, the retiree:
      (1)   irrevocably waives all rights to payment of pension benefits for
the period of re-employment; and
      (2)   may elect to become a member and contribute to the retirement fund
during the period of re-employment.
   (b)   Upon termination of re-employment of a retiree who elects to
contribute to the fund under Subsection (a), pension benefits will be
calculated as follows:
      (1)   If the period of re-employment was for less than 12 months, pension
benefits for the credited service from which the person had previously retired
will be reinstated in the form and amount previously paid, modified by any
intervening cost-of-living adjustments. Pension benefits for credited service
for the period of re-employment will be calculated in accordance with the
formulas and options available under the fund on the date of termination of re-
employment.
      (2)   If the period of re-employment was for at least 12 months, the
person may choose to have pension benefits paid in accordance with Paragraph
(1) of this subsection or calculated on all credited service for all periods of
employment in accordance with the formulas and options available under the fund
on the date of termination of re-employment. If the new election changes or
adds a retirement option or designated beneficiary for a period of credited
service from which the person had previously retired and the change would have
a negative actuarial effect on the fund, the pension benefits will be reduced
by an amount calculated by the fund's actuary as necessary to prevent the loss.
   (c)   A retiree re-employed by the city who does not contribute to the fund
is, after termination of re-employment, entitled to those pension benefits
payable on the date of re-employment, modified by any intervening cost-of-
living adjustments. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 16886; 17713; 19470; 20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-20.1.   SELECTION OF A DESIGNEE.
   (a)   A member, inactive member, or retiree may at any time select a
designee or designees or change a previous selection of a designee or
designees.
   (b)   If a designee is a former spouse, the designation must have been
signed by the member, inactive member, or retiree after the divorce, or the
designation of the former spouse is void.
   (c)   A designee who is a person must be alive at the time payment is due,
or the designation of that person is void. A designee that is an entity must be
in existence at the time payment is due, or the designation of that entity is
void.
   (d)   Any selection of a designee by a member or inactive member must be
ratified at the time of retirement, or it becomes void. (Ord. Nos. 22345;
30162)
SEC. 40A-21.   DEATH BENEFITS BEFORE RETIREMENT.
   (a)   Before retirement, a member or inactive member is eligible for the
death benefits described in this section.
   (b)   Refund of contributions.
      (1)   If a member who is not eligible to retire by both age and years of
credited service dies with less than two years of credited service, a refund of
the member's contributions will be paid to one or more designees or, if no
designee exists, to the member's estate.
      (2)   If an inactive member who terminated city employment without having
at least five years of credited service dies before receiving a refund of
contributions, a refund of the contributions will be paid to one or more
designees or, if no designee exists, to the inactive member's estate, except
that if more than three years have passed between the date of termination of
city employment and the date of death, then the contributions are forfeited
under Section
40A-30 and are not refundable.
   (c)   Death benefit options.
      (1)   10 year certain option. Under this option, the designated
beneficiary or beneficiaries will receive an unreduced pension for 120 months.
Only qualified recipients of the member or inactive member are eligible to be
beneficiaries. If all beneficiaries die or cease to be eligible before 120
monthly payments have been made, then a lump sum payment equal to the commuted
value of the balance of the 120 monthly payments will be paid in the following
order of priority:
         (A)   to one or more designees; or
         (B)   if no designee exists, to the estate of the member or inactive
member.
      (2)   One-half survivor option. Under this option, one designated
beneficiary will receive one-half of an unreduced pension for life. Only a
qualified recipient of the member or inactive member other than one described
in Section
40A-1(38)(C) is eligible to be the beneficiary. If the designated beneficiary
dies or ceases to be eligible before 120 monthly payments have been made, then
a lump sum payment equal to the commuted value of the balance of the 120
monthly payments will be paid in the following order of priority:
         (A)   to one or more designees;
         (B)   if no designee exists and if an eligible beneficiary survived
the member or inactive member, to the estate of the beneficiary; or
         (C)   if no designee exists and if no eligible beneficiary survived
the member or inactive member, to the estate of the member or inactive member.
      (3)   Full survivor option. Under this option, one designated beneficiary
will receive a reduced pension for life based upon the relative ages of the
member or inactive member and the beneficiary on the day before the member or
inactive member's death in an amount actuarially equivalent to an unreduced
pension payable to the member or inactive member. Only a qualified recipient of
the member or inactive member other than one described in Section
40A-1(38)(C) is eligible to be the beneficiary. If the designated beneficiary
dies or ceases to be eligible before 120 monthly payments have been made, then
a lump sum payment equal to the commuted value of the balance of the 120
monthly payments will be paid in the following order of priority:
         (A)   to one or more designees;
         (B)   if no designee exists and if an eligible beneficiary survived
the member or inactive member, to the estate of the beneficiary; or
         (C)   if no designee exists and if no eligible beneficiary survived
the member or inactive member, to the estate of the member or inactive member.
   (d)   If an inactive member dies with at least five years, but less than 15
years, of credited service, a death benefit is payable in accordance with this
subsection. The pension will not be reduced because of the age of the inactive
member. The pension will be based upon the inactive member's actual credited
service or 10 years credited service, whichever is greater, and the benefit
formulas in effect at the time of termination of city employment. The death
benefit will be paid as either:
      (1)   a 10 year certain option; or
      (2)   a one-half survivor option.
   (e)   If a member who is not described in Subsection (f) dies with at least
two years, but less than 15 years, of credited service, a death benefit is
payable in accordance with this subsection. The pension will not be reduced
because of the age of the member. The pension will be based upon the member's
actual credited service or 10 years credited service, whichever is greater. The
death benefit will be paid as either:
      (1)   a 10 year certain option; or
      (2)   a one-half survivor option.
   (f)   If a member who is eligible to retire by both age and years of
credited service or a member or inactive member who has at least 15 years of
credited service dies, a death benefit is payable in accordance with this
subsection. The pension will not be reduced because of the age of the member or
inactive member. The pension will be based upon the member or inactive member's
actual credited service or 10 years credited service, whichever is greater. The
death benefit will be paid as either:
      (1)   a 10 year certain option; or
      (2)   a full survivor option.
   (g)   Death benefits for any service death will be determined as follows:
      (1)   The benefits will be computed using the greater of:
         (A)   the decedent's actual credited service; or
         (B)   10 times the percentage multiplier used in computing benefits of
the decedent on the date of death multiplied by the decedent's average monthly
earnings.
      (2)   The benefits may never be less than $1,000 per month, regardless of
the date of death, or the amount computed under Paragraph (1) of this
subsection, whichever is greater.
   (h)   If two or more beneficiaries are entitled to pension payments from the
account of a deceased member or inactive member and one of the beneficiaries
dies or becomes ineligible, then that beneficiary's share of the pension will
be divided equally among any remaining beneficiaries. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 16886;
17713; 18181; 19470; 20443; 20960; 21582; 22345; 25695; 30162)
SEC. 40A-22.   SELECTION OF DEATH BENEFITS PRIOR TO RETIREMENT.
   (a)   A member or inactive member described in Section
40A-21(d), (e), (f), or (g) is eligible to select a death benefit option for
the payment of a pension as provided by those provisions. The selected option
will become effective only if the member or inactive member dies while eligible
to select the option.
   (b)   Designation of beneficiaries.
      (1)   Each member or inactive member who is married at the time a death
benefit option is selected shall designate the spouse as beneficiary under the
full survivor option or, if not eligible for the full survivor option, under
the one-half survivor option. Any other designation of a beneficiary or
selection of a death benefit option will become effective only if agreed to by
the spouse in writing on a form filed with the administrator.
      (2)   A death benefit option that designates a spouse as beneficiary
becomes void if the member or inactive member and the spouse become divorced.
      (3)   Upon the marriage of a member or inactive member, a death benefit
option that does not designate the new spouse as beneficiary under either the
full survivor option or the one-half survivor option becomes void.
   (c)   If a member or inactive member selects a one-half survivor option, and
the member or inactive member is eligible to select a full survivor option at
the time of death, then benefits under a full survivor option will be paid.
   (d)   If an eligible member or inactive member dies without having selected
a death benefit option or if the selection cannot be made effective, the
surviving spouse may select an option as if the member or inactive member had
made the selection. If there is no surviving spouse, the personal
representative of the estate of the member or inactive member may make the
selection for the benefit of the qualified recipients. If there are no
qualified recipients, then a lump sum payment equal to the commuted value of a
10 year certain option will be paid to the estate of the member or inactive
member. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 16886; 18181; 19470; 20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-23.   DEATH BENEFITS AFTER RETIREMENT.
   (a)   A retiree who dies shall have death benefits determined and
distributed in accordance with the provisions of the retirement option selected
at retirement.
   (b)   If two or more beneficiaries are entitled to a pension upon a
retiree's death and one of the beneficiaries subsequently dies or becomes
ineligible, then that beneficiary's share of the pension will be divided
equally among any remaining beneficiaries.
   (c)   If a retiree marries after retirement, the spouse of this marriage is
not eligible for any retirement benefit from the fund other than as the
retiree's heir, devisee, or designee.
   (d)   If the retiree is divorced, the former spouse has no right to benefits
except as provided in Section
40A-34(b).
   (e)   When a retiree or beneficiary dies, the earned but unpaid portion of
the final month's benefit will be paid as follows:
      (1)   To the beneficiary or beneficiaries entitled to future monthly
benefits from the fund, to be divided in the same proportional shares as the
future monthly benefits are to be divided.
      (2)   If there are no future monthly benefits payable, then to the
decedent's surviving spouse, if any.
      (3)   If there are no future monthly benefits payable and if there is no
surviving spouse, then to the executor or administrator of the decedent's
estate, if any.
      (4)   If there are no future monthly benefits payable, if there is no
surviving spouse, and if no executor or administrator has been named within 120
days of the decedent's death, then to the decedent's heirs as established by an
affidavit of heirship filed with the administrator of the retirement fund.
(Ord. Nos. 15414; 16886; 17713; 18181; 19470; 20443; 20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-24.   DEATH BENEFITS TO MINORS.
   If a minor is entitled to benefits from the retirement fund, the board must
pay the benefits to the minor's legal guardian or, until one is appointed, the
minor's natural guardian, who shall be entitled to receive the benefits for the
best interest of the child. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-25.   BENEFITS TO INCOMPETENT RETIREES OR BENEFICIARIES.
   If a court has appointed a personal representative of a retiree or qualified
recipient entitled to benefits from the retirement fund, the board shall pay
those benefits to the court-appointed representative. (Ord. Nos. 17713; 19470;
20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-26.   DIRECT ROLLOVER.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would
otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may
elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator, to
have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
   (b)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION means any distribution of all or any
portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an
eligible rollover distribution does not include:
         (A)   any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal
periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life or life
expectancy of the distributee or the joint lives or joint life expectancies of
the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a
specified period of 10 years or more;
         (B)   any distribution to the extent such distribution is required
under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; or
         (C)   any distribution that is made upon hardship of the employee.
      (2)   ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN means an individual retirement account
described in Section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual
retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an
annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an
eligible deferred compensation plan that is maintained by an eligible employer
described in Section 457(e)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity
contract described in Section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a
qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, that
accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. An eligible
retirement plan means only an individual retirement account or individual
retirement annuity in the case of an eligible rollover distribution for a
designated beneficiary that is not:
         (A)   the surviving spouse; or
         (B)   an alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order
who is a spouse or former spouse.
      (3)   DISTRIBUTEE means:
         (A)   an employee or former employee;
         (B)   the employee or former employee's surviving spouse;
         (C)   an alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order
who is the employee or former employee's spouse or former spouse, but only with
regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse under the qualified
domestic relations order; or
         (D)   the employee or former employee's designated beneficiary.
      (4)   DIRECT ROLLOVER means a payment by the plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee.
      (5)   DESIGNATED BENEFICIARY means an individual who is designated to
receive an eligible rollover distribution. (Ord. Nos. 21582; 25818; 28739;
30162)
SEC. 40A-27.   HEALTH BENEFIT SUPPLEMENTS.
   (a)   A Tier A retiree or beneficiary is eligible for a health benefit
supplement in addition to the amount otherwise payable under the fund. The
health benefit supplement is equal to $25 a month for each full year of
credited service or $125 a month, whichever is less. Payment of the health
benefit supplement will be prorated for each partial year of credited service.
   (b)   If more than one beneficiary is receiving a pension from the account
of a deceased member, inactive member, or retiree, the health benefit
supplement will be divided among the beneficiaries in shares proportionate to
their rights to the pension.
   (c)   A health benefit supplement is not includable when calculating lump
sum death benefit payments.
   (d)   Health benefit supplements attributable to retirements and deaths that
occurred before January 1, 2017 shall not be reduced by reason of Subsection
(a).
   (e)   A Tier B retiree or beneficiary is not eligible for any health benefit
supplement. (Ord. Nos. 20960; 21582; 22345; 30162)
SEC. 40A-28.   COST-OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENT TO BENEFITS.
   (a)   On January 1 of each year, a cost-of-living adjustment will be made to
the base pension payable to each retiree or beneficiary, if the person was
entitled to a base pension on or before December 31 of the preceding year. If a
base pension becomes payable during the 12 months preceding the cost-of-living
adjustment, the adjustment will be prorated, with one-twelfth being paid for
each whole or part month from the date the base pension became payable to the
end of the year.
      (1)   A health benefit supplement under Section
40A-27 is not base pension and is not subject to any cost-of-living adjustment.
      (2)   The minimum amount payable as a disability retirement pension for a
service disability under Section
40A-18(b)(2) or as death benefits for a service death under Section
40A-21(g)(2) will be considered the base pension for computing cost-of-living
adjustments unless a greater base pension is payable under this chapter.
   (b)   The cost-of-living adjustment to the base pension will be made by
using one of the following methods, whichever is the most beneficial to the
retiree or beneficiary:
      (1)   the percentage of change in the price index for October of the
current year over October of the previous year, up to:
         (A)   five percent for a Tier A retiree or beneficiary; or
         (B)   three percent for a Tier B retiree or beneficiary; or
      (2)   the percentage of the annual average change of the price index for
the latest 12 months available, up to:
         (A)   five percent for a Tier A retiree or beneficiary; or
         (B)   three percent for a Tier B retiree or beneficiary.
   (c)   The cost-of-living adjustment may not reduce benefits of a retiree or
beneficiary.
   (d)   In addition to the regular cost-of-living adjustment payable under
Subsection (a) of this section, the board may from time to time grant an
additional temporary or permanent adjustment if there exists investment income
in excess of that needed to maintain the actuarial soundness of the fund. The
adjustment is discretionary with the board in both its grant and application
after the board has considered the funding of the increase and the relative
needs of the retirees and beneficiaries. The adjustment may not increase or
decrease the base pension of the retirees and beneficiaries. Any discretionary
adjustment granted by the board under this subsection will not become effective
unless approved by an ordinance or resolution of the city council. (Ord. Nos.
15414; 16886; 19470; 20960; 21582; 22345; 25695; 30162)
SEC. 40A-29.   TERMINATION OF CITY EMPLOYMENT PRIOR TO RETIREMENT; BENEFITS.
   (a)   A member with five or more years of credited service who terminates
employment before becoming eligible for a normal, early, or service retirement
pension is entitled to:
      (1)   a refund of contributions to the retirement fund, without interest,
any time after termination, less any previous retirement pension payments; or
      (2)   payment of a retirement pension and benefits at the time the member
becomes eligible.
   (b)   An inactive member with more than 10 years of credited service who
terminated employment before becoming eligible for a normal, early, or service
retirement pension is eligible to apply for a disability retirement pension as
provided in Section
40A-17.
   (c)   A member with less than five years of credited service at the time of
termination of employment who does not retire or withdraw contributions to the
fund and who is later re-employed:
      (1)   before contributions are forfeited under Section
40A-30(b), shall have any pension benefits payable for all periods of credited
service based on the provisions of the fund in effect on the date of
termination of re-employment;
      (2)   after contributions are forfeited under Section
40A-30(b), but who reinstates credited service by filing the application
required under Section
40A-11, shall have pension benefits payable for all periods of credited service
based on provisions of the fund in effect on the date of termination of re-
employment; or
      (3)   after contributions are forfeited under Section
40A-30(b), but who is not eligible to reinstate credited service under Section
40A-11, shall be treated as a new employee by the fund and have no right to
pension benefits based on the period of canceled credited service.
   (d)   A member with five or more years of credited service at the time of
termination of employment who does not retire or withdraw contributions to the
fund and who is later re-employed for:
      (1)   less than 12 full months of continuous service, shall have pension
benefits payable on the period of credited service earned prior to the break in
service based on provisions of the fund in effect at the time such service
ended, while pension benefits for the period of credited service earned during
re- employment will be based on provisions of the fund in effect on the date of
termination of re-employment;
      (2)   at least 12 full months of continuous service, shall have pension
benefits payable on all periods of credited service based on provisions of the
fund in effect on the date of termination of re-employment. (Ord. Nos. 15414;
17713; 18181; 19470; 20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-30.   REFUND OR FORFEITURE OF CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (a)   A member who terminates city employment without either retiring or
having sufficient credited service to retire at a future date is entitled to
the amount of the member's contributions to the retirement fund, without
interest, less any previous retirement pension payments, except as provided by
federal law.
   (b)   A member who terminates employment without either retiring or having
sufficient credited service to retire at a future date must make written
application with the retirement fund for the refund of the member's
contributions within three years of the date of termination or all of the
member's rights to a refund of contributions will be forfeited, and the
contribution will remain in the retirement fund.
   (c)   Actuarial gains and forfeitures of employee or city contributions must
be applied to reduce the cost of the fund and may not be used to increase
benefits otherwise payable under the fund. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 18181; 20960;
21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-31.   LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   (a)   A member on leave of absence, who is eligible to retire because of
disability or because of age and length of credited service, is entitled to:
      (1)   receive a pension for normal, early, or service retirement; or
      (2)   receive a pension for disability retirement or have death benefits
paid to the beneficiaries if the leave of absence was granted for sickness or
injury.
   (b)   The administrator of the retirement fund must be notified in writing
by the city manager, or by any department head not under the city manager, of a
member who has been granted a leave of absence and must be furnished with a
copy of a written authorization for the leave of absence.
   (c)   A leave of absence will be regarded for retirement fund purposes as a
break in service and not as a termination of employment. (Ord. Nos. 15414;
20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-32.   LEAVE FOR MILITARY ACTIVE DUTY.
   The administrator of the retirement fund must be notified in writing by the
city manager, or by any department head not under the city manager, of a member
who has been granted a leave for military active duty and must be furnished
with a copy of a written authorization for the leave. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 19470;
20960; 21582; 30162)
SEC. 40A-33.   COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL TAX LAWS.
   (a)   A member or survivor of a member of the pension system may not accrue
a retirement pension, or any other benefit under this chapter, in excess of the
benefit limits applicable to the fund under Section 415 of the Internal Revenue
Code. The board shall reduce the amount of any benefit that exceeds those
limits by the amount of the excess. If total benefits under this fund and the
benefits and contributions to which any member is entitled under any other
qualified plans maintained by the city would otherwise exceed the applicable
limits under Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, the benefits the member
would otherwise receive from the fund shall be reduced to the extent necessary
to enable the benefits to comply with Section 415. The limits shall be adjusted
annually in accordance with Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code. The
annual adjustment shall apply to the benefits of both active and inactive
members and shall apply without regard to whether retirement benefits are being
received.
   (b)   The total salary taken into account for any purpose for any member of
the pension system may not exceed the limit imposed pursuant to Section 401(a)
(17) of the Internal Revenue Code for any year ($360,000 for an eligible
participant and $245,000 for an ineligible participant for 2009). These dollar
limits shall be adjusted from time to time in accordance with guidelines
provided by the United States secretary of the treasury. For purposes of this
subsection, an eligible participant is a person who first became an active
member before 1996, and an ineligible participant is a member who is not an
eligible participant.
   (c)   Amounts representing forfeited nonvested benefits of terminated
members may not be used to increase benefits payable from the fund.
   (d)   Distribution of benefits must begin not later than April 1 of the year
following the calendar year during which the member entitled to the benefits
becomes 70-1/2 years of age or terminates employment with the city, whichever
is later, and must otherwise conform to Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
   (e)   If the retirement fund is fully terminated or partially terminated, as
determined by the Internal Revenue Service, or if all city contributions to the
retirement fund are discontinued, the rights of each member affected by the
termination or discontinuance that have accrued at the date of termination or
discontinuance will be fully vested to the extent funded.
   (f)   It is intended that the provisions of this chapter be construed and
administered in such a manner that the fund's program of benefits will be
considered a qualified plan under Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
In determining qualification status under Section 401(a), the fund's program of
benefits will be considered the primary retirement plan for members of the
fund.
   (g)   The right of each member to such member's interest accrued under this
chapter shall become 100 percent vested, if not already vested, upon the
member's attainment of normal retirement age, and the member shall have a right
to terminate employment and commence to receive a pension at that time. (Ord.
Nos. 20354; 20960; 21582; 22345; 25818; 28739; 30162)
SEC. 40A-34.   NONALIENATION AND NONREDUCTION OF BENEFITS.
   (a)   Title/ownership. Except with respect to fund assets subject to a
securities lending agreement, the legal and equitable title and ownership of
all assets at any time constituting a part of the fund will be and remain with
the board, and neither the city nor any member or other person who may be
entitled to benefits under the fund shall ever have any legal or equitable
estate in the fund, except to receive distributions lawfully made in accordance
with this chapter.
   (b)   Qualified domestic relations orders. The administrator shall determine
whether a domestic relations order is a valid qualified domestic relations
order, and the determination by the administrator may be appealed only to the
board. In the event of receipt of a valid qualified domestic relations order,
the interest in the fund of the member, inactive member, or retiree will be
divided between the member, inactive member, or retiree and the spouse, former
spouse, or child in accordance with the terms of the order as follows:
      (1)   A spouse or former spouse who is named as an alternate payee is
entitled to receive a court-ordered lump sum distribution of accumulated
employee contributions or monthly pension benefit in the form of payments for
life. If the actuarial value of the pension is less than $10,000, the board, at
its option, may pay the actuarial present value to the alternate payee as a
lump sum. A lump sum distribution of a portion of the member, or inactive
member, or retiree's contributions, but not of annuity payments, may be made to
an alternate payee who is a spouse or former spouse if such distribution is
authorized by a qualified domestic relations order, even if the earliest
retirement age has not been reached.
      (2)   A child who is named as an alternate payee is entitled to receive a
part of the retiree's monthly pension benefit in an amount ordered by the
court. Payments will terminate on the date designated by the court or upon the
retiree's death, whichever occurs first. Payments may be made to a person
legally authorized to receive them on behalf of the child.
      (3)   All rights and benefits provided to the member, inactive member, or
retiree are subject to the rights afforded to any alternate payee under a valid
qualified domestic relations order that meets the requirements of this section.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, alternate payee, domestic relations
order, and qualified domestic relations order have the meanings given under
Texas Government Code Chapter 804, as in effect on January 1, 2017.
   (c)   Exemptions. Contributions and benefits payable under the retirement
fund are exempt from attachment, execution, garnishment, judgments, and all
other suits or claims, with the exception of a "qualified domestic relations
order," and are not assignable or transferable.
   (d)   Waiver of benefits.
      (1)   A person may, on a form prescribed by and filed with the
administrator, waive all or a portion of any benefits from the retirement fund
to which the person is entitled. A person may revoke a waiver of benefits in
the same manner as the original waiver was made, unless the original waiver by
its terms was made irrevocable.
      (2)   A waiver or a revocation of a waiver applies only to benefits that
become payable on or after the date the document is filed.
      (3)   Unless otherwise expressly provided for in this chapter, the board
may not take action to reduce an individual pension. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 19470;
20960; 21582; 22345; 30162)
SEC. 40A-35.   AMENDMENT TO THIS CHAPTER.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b) of this section, this chapter may
not be amended except by a proposal initiated by either the board or the city
council that results in an ordinance adopted by the city council and approved
by a majority of the voters voting at a general or special election. The board
may make a recommendation to city council on all proposed amendments to this
chapter.
   (b)   A provision of this chapter, other than this section, that is
determined by the board or the city to require amendment in order to comply
with federal law may be amended by ordinance of the city council, without voter
approval. An amendment may be made under this subsection only to the extent
necessary to comply with federal law.
   (c)   The city manager shall notify the board and the plan administrator in
writing of the city’s intent to propose any amendments to this chapter for city
council discussion, deliberation, or direction. (Ord. Nos. 15414; 20960; 21582;
25695; 30162; 32801)
CHAPTER 40B
SECONDARY METALS RECYCLERS
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
Sec.
40B-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
40B-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
40B-3.   Records required.
Sec.
40B-4.   Notice to sellers.
Sec.
40B-5.   Facsimile, telecopier, or similar equipment required.
Sec.
40B-6.   Restrictions on the purchase of regulated metal property.
Sec.
40B-7.   Five-day hold on regulated metal property; segregation, labeling, and
inspection of regulated metal property; exceptions.
Sec.
40B-8.   Hold on stolen regulated metal property; hold notice.
Sec.
40B-9.   Offenses; defenses; penalty.
ARTICLE II.
LICENSING OF SECONDARY METALS RECYCLERS.
Sec.
40B-10.   License required.
Sec.
40B-11.   Issuance of license; posting.
Sec.
40B-12.   Fees.
Sec.
40B-13.   Expiration of license.
Sec.
40B-14.   Suspension.
Sec.
40B-15.   Revocation.
Sec.
40B-16.   Appeal.
Sec.
40B-17.   Transfer of license.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
SEC. 40B-1.   PURPOSE.
   This chapter is an exercise of the city’s police power to promote, through
regulation of secondary metals recyclers, the recovery of stolen property. This
chapter provides licensing and recordkeeping requirements and enforcement
procedures that will enable the police department to identify and recover
public and private property composed of certain metals that may have been
illegally appropriated. (Ord. Nos. 20260; 22958; 26537; 27202; 27249)
SEC. 40B-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   CASH TRANSACTION CARD means a card issued to a seller by a
secondary metals recycler in compliance with Section
40B-6(f) of this chapter that allows a secondary metals recycler, at the time
of purchase, to give consideration in the form of cash or a debit card to a
seller in a purchase transaction for regulated metal property.
      (2)   CATALYTIC CONVERTER means a device used to reduce the toxicity of
emissions from an internal combustion engine through the use of a catalyst
(typically a platinum- iridium catalyst) that converts the toxic combustion by-
products into less toxic gases or products. A catalytic converter includes any
material removed from a catalytic converter.
      (3)   CHECK means a check, draft, or other negotiable or nonnegotiable
order of withdrawal that is drawn against funds held by a financial
institution.
      (4)   CHIEF means the chief of police for the city of Dallas or a
designated representative.
      (5)   DEBIT CARD means a card issued by a bank that combines the
functions of an automatic teller machine (ATM) card and checks. A debit card
can be used to withdraw cash at a bank like an ATM card and can also be used at
stores to pay for goods and services in place of a check. Unlike a credit card,
a debit card automatically withdraws money from a checking account at the time
of the transaction.
      (6)   FERROUS METAL means a metal that contains significant quantities of
iron or steel.
      (7)   HOLD NOTICE means written notification by the chief to a secondary
metals recycler stating that the secondary metals recycler may not sell,
redeem, or dispose of certain regulated metal property that the chief has
reasonable cause to believe has been stolen.
      (8)   LICENSEE means a person in whose name a license has been issued
under this chapter or a person listed as an applicant on the application for a
license.
      (9)   NONFERROUS METAL means a metal that does not contain significant
quantities of iron or steel, including, but not limited to, copper, brass,
aluminum, bronze, lead, zinc, nickel, and their alloys.
      (10)   PERSON means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint
venture, trust, association, and any other legal entity.
      (11)   PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION CERTIFICATE means a personal
identification card issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety under
Chapter 521, Subchapter E of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, or a
similar card or certificate issued by another state.
      (12)   PURCHASE TRANSACTION means a transaction in which a secondary
metals recycler gives consideration, or agrees to give consideration, in
exchange for regulated metal property.
      (13)   REGULATED METAL PROPERTY means any item composed in whole or in
part of any ferrous or nonferrous metal, other than an item composed in whole
of tin.
      (14)   SECONDARY METALS RECYCLER means any person who:
         (A)   is engaged in the business of purchasing, collecting, or
soliciting regulated metal property; or
         (B)   operates or maintains a facility where regulated metal property
is purchased or kept for shipment, sale, transfer, or salvage.
      (15)   SELLER means any person who, in a purchase transaction, receives
consideration from a secondary metals recycler in exchange for regulated metal
property.
      (16)   THUMBPRINT IMPRESSION means an intentional recording of the
friction ridge detail on the volar pads of the thumb. (Ord. Nos. 20260; 22958;
26537; 27202; 27249; 32726)
SEC. 40B-3.   RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (a)   A secondary metals recycler shall maintain an electronic record or
accurate and legible record of each purchase transaction. Each transaction must
be recorded and filed separately.
   (b)   The record of each purchase transaction must be in English and contain
the following information:
      (1)   the name and street address of the secondary metals recycler;
      (2)   the name or initials of the individual recording the information
required by this section for the secondary metals recycler;
      (3)   the seller’s name, street address, sex, and birthdate and the
identifying number from the seller’s current and valid driver’s license issued
by a state in the United States, United States military identification card, or
personal identification certificate;
      (4)   the make, model, and license plate number of the motor vehicle in
which the regulated metal property is delivered in a purchase transaction,
along with a clear digital still photograph of the motor vehicle and any
trailer attached to the motor vehicle;
      (5)   the place, date, and time of the purchase transaction;
      (6)   the weight, quantity, or volume and a description, made in
accordance with the custom of the trade, of the regulated metal property
purchased, along with a clear digital still photograph of the regulated metal
property;
      (7)   a general description of the predominant types of regulated metal
property purchased in the purchase transaction;
      (8)   the amount of consideration given in a purchase transaction for the
regulated metal property and, if the seller was:
         (A)   paid by check, a copy of the check;
         (B)   paid in cash, a copy of the seller’s valid cash transaction card
(or the seller’s current approved application for a cash transaction card); or
         (C)   paid by debit card, a copy of the debit card receipt and, if
payment was made at the time of purchase, a copy of the seller’s valid cash
transaction card (or the seller’s current approved application for a cash
transaction card);
      (9)   written documentation evidencing that the seller is the legal
owner, or is lawfully entitled to sell, the regulated metal property or a
signed statement from the seller affirming a legal right of ownership and the
right to sign over title to the regulated metal property offered for sale;
      (10)   a clear digital still photograph of the seller, taken at the time
of the purchase transaction, that clearly depicts the seller’s facial features;
and
      (11)   a clear and legible thumbprint impression of the seller, unless a
valid cash transaction card issued is presented by the seller to the metal
recycling entity under this chapter if the sale is for a catalytic converter.
   (c)   A person selling or attempting to sell regulated metal property to a
secondary metals recycler shall:
      (1)   display to the secondary metals recycler the person’s current and
valid driver’s license issued by a state in the United States, United States
military identification card, or personal identification certificate;
      (2)   provide to the secondary metals recycler the make, model, and
license plate number of the motor vehicle used to deliver the regulated metal
property;
      (3)   sign a written statement provided by the secondary metals recycler
affirming that the person is the legal owner of, or is lawfully entitled to
sell, the regulated material offered for sale; and
      (4)   for a catalytic converter provide:
         (A)   the year, make, model, and vehicle identification number for the
vehicle from which the catalytic converter was removed; and
         (B)   a copy of the certificate of title or other documentation
indicting that the person has an ownership interest in the vehicle described in
Subparagraph (A).
   (d)   The secondary metals recycler or the recycler’s agent shall visually
verify the accuracy of the identification presented by the seller at the time
of each purchase of regulated metal property and make a copy of the
identification to be maintained by the secondary metals recycler in the record
of the purchase transaction. A metal recycling entity may not purchase a
catalytic converter unless the entity determines that the catalytic converter
is consistent with the manufacturer's specifications for a catalytic converter
from the vehicle for which the seller provided the information under Subsection
(c).
   (e)   A secondary metals recycler shall maintain on file the information
required by this section for not less than three years after the date of the
purchase transaction. A secondary metals recycler shall make these records
available for inspection by any police officer, upon request but not later than
72 hours, at the secondary metals recycler’s place of business during the usual
and customary business hours of the secondary metals recycler.
   (f)   A secondary metals recycler shall mark, in the manner prescribed by
the commission by rule, each catalytic converter purchased by the entity with a
unique number and shall keep the information in the electronic record or
accurate and legible written record in compliance with Subsection (e).
   (g)   The owner of a garage or repair shop that sells to a metal recycling
entity registered under
Chapter 40B a catalytic converter that the person removed in connection with a
motor vehicle repair shall maintain a record of all repairs for the vehicle,
and such record shall be kept until at least the second anniversary of the date
of repair, that includes:
      (1)   the name and address of the vehicle's owner; and
      (2)    copies of all related invoices. (Ord. Nos. 20260; 22958; 26537;
27202; 27249; 32726)
SEC. 40B-4.   NOTICE TO SELLERS.
   (a)   A secondary metals recycler shall at all times maintain in a prominent
place in the secondary metals recycler’s place of business, in open view to a
seller of regulated metal property, a notice in two-inch lettering that:
      (1)   contains the following or similar language approved by the chief:
“A PERSON ATTEMPTING TO SELL ANY REGULATED METAL PROPERTY MUST PRESENT
SUFFICIENT IDENTIFICATION AND WRITTEN PROOF OF OWNERSHIP REQUIRED BY CITY OF
DALLAS ORDINANCE”; and
      (2)   states the usual business hours of the secondary metals recycler.
   (b)   The notice required by this section may be contained on a sign that
contains another notice required by law to be displayed by the secondary metals
recycler. (Ord. Nos. 22958; 26537; 27202; 27249)
SEC. 40B-5.   FACSIMILE, TELECOPIER, OR SIMILAR EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   A secondary metals recycler shall maintain at its place of business, or
otherwise have immediate access to, a facsimile, telecopier, or other equipment
of similar function on which notifications of stolen property or other
notifications relating to regulated metal property may be expeditiously
received from the police department. The equipment must be operable at all
times during the usual and customary business hours of the secondary metals
recycler. The secondary metals recycler shall maintain the facsimile number or
other access number of the equipment on file with the chief and shall notify
the chief within 24 hours after any change in the number. (Ord. Nos. 22958;
26537; 27202; 27249)
SEC. 40B-6.   RESTRICTIONS ON THE PURCHASE OF REGULATED METAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   A secondary metals recycler shall conduct all purchase transactions
only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
   (b)   A secondary metals recycler shall not purchase any item of regulated
metal property from:
      (1)   an intoxicated person; or
      (2)   a person who does not deliver the item of regulated metal property
to the secondary metals recycler’s place of business in a motor vehicle or in a
trailer attached to a motor vehicle.
   (c)   A secondary metals recycler shall not purchase any of the following
items of regulated metal property without obtaining proof that the seller owns
the property (such as by a receipt or bill of sale) or proof that the seller is
an employee, agent, or contractor of a governmental entity, utility company,
cemetery, railroad, manufacturer, or other person, business, or entity owning
the property and the seller is authorized to sell the item of regulated metal
property on behalf of the person, business, or entity owning the property:
      (1)   A manhole cover.
      (2)   An electric light pole or other utility structure and its fixtures
and hardware.
      (3)   A guard rail.
      (4)   A street sign, traffic sign, or traffic signal and its fixtures and
hardware.
      (5)   Communication, transmission, and service wire.
      (6)   A funeral marker or funeral vase.
      (7)   An historical marker.
      (8)   Railroad equipment, including but not limited to a tie plate,
signal house, control box, switch plate, E clip, or rail tie junction.
      (9)   Any metal item that is marked with any form of the name, initials,
or logo of a governmental entity, utility company, cemetery, or railroad.
      (10)   A copper or aluminum condensing or evaporator coil from a heating
or air conditioning unit.
      (11)   An aluminum or stainless steel container or bottle designed to
hold propane for fueling fork lifts.
      (12)   A catalytic converter or any part of a catalytic converter.
   (d)   A secondary metals recycler shall maintain on file the information
required by Subsection (c) of this section for not less than three years after
the date of the purchase of the item of regulated metal property. In addition,
the record for each catalytic converter transaction must contain a description
made in accordance with the custom of the trade for the volume of catalytic
converters sold or transferred, the name of the person from whom the catalytic
converters were purchased or otherwise acquired, and the date of the
transaction. A secondary metals recycler shall make these records available for
inspection by any police officer, upon request, at the secondary metals
recycler’s place of business during the usual and customary business hours of
the secondary metals recycler.
   (e)   Except as provided in Subsection (f) of this section, a secondary
metals recycler may not, at the time of purchase, give any form of
consideration in a purchase transaction for regulated metal property, but must
pay the seller for the purchased regulated metal property by mailing a check or
debit card to the seller at the seller’s street address as listed in the record
of the purchase transaction. A copy of the check or the debit card receipt must
be maintained on file with the purchase transaction record.
   (f)   A secondary metals recycler may, at the time of purchase, give
consideration in the form of cash or a debit card credit in a purchase
transaction for regulated metal property if the seller presents the secondary
metals recycler with a valid cash transaction card issued by any secondary
metals recycler located in the city (or the secondary metals recycler obtains a
copy of the cash transaction card and the complete approved application for the
card from its own files or from a secondary metals recycler located in the city
that issued the card to the seller), and all of the following requirements are
met:
      (1)   A secondary metals recycler may only issue or renew a cash
transaction card to a seller after receiving an application signed by the
seller that contains:
         (A)   the seller’s name, street address, sex, and birthdate and the
identifying number from (and a copy of) the seller’s current and valid driver’s
license issued by a state in the United States, United States military
identification card, or personal identification certificate;
         (B)   a clear digital still photograph of the seller, taken at the
time of application, that clearly depicts the seller’s facial features;
         (C)   a clear and legible thumbprint impression of the seller; and
         (D)   the signature of the individual approving the application on
behalf of the secondary metals recycler.
      (2)    The secondary metals recycler may only issue or renew a cash
transaction card by mailing it to the seller at the seller’s street address
listed in the application for the card.
      (3)   The cash transaction card must contain:
         (A)   the name and street address of the seller;
         (B)   a clear digital still photograph of the seller;
         (C)   an identifying number that is unique to the individual card; and
         (D)   the expiration date of the card, which date may not exceed two
years after the date of issuance.
      (4)   The cash transaction card must be laminated or made of a rigid
plastic or other durable material that will preserve the legibility of the
information contained on the card.
      (5)   The cash transaction card may not be transferable to another
person.
      (6)   A secondary metals recycler shall visually verify that the
identification presented by the seller under Section
40B-3(c)(1) corresponds to the identifying information on any cash transaction
card presented by the seller or on any copy of the cash transaction card and
the complete approved application for the card obtained from the secondary
metals recycler’s own files or from the secondary metals recycler that issued
the card to the seller.
      (7)   By the end of the next business day after invalidating a cash
transaction card for any reason, the secondary metals recycler that issued the
card shall notify the chief of the card’s invalidation and provide other
information relating to the card as determined necessary by the chief. After
receiving such notification, the chief shall notify all other secondary metals
recyclers of the card’s invalidation. A secondary metals recycler shall not
accept any cash transaction card after being notified of its invalidation.
      (8)   A secondary metals recycler shall maintain on file each application
for a cash transaction card made to it or obtained from another secondary
metals recycler (including a copy of each cash transaction card issued or
renewed by it or the other secondary metals recycler) for not less than two
years after the date of the application, issuance, or renewal of the card,
whichever is later. A secondary metals recycler shall make these records
available for inspection by any police officer, upon request, at the secondary
metals recycler’s place of business during the usual and customary business
hours of the secondary metals recycler.
   (g)   The requirements of Subsections (e) and (f) of this section do not
apply to any item of regulated metal property composed solely of ferrous metal
material, unless the item is listed in Subsection (c) of this section or unless
the secondary metals recycler has received notice that the chief has, in
accordance with this subsection, designated the item or type of item as being
subject to those requirements. The chief shall periodically review theft
statistics on ferrous regulated metal property and establish a list of items or
types of items that the chief determines are subject to the requirements of
Subsection (e) and (f). A current list must be maintained on file in the
chief’s office, or in another designated office of the police department, so
that it may be inspected by the public during the city’s normal business hours.
Notice of the list must be given to secondary metals recyclers in accordance
with schedules and procedures established by the chief. A secondary metals
recycler is presumed to have received notice of the list if the police
department transmits the list to the facsimile number or access number provided
by the secondary metals recycler under Section
40B-5 of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 22958; 26537; 27202; 27249; 32726)
SEC. 40B-7.   FIVE-DAY HOLD ON REGULATED METAL PROPERTY; SEGREGATION, LABELING,
AND INSPECTION OF REGULATED METAL PROPERTY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (c) of this section, a secondary
metals recycler shall retain possession of purchased regulated metal property,
including catalytic converters, at the secondary metals recycler's local place
of business and withhold the property from alteration, processing, resale,
disposal, removal, or salvage use for five days, excluding weekends and
holidays, after purchase, unless the property is released sooner by written
order of the chief or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (b)   Except as provided in Subsection (c) of this section, a secondary
metals recycler shall segregate all regulated metal property purchased from a
seller from regulated metal property purchased from other sellers and attach to
the property, or to the container in which the property is held, a label
indicating the name of the seller, the date on which the property was
purchased, and the number of the receipt on which the purchase information is
recorded. If in any single purchase transaction there are multiple items of
regulated metal property of the same general type, only one representative item
from each type of regulated property must be segregated and labeled in
accordance with this subsection.
   (c)   The hold, segregation, and labeling requirements of Subsections (a)
and (b) of this section do not apply to any item of regulated metal property
composed solely of ferrous metal material, unless the secondary metals recycler
has received notice that the chief has, in accordance with this subsection,
designated the item or type of item as being subject to those requirements. The
chief shall periodically review theft statistics on ferrous regulated metal
property and establish a list of items or types of items that the chief
determines are subject to the requirements of Subsection (a) and (b). A current
list must be maintained on file in the chief’s office, or in another designated
office of the police department, so that it may be inspected by the public
during the city’s normal business hours. Notice of the list must be given to
secondary metals recyclers in accordance with schedules and procedures
established by the chief. A secondary metals recycler is presumed to have
received notice of the list if the police department transmits the list to the
facsimile number or access number provided by the secondary metals recycler
under Section 40B-5 of this chapter.
   (d)   While in possession of purchased regulated metal property, a secondary
metals recycler shall make the property available for inspection by any police
officer at the secondary metals recycler’s place of business during the usual
and customary business hours of the secondary metals recycler. (Ord. Nos.
20260; 22958; 26537; 27202; 27249; 32726)
SEC. 40B-8.   HOLD ON STOLEN REGULATED METAL PROPERTY; HOLD NOTICE.
   (a)   Whenever a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that certain
items of regulated metal property in the possession of a secondary metals
recycler are stolen, the chief may issue a hold notice. The hold notice must:
      (1)   identify those items of regulated metal property alleged to be
stolen and subject to hold; and
      (2)   inform the secondary metals recycler of the restrictions imposed on
the regulated metal property under Subsection (b) of this section.
   (b)   A secondary metals recycler may not, for 60 days after the date of
receiving a hold notice under this section, process or remove from the
secondary metals recycler’s place of business any regulated metal property
identified in the hold notice, unless the property is released sooner by the
chief or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. At the expiration of
the hold period, the hold is automatically released, and the secondary metals
recycler may dispose of the regulated metal property unless otherwise directed
by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. Nos. 20260; 22958; 26537; 27202;
27249)
SEC. 40B-9.   OFFENSES; DEFENSES; PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who fails to
perform a duty required of him under this chapter, commits an offense. A person
is guilty of a separate offense for each item of regulated metal property
involved in a violation of this chapter. An offense under this chapter is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that the regulated
metal property involved:
      (1)   was purchased from a charitable, philanthropic, religious,
fraternal, civic, patriotic, social, or school-sponsored organization or
association or from any organization that is exempt from taxation under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended;
      (2)   was purchased from any public officer acting in an official
capacity as a trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator, or receiver; from
any public official acting under judicial process or authority; or from a sale
on the execution, or by virtue, of any process issued by a court;
      (3)   consists of aluminum food or beverage containers, used food or
beverage containers, or similar food or beverage containers for the purpose of
recycling, other than beer or beverage kegs; or
      (4)   was purchased from a manufacturing, industrial, or other commercial
vendor that generates or sells regulated metal property in the ordinary course
of its business.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 20260; 22958; 26537; 27202; 27249)
ARTICLE II.
LICENSING OF SECONDARY METALS RECYCLERS.
SEC. 40B-10.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, without a license issued under this
article, he:
      (1)   purchases regulated metal property in the city for resale or
salvage use;
      (2)   operates a business establishment in the city that purports to
purchase regulated metal property for resale or salvage use; or
      (3)   in any other manner conducts business in the city as a secondary
metals recycler.
   (b)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
chief. Each applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (c)   A person who wishes to purchase regulated metal property for resale or
salvage use must sign the application as applicant. If the person is a legal
entity, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, association,
or joint venture, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a license as an applicant. Each
applicant must meet the requirements of Section
40B-11(a), and each applicant will be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that, at the time of
the alleged offense, the person was purchasing regulated metal property for
resale or salvage use under the specific authority of a valid license issued by
the State of Texas (other than a certificate of registration issued under
Chapter 1956, Texas Occupations Code, as amended) or the United States
government. A license must still be obtained under this section for those
activities conducted by a secondary metals recycler that are not specifically
authorized by a state or federal license. (Ord. Nos. 22958; 27202; 27249)
SEC. 40B-11.   ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; POSTING.
   (a)   The chief shall issue a license to an applicant within 30 days after
receipt of an application unless it is determined that one or more of the
following is true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or the applicant’s spouse.
      (3)   An applicant failed to answer or falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form provided.
      (4)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of two or
more offenses under this chapter, other than the offense of conducting business
as a secondary metals recycler without a license, within two years immediately
preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no
effect.
      (5)   An applicant has not obtained a certificate of occupancy for the
premises in which the applicant intends to do business, or the business or its
location would otherwise be in violation of the Dallas Development Code or any
other applicable city ordinance or state or federal law.
      (6)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
      (7)   An applicant has been convicted of a felony or a Class A
misdemeanor involving theft or fraud, including but not limited to theft,
robbery, burglary, forgery, criminal simulation, deceptive business practices,
securing execution of document by deception, or any other similar state or
federal criminal offense, and three years have not elapsed since the
termination of any sentence, parole, or probation; the fact that a conviction
is being appealed has no effect. If three years have elapsed, the chief shall,
in accordance with Section 53.023 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended,
determine the present fitness of the applicant to be licensed from the
information and evidence presented with the application.
      (8)   An applicant has been convicted of an offense under any federal or
state law providing recordkeeping or licensing requirements for persons
purchasing or selling regulated metal property, and three years have not
elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole, or probation. The fact
that a conviction is being appealed has no effect.
   (b)   The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the
premises for which the license is granted. A license issued pursuant to this
chapter is valid only for the location stated in the application. Should any
licensee move a place of business from the place stated on the license to a new
location, the licensee shall give the chief prior written notice and present
the license to the chief to have the change of location noted on the license.
   (c)   A license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the licensed premises so that it may be easily read at any time.
   (d)   If the chief determines that issuance or renewal of a license should
be denied, the chief shall send to the applicant or licensee by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a written statement of the reasons for the denial and
of the applicant or licensee’s right to appeal. (Ord. Nos. 22958; 27202; 27249)
SEC. 40B-12.   FEES.
   The annual fee for a license issued under this article is $245. (Ord. Nos.
22958; 27202; 27249)
SEC. 40B-13.   EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Each license will expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in Section
40B-10. To ensure reissuance of a license prior to expiration, application for
renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date. (Ord. Nos.
22958; 27202; 27249)
SEC. 40B-14.   SUSPENSION.
   (a)   The chief shall suspend a license for a definite period of time, not
exceeding 30 days, if the chief determines that a licensee, an individual who
is a business associate of the licensee in the same or a related business or a
corporate officer of the licensee, or an employee of the licensee:
      (1)   committed, in the aggregate, two or more violations of this chapter
within any six-month period; or
      (2)   intentionally or knowingly impeded or refused to allow an
inspection by the chief authorized under this chapter.
   (b)   The chief shall send to the licensee by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a written statement of the reasons for the suspension, the date the
suspension is to begin, the duration of the suspension, and the licensee’s
right to appeal.
   (c)   A licensee whose license is suspended may not operate as a secondary
metals recycler inside the city during the period of suspension. (Ord. Nos.
22958; 27202; 27249)
SEC. 40B-15.   REVOCATION.
   (a)   The chief shall revoke a license if it is determined that one or more
of the following is true:
      (1)   A licensee has given a false statement as to a material matter
submitted to the chief during the application process.
      (2)   A licensee, an individual who is a business associate of the
licensee in the same or a related business or a corporate officer of the
licensee, or an employee of the licensee has been convicted within a two-year
period of three or more offenses under this chapter. If a conviction is
appealed, the time period between conviction and final disposition on appeal of
the conviction is not included in calculating the two- year period if the
conviction is affirmed.
      (3)   A licensee has been convicted of any felony or of a Class A
misdemeanor involving theft or fraud, including but not limited to theft,
robbery, burglary, forgery, criminal simulation, deceptive business practices,
securing execution of document by deception, or any other similar state or
federal criminal offense, and three years have not elapsed since the
termination of any sentence, parole, or probation. The fact that a conviction
is being appealed has no effect.
      (4)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense under any federal or
state law providing recordkeeping or licensing requirements for persons
purchasing or selling regulated metal property, and three years have not
elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole, or probation. The fact
that a conviction is being appealed has no effect.
      (5)   A cause for suspension under Section
40B-14 has occurred and the license has already been suspended at least once
within the preceding 12 months.
      (6)   The licensee does not qualify for a license under Section
40B-11(a).
   (b)   The chief shall send to the licensee by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a written statement of the reasons for the revocation and of the
licensee’s right to appeal.
   (c)   When the chief revokes a license, the revocation will continue for one
year, and the licensee may not be issued a license for one year from the date
revocation became final. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief finds that the
basis for the revocation action has been corrected or abated, the applicant may
be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became final. If the license was revoked under Subsection (a)(3) or
(a)(4) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license within
three years of the termination of any sentence, parole, or probation. (Ord.
Nos. 22958; 27202; 27249)
SEC. 40B-16.   APPEAL.
   If the chief denies issuance or renewal of a license, or suspends or revokes
a license, the aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief to a permit
and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. The action of the chief is final unless a timely appeal is
made. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief in suspending or
revoking a license until the permit and license appeal board makes a final
decision. (Ord. Nos. 22958; 27202; 27249)
SEC. 40B-17.   TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not:
      (1)   transfer a license issued under this chapter to another; or
      (2)   operate a business engaged in the purchase of regulated metal
property for resale or salvage use under the authority of a license at any
location other than the address designated in the license application. (Ord.
Nos. 22958; 27202; 27249)
CHAPTER 41
SMOKING
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
41-1.   Definitions.
ARTICLE II.
SMOKING PROHIBITIONS.
Sec.
41-2.   Smoking and electronic smoking devices prohibited in certain areas.
Sec.
41-3.   Signage and other requirements.
Secs. 41-4 thru 41-5.   Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED.
Secs. 41-6 thru 41-8.   Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
ENFORCEMENT.
Sec.
41-9.   Penalties.
ARTICLE V.
TOBACCO-PRODUCT VENDING MACHINES.
Sec.
41-10.   Definitions.
Sec.
41-11.   Tobacco-product vending machines prohibited; defenses.
Sec.
41-12.   Lock-out devices.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 41-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   BAR means an establishment principally for the sale and consumption
of alcoholic beverages on the premises that derives 75 percent or more of its
gross revenue on a quarterly (three-month) basis from the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, for on-
premises consumption. If an establishment is located in a hotel or motel, the
gross revenues of the particular establishment, rather than the gross revenues
of the entire hotel or motel, will be used in calculating the percentage of
revenues derived from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages.
      (2)   BILLIARDS means any game played on a cloth-covered table with balls
and cue sticks where the balls are struck by the sticks and the balls strike
against one another.
      (3)   BILLIARD HALL means an establishment that:
         (A)   holds a valid billiard hall license issued by the city under
Chapter 9A of this code;
         (B)   has at least 12 billiard tables that are not coin-operated
available for rent to persons desiring to play billiards on the premises; and
         (C)   derives 70 percent or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly
(three-month) basis from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages, as defined
in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, for on-premises consumption and from the
rental of billiard tables and billiard equipment to persons desiring to play
billiards on the premises.
      (4)   CIGAR BAR means a bar that derives 15 percent or more of its gross
revenue on a quarterly (three-month) basis from the sale or rental of tobacco,
tobacco products, smoking implements, or smoking accessories for on-premises
consumption.
      (5)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter, or the director’s
designated representative.
      (6)   EATING ESTABLISHMENT means any establishment that prepares or
serves food or beverages, regardless of whether the establishment provides
seating or facilities for on-premises consumption. The term includes, but is
not limited to, restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, fast
food establishments, luncheonettes, lunchrooms, soda fountains, food carts,
food vending vehicles, and catering establishments.
      (7)   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE means any product containing or
delivering nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that
can be used by a person in any manner for the purpose of inhaling vapor or
aerosol from the product. The term includes any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-
pipe, e-hookah, dab rig or vape pen, or under any other product name or
descriptor.
      (8)   EMPLOYEE means any person who works for hire at an indoor or
enclosed area including an independent contractor with an assigned indoor
location.
      (9)   EMPLOYER means any person who employs one or more employees.
      (10)   ENCLOSED means an area that:
         (A)   is closed in overhead by a roof or other covering of any
material, whether permanent or temporary; and
         (B)   has 40 percent or more of its perimeter closed in by walls or
other coverings of any material, whether permanent or temporary.
      (11)   HOSPITAL means any institution that provides medical, surgical,
and overnight facilities for patients.
      (12)   MINOR means an individual under 21 years of age but does not
include an individual that is at least 18 years of age and presenting a valid
military identification card of the United States military forces or the state
military forces.
      (13)   PARK PARTNER means any entity that contracts with the city for the
operation, maintenance, or management of park property.
      (14)   PARK PROPERTY means property under the control and jurisdiction of
the park board.
      (15)   PERSON means an individual, firm, partnership, association, or
other legal entity.
      (16)   RETAIL OR SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT means any establishment that sells
goods or services to the general public, including but not limited to any
eating establishment, bar, hotel, motel, department store, grocery store, drug
store, shopping mall, laundromat, bingo parlor, bowling center, billiard hall,
or hair styling salon.
      (17)   SECOND-HAND SMOKE means ambient smoke resulting from the act of
smoking.
      (18)   SMOKE OR SMOKING means inhaling, exhaling, burning, possessing, or
carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, hookah, electronic smoking
device, or any pipe or other device that contains lighted or burning tobacco or
plant products intended for inhalation, whether natural or synthetic, including
marijuana or cannabis in any manner or in any form.
      (19)   TOBACCO SHOP means a retail or service establishment that derives
90 percent or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly (three-month) basis from
the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or smoking implements.
      (20)   WORKPLACE means any indoor or enclosed area where an employee
works for an employer. (Ord. Nos. 18961; 19648; 25168; 27440; 30258; 31360;
32933)
ARTICLE II.
SMOKING PROHIBITIONS.
SEC. 41-2.   SMOKING AND ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN
AREAS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he smokes or uses an electronic smoking
device:
      (1)   in any indoor or enclosed area in the city;
      (2)   within 15 feet of any entrance to an indoor or enclosed area in the
city;
      (3)   in any area designated as nonsmoking or no electronic smoking
devices allowed by the owner, operator, or person in control of the area and
marked with a no smoking and no electronic smoking device sign complying with
Section
41-3; or
      (4)   on park property.
   (b)   An owner, operator, or person in control of an indoor or enclosed area
in the city commits an offense if he, either personally or through an employee
or agent, permits a person to smoke or use an electronic smoking device in the
indoor or enclosed area.
   (c)   For purposes of this chapter, an indoor or enclosed area includes but
is not limited to the following:
      (1)   An elevator.
      (2)   A hospital or nursing home.
      (3)   Any facility owned, operated, or managed by the city.
      (4)   Any retail or service establishment.
      (5)   Any workplace.
      (6)   Any facility of a public or private primary or secondary school or
any enclosed theater, movie house, library, museum, or transit system vehicle.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(1), (a)(3), or (b)
of this section if the person was smoking or using an electronic smoking device
in a location that was:
      (1)   a private residence, except that this defense does not apply when
the residence is being used as a child care facility, adult day care facility,
or health care facility;
      (2)   a stage or set of a production of a television program, a
theatrical presentation, or a motion picture or filming event where smoking by
an actor or performer is essential to the production;
      (3)   a cigar bar that:
         (A)   was lawfully operating as a cigar bar on December 10, 2008
(except that this defense does not apply if the cigar bar is expanded, is
relocated, or changes majority ownership after December 10, 2008);
         (B)   does not open into any other indoor or enclosed area in which
smoking is prohibited under this section;
         (C)   is not generally accessible by a minor; and
         (D)   keeps all windows and doors closed at all times except as
reasonably necessary for the expeditious entering and exiting of the cigar bar;
      (4)   a tobacco shop that:
         (A)   does not open into any other indoor or enclosed area in which
smoking is prohibited under this section; and
         (B)   keeps all windows and doors closed at all times except as
reasonably necessary for the expeditious entering and exiting of the tobacco
shop;
      (5)   an unenclosed outdoor seating area associated with an indoor or
enclosed area, including but not limited to a bar, hotel, motel, or eating
establishment, except that this defense does not apply if:
         (A)   the outdoor seating area is adjacent to a playground or play
area for children; or
         (B)   the location was posted as a nonsmoking area by the owner,
operator, or person in control of the establishment or area with a sign
complying with Section
41-3; or
      (6)   a private, rented guest room in a hotel or motel that has been
designated as a smoking room by the owner, operator, or person in control of
the hotel or motel.
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(2) of this section
if the person was smoking or using an electronic smoking device in a location
that was an unenclosed outdoor seating area associated with an indoor or
enclosed area, including but not limited to a bar, hotel, motel, or eating
establishment, except that this defense does not apply if:
      (1)   the outdoor seating area is adjacent to a playground or play area
for children; or
      (2)   the location was posted as a nonsmoking area by the owner,
operator, or person in control of the establishment or area with a sign
complying with Section
41-3.
   (f)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(4) of this section
if the person was smoking in a location that was:
      (1)   a golf course, if the location was:
         (i)   between the tee box of the first hole and the end of the green
of the 18th hole;
         (ii)   on the driving range; or
         (iii)   on the outdoor patio;
      (2)   the Elm Fork Shooting Range; or
      (3)   at a park partner site. (Ord. Nos. 18961; 19648; 21109; 21109;
21614; 25168; 27440; 30258; 32933)
SEC. 41-3.   SIGNAGE AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The owner, operator, or person in control of an establishment or other
area in which smoking and the use of an electronic smoking device is prohibited
under Section
41-2(a)(1) or (a)(3) shall post a conspicuous sign at the main entrance to the
establishment or area. The sign must contain the words “No Smoking or Use Of An
Electronic Smoking Device, City of Dallas Ordinance,” the universal symbols for
no smoking and use of an electronic smoking device, or other language that
clearly prohibits smoking and the use of an electronic smoking device.
   (b)   The owner, operator, or person in control of an indoor or enclosed
area to which the smoking or the use of an electronic smoking device
prohibition of Section
41-2(a)(2) applies shall post a conspicuous sign at each entrance to the indoor
or enclosed area. The sign must contain the words “No Smoking or Use Of An
Electronic Smoking Device within 15 Feet of Entrance, City of Dallas
Ordinance.” The universal symbols for no smoking and use of an electronic
smoking device may be substituted for the words “No Smoking and No Use Of An
Electronic Smoking Device.”
   (c)   The owner, operator, or person in control of an establishment or area
in which smoking or the use of an electronic smoking device is prohibited under
Section
41-2 shall remove all ashtrays from the establishment or area.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
establishment or area is a location for which a defense to prosecution is
provided under Section
41-2(d). (Ord. Nos. 27440; 32933)
SECS. 41-4 THRU 41-5.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 25168)
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED.
SECS. 41-6 THRU 41-8.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 27440)
ARTICLE IV.
ENFORCEMENT.
SEC. 41-9.   PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to
perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits an offense. A
person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a
violation is committed, permitted, or continued.
   (b)   Unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, an offense
under this chapter is punishable by a fine of $200.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 18961; 19648; 21540; 25168; 27440)
ARTICLE V.
TOBACCO-PRODUCT VENDING MACHINES.
SEC. 41-10.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   TOBACCO-PRODUCT VENDING MACHINE means any self-service device that,
upon insertion of any coin, paper currency, token, card, key, or other item,
dispenses one or more tobacco products. The term does not include any machine
that is in storage, in transit, or otherwise not set up for use and operation,
nor does it include any machine that is situated on a train, bus, or other
public conveyance.
      (2)   RESTAURANT BAR means any area of an eating establishment, excluding
the dining area:
         (A)   that is primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages
for consumption by guests on the premises; and
         (B)   in which food service, if any, is only incidental to the
consumption of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. Nos. 21540; 21613; 25168; 27440)
SEC. 41-11.   TOBACCO-PRODUCT VENDING MACHINES PROHIBITED; DEFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he owns or allows the display or use of
any tobacco-product vending machine upon any property within the city.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the tobacco-
product vending machine was:
      (1)   situated in a premises where entry by a person under 21 years of
age is prohibited by law;
      (2)   situated in a hotel, motel, bar, or restaurant bar,
      (3)   located in a workplace with the permission of the employer;
provided that:
         (A)   the employer usually has no person under 21 years of age
employed at the workplace; and
         (B)   the tobacco-product vending machine is situated at a location
within the workplace to which no person other than an employee of the workplace
is usually permitted to have access; or
      (4)   located in an eating establishment and equipped with a lock-out
device that was installed, maintained, and operated in compliance with Section
41-12. (Ord. Nos. 21540; 21613; 25168; 27440; 31360)
SEC. 41-12.   LOCK-OUT DEVICES.
   (a)   A lock-out device on a tobacco-product vending machine located in an
eating establishment must be installed, maintained, and operated in compliance
with this section.
   (b)   A lock-out device may be electrical or mechanical and must be approved
by the director.
   (c)   An owner, operator, employee, or other person in charge of an eating
establishment who is at least 21 years of age shall:
      (1)   install and continuously maintain a lock-out device on a tobacco-
product vending machine in good working order;
      (2)   require identification from any potential customer of the tobacco-
product vending machine who appears to be under 30 years of age;
      (3)   physically observe all transactions in which the tobacco-product
vending machine is used; and
      (4)   physically release the lock-out device before each sale from a
tobacco-product vending machine. (Ord. Nos. 21613; 25168; 27440; 31360)
CHAPTER 41A
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Sec.
41A-1.   Purpose and intent.
Sec.
41A-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
41A-3.   Classification.
Sec.
41A-4.   License and designated operator required.
Sec.
41A-5.   Issuance of license.
Sec.
41A-6.   Fees.
Sec.
41A-7.   Inspection.
Sec.
41A-7.1.   Identification records.
Sec.
41A-8.   Expiration of license.
Sec.
41A-9.   Suspension.
Sec.
41A-10.   Revocation.
Sec.
41A-10.1.   Denial, suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of a license
for criminal convictions.
Sec.
41A-10.2.   Notice of denial of issuance or renewal of license or suspension or
revocation of license; surrender of license.
Sec.
41A-11.   Appeal.
Sec.
41A-12.   Transfer of license.
Sec.
41A-13.   Location of sexually oriented businesses.
Sec.
41A-14.   Exemption from location restrictions.
Sec.
41A-14.1.   Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses.
Sec.
41A-14.2.   Sign requirements.
Sec.
41A-14.3.   Hours of operation.
Sec.
41A-15.   Additional regulations for escort agencies.
Sec.
41A-16.   Additional regulations for nude model studios.
Sec.
41A-17.   Additional regulations for adult motion picture theaters.
Sec.
41A-18.   Additional regulations for adult motels.
Sec.
41A-18.1.   Additional regulations for adult cabarets.
Sec.
41A-19.   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or
videos.
Sec.
41A-20.   Display of sexually explicit material to minors.
Sec.
41A-20.1.   Prohibitions against minors in sexually oriented businesses.
Sec.
41A-21.   Enforcement.
Sec.
41A-22.   Injunction.
Sec.
41A-23.   Amendment of this chapter.
SEC. 41A-1.   PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city; to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the continued concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the
city; and to minimize the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses both inside such businesses and outside in the surrounding
communities. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials or performances, including sexually oriented materials and
performances. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials and
performances protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market.
   (b)   It is the intent of the city council that this chapter is promulgated
pursuant to Chapter 243 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
   (c)   A license, permit, or decal granted under this chapter or under any
other city ordinance does not authorize or legalize any conduct, activity, or
business that is illegal under state or federal law. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 24440;
24699; 25296; 27139)
SEC. 41A-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   ACHROMATIC means colorless or lacking in saturation or hue. The
term includes, but is not limited to, grays, tans, and light earth tones. The
term does not include white, black, or any bold coloration that attracts
attention.
       (2)   ADULT ARCADE means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin- operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
      (3)   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE means a commercial
establishment that as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or
rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
         (A)   books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, DVD’s, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations, that depict or describe
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
         (B)   instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
      (4)   ADULT CABARET means a commercial establishment that regularly
features the offering to customers of adult cabaret entertainment.
      (5)   ADULT CABARET ENTERTAINER means an employee of a sexually oriented
business who engages in or performs adult cabaret entertainment.
      (6)   ADULT CABARET ENTERTAINMENT means live entertainment that:
         (A)   is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification; and
         (B)   is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, simulating, describing, or relating to “specified anatomical areas”
or “specified sexual activities.”
      (7)   ADULT MOTEL means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial
establishment that:
         (A)   offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions; or
         (B)   offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than 10 hours; or
         (C)   allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the
room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
      (8)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER means a commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas.”
      (9)   APPLICANT means:
         (A)   a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business will be issued;
         (B)   each individual who signs an application for a sexually oriented
business license as required by Section
41A-4(d);
         (C)   each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented
business for which a license application is made under Section
41A-4, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears on the
application;
         (D)   each individual who has a 20 percent or greater ownership
interest in a sexually oriented business for which a license application is
made under Section
41A-4, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears on the
application; and
         (E)   each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over
a sexually oriented business for which a license application is made under
Section
41A-4, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears on the
application.
      (10)   CHIEF OF POLICE means the chief of police of the city of Dallas or
the chief’s designated agent.
      (11)   CHILD-CARE FACILITY has the meaning given that term in Section
51A-4.204 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (12)   CHURCH has the meaning given that term in Section
51A-4.204 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (13)   CONVICTION means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any
state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation
that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. “Conviction” includes
disposition of charges against a person by probation or deferred adjudication.
      (14)   DESIGNATED OPERATOR means the person or persons identified in the
license application, or in any supplement or amendment to the license
application, as being a designated operator of the sexually oriented business.
      (15)   EMPLOYEE means any individual who:
         (A)   is listed as a part-time, full-time, temporary, or permanent
employee on the payroll of an applicant, licensee, or sexually oriented
business; or
         (B)    performs or provides entertainment on the sexually oriented
business premises for any form of compensation or consideration.
      (16)   ESCORT means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to
act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers
to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
      (17)   ESCORT AGENCY means a person or business association that
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
      (18)   ESTABLISHMENT means and includes any of the following:
         (A)   the opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as
a new business;
         (B)   the conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
         (C)   the addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
          (D)   the relocation of any sexually oriented business.
      (19)   HISTORIC DISTRICT means an historic overlay zoning district as
defined in the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (20)   HOSPITAL has the meaning given that term in Section
51A-4.204 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (21)   LICENSEE means:
         (A)   a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued;
         (B)   each individual listed as an applicant on the application for a
license;
         (C)   each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented
business for which a license has been issued under this chapter, regardless of
whether the individual’s name or signature appears on the license application;
         (D)   each individual who has a 20 percent or greater ownership
interest in a sexually oriented business for which a license has been issued
under this chapter, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature
appears on the license application; and
         (E)   each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over
a sexually oriented business for which a license has been issued under this
chapter, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears on
the license application.
      (22)   MINOR means a person under the age of 18 years.
      (23)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO means any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
      (24)   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY means:
         (A)   the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals,
female genitals, or female breast; or
         (B)   a state of dress that fails to completely and opaquely cover a
human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or any part of the female
breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      (25)   OPERATES OR CAUSES TO BE OPERATED means to cause to function or to
put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to
be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an
owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
      (26)   OPERATOR means any person who has managerial control of the on-
site, day-to-day operations of a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether that person is a designated operator of the sexually oriented business.
      (27)   PERSON means an individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association, or other legal entity.
      (28)   PUBLIC PARK has the meaning given that term in Section
51A-4.208 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (29)   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT means a single family, duplex, townhouse,
multiple family, or mobile home zoning district as defined in the Dallas
Development Code, as amended.
      (30)   RESIDENTIAL USE means a single family, duplex, multiple family, or
“mobile home park, mobile home subdivision, and campground” use as defined in
the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (31)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS means an adult arcade, adult bookstore
or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater,
escort agency, nude model studio, or other commercial enterprise the primary
business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or
exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation
or sexual gratification to the customer.
      (32)   SIGN means any display, design, pictorial, or other representation
that is:
         (A)   constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened, or
manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that it is visible from the outside of
a sexually oriented business; and
         (B)   used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods,
services, or merchandise available at the sexually oriented business.
The term “sign” also includes any representation painted on or otherwise
affixed to any exterior portion of a sexually oriented business establishment
or to any part of the tract upon which the establishment is situated.
      (33)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS means:
         (A)   any of the following, or any combination of the following, when
less than completely and opaquely covered:
            (i)   any human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;
            (ii)   any buttock; or
            (iii)   any portion of the female breast or breasts that is
situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
         (B)   human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      (34)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES means and includes any of the
following:
         (A)   the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
         (B)   sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
         (C)   masturbation, actual or simulated; or
         (D)   excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Paragraphs (A) through (C) of this subsection.
      (35)   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT of a sexually oriented business means an
increase in the floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as
the floor area existed on:
         (A)   June 18, 1986, for any premises that were used as a sexually
oriented business on or before that date, regardless of any subsequent changes
in applicants, licensees, owners, or operators of the premises or the sexually
oriented business;
         (B)   August 22, 2001, for any premises that were used as a sexually
oriented business on or before August 22, 2001, but not on or before June 18,
1986, regardless of any subsequent changes in applicants, licensees, owners, or
operators of the premises or the sexually oriented business; or
         (C)   for any premises not used as a sexually oriented business on or
before August 22, 2001, the date an initial application for a license to use
the premises as a sexually oriented business is received by the chief of police
designating the floor area of the structure or proposed structure in which the
sexually oriented business will be conducted, regardless of any subsequent
changes in applicants, licensees, owners, or operators of the premises or the
sexually oriented business.
      (36)   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL of a sexually oriented business
means and includes any of the following:
         (A)   the sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
         (B)   the transfer of securities that constitute a controlling
interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
         (C)   the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal
device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
      (37)   VIP ROOM means any separate area, room, booth, cubicle, or other
portion of the interior of an adult cabaret (excluding a restroom and excluding
an area of which the entire interior is clearly and completely visible from the
exterior of the area) to which one or more customers are allowed access or
occupancy and other customers are excluded. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 19377; 20291;
20552; 21838; 23137; 24440; 24699; 25296; 27139)
SEC. 41A-3.   CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
      (1)   adult arcades;
      (2)   adult bookstores or adult video stores;
      (3)   adult cabarets;
      (4)   adult motels;
      (5)   adult motion picture theaters;
      (6)   escort agencies; and
      (7)   nude model studios. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 24440; 24699; 25296; 27139)
SEC. 41A-4.   LICENSE AND DESIGNATED OPERATOR REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented
business without a valid license issued by the city for the particular type of
business.
   (b)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram
showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor
space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with Section
41A-19 of this chapter shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of
Section
41A-19.
   (c)   Only a person who is an officer of or who has an ownership interest in
a sexually oriented business may apply for a license for the business. Each
applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he must sign the application for a license as the applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who is an officer of the business or who has a 20
percent or greater ownership interest in the business must sign the application
for a license as an applicant. The application must be sworn to be true and
correct by each applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under Section
41A-5, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
   (e)   The fact that a person possesses a valid dance hall license does not
exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented
business license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and
possesses a dance hall license shall comply with the requirements and
provisions of this chapter as well as the requirements and provisions of
Chapter 14 of this code when applicable. The possession of a late hours permit
issued under Dallas City Code Section
14-3.1 does not exempt the person from the provisions of Section
41A-14.3(a) of this chapter.
   (f)   In addition to identifying those persons required to sign an
application under Subsection (b), the application must identify all parent and
related corporations or entities of any person who will own or operate the
sexually oriented business and include the names of the officers of each parent
or related corporation or entity.
   (g)   The application must also include the name, address, and telephone
number of one or more designated operators who will be present on the premises
of the sexually oriented business during all hours of operation. The applicant
or licensee shall maintain a current list of designated operators with the
chief of police. Before a person may serve as a designated operator of the
sexually oriented business, the person must be named in the license
application, or a supplement or amendment to the license application, and not
be disqualified to operate a sexually oriented business under this chapter.
   (h)   A licensee commits an offense if he fails to maintain at least one
designated operator present on the premises of the sexually oriented business
during all hours of operation.
   (i)   The application must include a current official Texas criminal history
report with a fingerprint card (issued within the preceding 12 months) for the
applicant, the applicant’s spouse, and each designated operator showing that
they are not disqualified to operate a sexually oriented business under this
chapter. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 20552; 21838; 24440; 24699; 27139; 32607)
SEC. 41A-5.   ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license by the
special collections division of the water utilities department to an applicant
within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds
one or more of the following to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is a minor.
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or the applicant’s spouse in relation to a sexually oriented
business.
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
      (4)   An applicant, an applicant’s spouse, or a designated operator has
been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter within two years
immediately preceding the application.
      (5)   Any fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
      (6)   Reserved.
      (7)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with Section
41A-7,
41A-7.1,
41A-12,
41A-13,
41A-14.1,
41A-14.2,
41A-15,
41A-16,
41A-17,
41A-18,
41A-18.1,
41A-19,
41A-20, or
41A-20.1(a).
      (8)   An applicant, an applicant’s spouse, or a designated operator has
been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 43 of
the Texas Penal Code:
               (aa)   prostitution;
               (bb)   promotion of prostitution;
               (cc)   aggravated promo-tion of prostitution;
               (dd)   compelling prosti-tution;
               (ee)   obscenity;
               (ff)   sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a
minor;
               (gg)   sexual performance by a child; or
               (hh)   possession of child pornography;
            (ii)   any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 21 of
the Texas Penal Code:
               (aa)   public lewdness;
               (bb)   indecent exposure; or
               (cc)   indecency with a child;
            (iii)   sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in
Chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (iv)   incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway
child as described in Chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or
            (v)   criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any
of the foregoing offenses;
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24-month period.
      (9)   An applicant has been operating the proposed business as a sexually
oriented business without a valid license issued under this chapter.
      (10)   Operation of the proposed sexually oriented business would violate
the city’s zoning ordinances.
   (b)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant, the applicant’s spouse, or a designated
operator under Subsection (a).
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, when the chief of
police denies issuance or renewal of a license, the applicant may not apply for
or be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year after the date
the denial became final. If, subsequent to the denial, the chief of police
finds that the basis for the denial has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may apply for and be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since
the date the denial became final. If issuance or renewal of a license is denied
under Subsection (a)(7) for a violation of Section
41A-13 only, the applicant may be granted a license immediately upon compliance
with Section
41A-13 of this chapter. If issuance or renewal of a license is denied under
Subsection (a)(8)(A), the applicant may not apply for or be issued another
sexually oriented business license until the appropriate number of years
required by Subsection (a)(8)(B) has elapsed. If issuance or renewal of a
license is denied under Subsection (a)(4), the applicant may not apply for or
be issued another sexually oriented business license until the time period
required by Subsection (a)(4) has elapsed.
   (d)   The chief of police, upon approving issuance of a sexually oriented
business license, shall send to the applicant, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, written notice of that action and state where the applicant
must pay the license fee and obtain the license. The chief of police’s approval
of the issuance of a license does not authorize the applicant to operate a
sexually oriented business until the applicant has paid all fees required by
this chapter and obtained possession of the license.
   (e)   The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the
sexually oriented business. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be
easily read at any time. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 19377; 20552; 21629; 21838; 24206;
24440; 24699; 27139; 27697)
SEC. 41A-6.   FEES.
   (a)   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is $1,907.
   (b)   In addition to the fees required by Subsection (a) and (c), an
applicant for an initial sexually oriented business license shall, at the time
of making application, pay a nonrefundable fee of $1,107 for the city to
conduct a survey to ensure that the proposed sexually oriented business is in
compliance with the locational restrictions set forth in Section
41A-13.
   (c)   In addition to the fees required by Subsections (a) and (b), an
applicant for an initial sexually oriented business license shall, at the time
of making application, pay a nonrefundable fee of $90 for the chief of police
to obtain a letter of zoning verification to ensure that the proposed sexually
oriented business is permitted in the zoning district in which it will be
located. The chief of police shall request and obtain the letter of zoning
verification from the department of development services within 30 days after
receipt of the license application. For any sexually oriented business holding
a valid license on October 25, 2000, this subsection will apply to the first
renewal of that license issued after October 25, 2000. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 20612;
21838; 22206; 24051; 24440; 24699; 25047; 25048; 25909; 27697; 29477; 30653;
31657; 32002; 32003; 33232)
SEC. 41A-7.   INSPECTION.
   (a)   An applicant, licensee, operator, or employee shall permit
representatives of the police department, the fire department, the department
of code compliance, and the building official to inspect the premises of a
sexually oriented business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the
law, at any time it is occupied or open for business and at other reasonable
times upon request.
   (b)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or the person’s
agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful
inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department, the
fire department, the department of code compliance, or the building official at
any time the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for business and at
other reasonable times upon request.
   (c)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel
that are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 19377; 22026; 23694; 24440; 24699;
27139; 27697)
SEC. 41A-7.1.   IDENTIFICATION RECORDS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented
business without maintaining on the premises a current registration card or
file that clearly and completely identifies all employees of the sexually
oriented business as required by this section.
   (b)   The registration card or file must contain the following information
for each employee:
      (1)   Full legal name.
      (2)   All aliases or stage names.
      (3)   Date of birth.
      (4)   Race and gender.
      (5)   Hair color, eye color, height, and weight.
      (6)   Current residence address and telephone number, and, for designated
operators and adult cabaret entertainers, all residence addresses during the
12- month period preceding commencement of an employment or contractual
relationship with the sexually oriented business.
      (7)   Legible copy of a valid driver’s license or other government-issued
personal identification card containing the employee’s photograph and date of
birth.
      (8)   Date of commencement of employment or contractual relationship with
the sexually oriented business.
      (9)   Original color photograph with a full face view that accurately
depicts the employee’s appearance at the time the employee commenced an
employment or contractual relationship with the sexually oriented business.
   (c)   The licensee shall maintain a separate file on each designated
operator (other than the licensee or the licensee’s spouse) and on each adult
cabaret entertainer, which contains, in addition to the information and
documentation required in Subsection (b), the person’s current official Texas
criminal history report with a fingerprint card issued within the preceding 12
months.
   (d)   Not later than 90 days after employing or contracting with a
designated operator or an adult cabaret entertainer, the licensee shall include
in the file a current official criminal history report from any state other
than Texas in which the designated operator or adult cabaret entertainer
resided during the 12-month period preceding commencement of the employment or
contractual relationship with the sexually oriented business.
   (e)   A licensee commits an offense if he allows a designated operator to
operate a sexually oriented business without having on file, and available for
inspection by representatives of the police department, all records and
information required by this section for the designated operator.
   (f)   A licensee or an operator commits an offense if he allows an adult
cabaret entertainer to perform adult cabaret entertainment at a sexually
oriented business without having on file, and available for inspection by
representatives of the police department, all records and information required
by this section for the adult cabaret entertainer.
   (g)   All records maintained on an employee in compliance with this section
must be retained at the sexually oriented business for at least 90 days
following the date of any voluntary or involuntary termination of the
employee’s employment or contract with the sexually oriented business.
   (h)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or the person’s
agent or employee shall allow immediate access to these records by
representatives of the police department. (Ord. Nos. 24440; 24699; 27139)
SEC. 41A-8.   EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Each license expires one year from the date of issuance, except that a
license issued pursuant to an exemption to a locational restriction expires on
the date the exemption expires. A license may be renewed only by making
application as provided in Section
41A-4. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will not be affected by the pendency of the
application. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 20552; 21838; 24440; 24699; 27139)
SEC. 41A-9.   SUSPENSION.
   The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30
days if the chief of police determines that a licensee, an operator, or an
employee has:
      (1)   violated or is not in compliance with Section
41A-4(h),
41A-7,
41A-7.1,
41A-13,
41A-14.1,
41A-14.2,
41A-14.3,
41A-15,
41A-16,
41A-17,
41A-18,
41A-18.1,
41A-19, or
41A-20 of this chapter;
      (2)   refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or
      (3)   knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 24440; 24699; 27139; 32125)
SEC. 41A-10.   REVOCATION.
   (a)   The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in
Section
41A-9 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
   (b)   The chief of police shall revoke a license if the chief of police
determines that one or more of the following is true:
      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the chief of police during the application process.
      (2)   A licensee or an operator has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises.
      (3)   A licensee or an operator has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises.
      (4)   A licensee or an operator knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended.
      (5)   A licensee or designated operator has been convicted of an offense
listed in Section
41A-5(a)(8)(A) for which the time period required in Section
41A-5(a)(8)(B) has not elapsed.
      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12- month period, a person or
persons committed an offense occurring in or on the sexually oriented business
premises of a crime listed in Section
41A-5(a)(8)(A) for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or
persons were employees of the licensee or the sexually oriented business at the
time the offenses were committed.
      (7)   A licensee or an operator has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur
in or on the sexually oriented business premises. The term “sexual contact”
shall have the same meaning as it is defined in Section 21.01, Texas Penal
Code.
      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy
taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented
business.
      (9)   A licensee or an operator has violated Section
41A-12 of this chapter.
      (10)   A licensee or an operator has violated Section
41A-20.1(a) of this chapter.
   (c)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the
revocation of the license.
   (d)   Subsection (b)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for
revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact
to occur in a public place or within public view.
   (e)   When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation will
continue for one year, and the licensee, for one year after the date revocation
becomes effective, shall not apply for or be issued a sexually oriented
business license for the same location for which the license was revoked. If,
subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may apply for and be
granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under Subsection (b)
(5), an applicant may not apply for or be granted another license until the
appropriate number of years required under Section
41A-5(a)(8)(B) has elapsed. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 19377; 21629; 24206; 24440;
24699; 27139)
SEC. 41A-10.1.   DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR DENIAL OF RENEWAL OF A
LICENSE FOR CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS.
   (a)   In determining whether a sexually oriented business license should be
denied, suspended, revoked, or denied for renewal based on criminal convictions
of an applicant or licensee of a sexually oriented business, or on convictions
of an operator or employee of the applicant, the licensee, or the sexually
oriented business, all convictions for offenses occurring within a designated
time period will be counted, regardless of whether the offenses occurred during
the current license period, a prior license period, or an unlicensed period.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Subsection (a), a conviction for an offense committed
during a prior license period or an unlicensed period will not be counted
against a current applicant or licensee of a sexually oriented business if no
person who is deemed a current applicant or licensee was an applicant,
licensee, owner, or operator of the sexually oriented business during the prior
license period or unlicensed period in which the offense was committed. (Ord.
Nos. 24699; 27139)
SEC. 41A-10.2.   NOTICE OF DENIAL OF ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF LICENSE OR
SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; SURRENDER OF LICENSE.
   (a)   If the chief of police denies the issuance or renewal of a sexually
oriented business license or suspends or revokes a sexually oriented business
license, the chief of police shall deliver to the applicant or licensee, either
by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice
of the action, the basis of the action, and the right to an appeal.
   (b)   If the chief of police suspends or revokes a license or denies renewal
of a license that was valid on the date the application for renewal was
submitted, the chief of police may not enforce such action before the 11th day
after the date the written notice required by Subsection (a) is delivered to
the applicant or licensee.
   (c)   After suspension or revocation of a license or denial of renewal of a
license that was valid on the date the application for renewal was submitted,
the applicant or licensee shall discontinue operating the sexually oriented
business and surrender the license to the chief of police by 11:59 p.m. of the
10th day after the date:
      (1)   notice required by Subsection (a) is delivered to the applicant or
licensee, if no appeal is filed under Section
41A-11 of this chapter; or
      (2)   a final decision is issued by the permit and license appeal board
upholding the action of the chief of police, if an appeal is filed under
Section
41A-11 of this chapter.
   (d)   For purposes of this chapter, written notice is deemed to be
delivered:
      (1)   on the date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or
licensee; or
      (2)   three days after the date the notice is placed in the United States
mail with proper postage and properly addressed to the applicant or licensee at
the address provided for the applicant or licensee in the most recent license
application. (Ord. Nos. 24440; 24699; 27139)
SEC. 41A-11.   APPEAL.
   (a)   Upon delivery of written notice of the denial, suspension, or
revocation of a sexually oriented business license as required by Section
41A-10.2, the applicant or licensee whose application for a license or license
renewal has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked has the
right to appeal to either the permit and license appeal board or the state
district court.
   (b)   An appeal to the permit and license appeal board must be in accordance
with Section
2-96 of this code, except that an appeal from the denial of an initial sexually
oriented business license must be heard and decided by the board within 30 days
after the applicant files a written request for an appeal hearing.
   (c)   The filing of an appeal under this section stays the action of the
chief of police in suspending or revoking a license, or in denying renewal of a
license that was valid on the date the application for renewal was submitted,
until a final decision is made by the permit and license appeal board. A
suspension or revocation of a license, or a denial of renewal of a license that
was valid on the date the application for renewal was submitted, that is upheld
by the board takes effect at 11:59 p.m. on the 10th day after the board issues
its decision.
   (d)   An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days
after notice of the decision of the chief of police is delivered to the
applicant or licensee as required by Section
41A-10.2 or a final decision is issued by the permit and license appeal board
upholding the decision of the chief of police. The applicant or licensee shall
bear the burden of proof in court. The filing of an appeal to state district
court stays a suspension or revocation of the license, or denial of renewal of
a license that was valid on the date the application for renewal was submitted,
pending a judicial determination of the appeal by the trial court. (Ord. Nos.
19196; 20552; 21838; 24440; 24699; 27139)
SEC. 41A-12.   TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application. (Ord. Nos. 19196;
24440; 24699)
SEC. 41A-13.   LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation,
establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of
a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:
      (1)   a church;
      (2)   a public or private elementary or secondary school;
      (3)   a boundary of a residential or historic district as defined in this
chapter;
      (4)   a public park;
      (5)   the property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined
in this chapter;
      (6)   a hospital; or
      (7)   a child-care facility.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation,
establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of
a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented
business.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation,
establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in
the same building, structure, or portion of a building or structure, or the
increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building,
structure, or portion of a building or structure containing another sexually
oriented business.
   (d)   For the purposes of Subsection (a), measurement must be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the premises of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school,
hospital, or child-care facility or to the nearest boundary of an affected
public park, residential district, historic district, or residential lot.
   (e)   For purposes of Subsection (b) of this section, the distance between
any two sexually oriented businesses must be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior
wall of the structure in which each business is located.
   (f)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on May 28, 1997 that
is in violation of Subsections (a), (b), or (c) of this section is a
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a
period not to exceed six months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. The nonconforming use
may not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered, except that the use may
be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are
within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the
sexually oriented business that was first established and continually operating
at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established
business is nonconforming.
   (g)   An owner of a nonconforming sexually oriented business who cannot
recoup actual investments in the use by November 29, 1997 may request an
extension of the compliance date from the board of adjustment. The request must
be in writing and filed with the city building official on or before October
29, 1997. No application for an extension that is received by the building
official after October 29, 1997 may be considered.
   (h)   The board of adjustment shall conduct a hearing on the request for
extension in accordance with applicable procedures set forth in Section
51A-4.703 of the Dallas Development Code. If the board of adjustment determines
that the owner of the nonconforming sexually oriented business cannot recoup
actual investments in the use by November 29, 1997, it may by written order
provide a new compliance date to the owner. The board of adjustment shall
consider the factors listed in Section
51A-4.704(a)(1)(D) of the Dallas Development Code in determining whether to
grant the request for extension. Any extension granted by the board of
adjustment must specify a date certain for closure of the sexually oriented
business and is not valid for operation of the business at any other location.
   (i)   The board of adjustment’s decision on a request for an extended
compliance date is final unless appealed to the district court within 10 days
in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code.
   (j)   A sexually oriented business that remains in operation pursuant to an
extension granted under this section is not considered as having a license for
purposes of measuring distances between a sexually oriented business and a
church, a public or private elementary or secondary school, a boundary of a
residential or historic district, a public park, the property line of a lot
devoted to a residential use, a hospital, a child-care facility, or another
sexually oriented business, as required in Section
41A-13.
   (k)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or
private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district,
historic district, residential lot, hospital, or child-care facility within
1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to
the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a
license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked.
   (l)   Requirements for posting an intent to locate a sexually oriented
business.
      (1)   Whenever a sign is posted at an intended location of a sexually
oriented business in compliance with Section 243.0075 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended, and the intended location of the sexually oriented
business is not in violation of the locational restrictions of this section at
the time the sign is posted, the sexually oriented business will qualify as a
conforming use and will not be rendered nonconforming by any location,
subsequent to the posting of the sign, of a church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, historic
district, residential lot, hospital, or child-care facility within 1,000 feet
of the posted location of the sexually oriented business.
      (2)   The operator of a proposed sexually oriented business shall notify
the chief of police, by either certified mail or hand delivery, whenever a sign
is posted at the intended location of the business in compliance with Section
243.0075 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. The notification must
be in the form of a sworn statement indicating the location of the sign and the
date it was posted and must be received by the chief of police within five days
after the date of the sign’s posting.
      (3)   Paragraph (1) of this subsection does not apply if:
         (A)   a completed license application for the proposed sexually
oriented business is not filed with the chief of police within 20 days after
the expiration of the 60-day posting requirement of Section 243.0075 of the
Texas Local Government Code, as amended; or
         (B)   the notification requirements of Paragraph (2) of this
subsection are not met. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 19377; 20291; 21629; 23137; 24440;
24699; 25092)
SEC. 41A-14.   EXEMPTION FROM LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an
applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment
is in violation of Section
41A-13 of this chapter, then the applicant may, not later than 10 calendar days
after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written
request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of Section
41A-13.
   (b)   If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the 10-
day limit, a permit and license appeal board, selected in accordance with
Section
2-95 of this code, shall consider the request. The city secretary shall set a
date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is
received.
   (c)   A hearing by the board may proceed if a quorum of the board is
present. The board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested
person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply.
   (d)   The permit and license appeal board may, in its discretion, grant an
exemption from the locational restrictions of Section
41A-13 if it makes the following findings:
      (1)   that the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will
not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public
safety or welfare;
      (2)   that the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will
not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or
encourage the development of urban blight;
      (3)   that the location of the proposed sexually oriented business in the
area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will
it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and
      (4)   that all other applicable provisions of this chapter will be
observed.
   (e)   The board shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote.
Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption.
Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the
evidence. The decision of the permit and license appeal board is final.
   (f)   If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year
from the date of the board’s action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the
sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of
Section
41A-13 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
   (g)   If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for
an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the
board’s action.
   (h)   The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other
provisions of this chapter other than the locational restrictions of Section
41A-13. The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from the
provisions of Section
41A-13 prohibiting substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business.
(Ord. Nos. 19196; 24440; 24699; 25002)
SEC. 41A-14.1.   EXTERIOR PORTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (a)   An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an
offense if he allows:
      (1)   the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible
from any point outside the establishment;
      (2)   the exterior portions of the establishment to have flashing lights,
or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial
representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by this chapter;
or
      (3)   the exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color
other than a single achromatic color, except that this paragraph does not apply
to an establishment if the following conditions are met:
         (A)   the establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center;
and
         (B)   the exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the establishment, are
painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way as to be a
component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial
multi-unit center.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires the painting of an otherwise
unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
   (c)   The exterior of any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on
May 28, 1997 is not required to comply with Subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of
this section until alterations, repairs, remodeling, and repainting that
cumulatively affect more than 50 percent of the exterior are performed on the
sexually oriented business during any 12-month period. (Ord. Nos. 23137; 24440;
24699)
SEC. 41A-14.2.   SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Dallas Development Code or any
other city ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, the owner or
operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person commits an
offense if he erects, constructs, or maintains any sign for the establishment
other than one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided in this
section.
   (b)   A primary sign may have no more than two display surfaces. Each
display surface must:
      (1)   not contain any flashing lights;
      (2)   be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
      (3)   not exceed 75 square feet in area; and
      (4)   not exceed 10 feet in height or 10 feet in length.
   (c)   A secondary sign may have only one display surface. The display
surface must:
      (1)   not contain any flashing lights;
      (2)   be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
      (3)   not exceed 20 square feet in area;
      (4)   not exceed five feet in height or four feet in width; and
      (5)   be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the establishment.
   (d)   A primary or secondary sign must contain no photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner, and may contain only:
      (1)   the name of the establishment; and/or
      (2)   one or more of the following phrases:
         (A)   “Adult arcade.”
         (B)   “Adult bookstore or adult video store.”
         (C)   “Adult cabaret.”
         (D)   “Adult motel.”
         (E)   “Adult motion picture theater.”
         (F)   “Escort agency.”
         (G)   “Nude model studio.”
   (e)   In addition to the phrases listed in Subsection (d)(2) of this
section, a primary sign for an adult motion picture theater may contain the
phrase, “Movie Titles Posted on Premises,” and a primary sign for an adult
bookstore or adult video store may contain the word “DVD’s”.
   (f)   Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign must be of a
solid color, and each letter must be the same print-type, size, and color. The
background behind the lettering on the display surface of a primary or
secondary sign must be of a uniform and solid color.
   (g)   Notwithstanding the sign requirements of this section and Section
41A-14.1, any sign lawfully existing on the premises of a lawfully operating
sexually oriented business on May 28, 1997 may continue to be maintained on the
premises, until:
      (1)   the sign is intentionally removed or destroyed by the owner or
operator of the sexually oriented business or abandoned by the owner or
operator of the sexually oriented business; or
      (2)   the city requires removal, relocation, or reconstruction of the
sign in accordance with applicable state law. (Ord. Nos. 23137; 24440; 24699;
25296)
SEC. 41A-14.3.   HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   A sexually oriented business must be closed for business each day
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (b)   This section shall be reviewed by the appropriate city council
committee on or before January 26, 2024, and by the January of every even
numbered year thereafter. (Ord. 32125)
SEC. 41A-15.   ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES.
   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act
as an escort for a minor. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 24440; 24699; 27139)
SEC. 41A-16.   ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under 21
years of age to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude
model studio.
   (b)   A minor commits an offense if the minor appears in a state of nudity
in or on the premises of a nude model studio.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity
or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude
model studio premises that can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
   (d)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress
in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception
room open to the public.
   (e)   An employee of a nude model studio, while exposing any specified
anatomical areas, commits an offense if the employee touches a customer or the
clothing of a customer.
   (f)   A customer at a nude model studio commits an offense if the customer
touches an employee who is exposing any specified anatomical areas or touches
the clothing of the employee.
   (g)   A licensee, an operator, or an employee of a nude model studio commits
an offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises not
visible from the manager’s station or not visible by a walk through of the
premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom. (Ord. Nos.
19196; 23137; 24440; 24699; 27139; 32125)
SEC. 41A-17.   ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under 21
years of age to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult
motion picture theater.
   (b)   A minor commits an offense if the minor knowingly appears in a state
of nudity in or on the premises of an adult motion picture theater. (Ord. Nos.
19196; 21838; 24440; 24699; 27139; 32125)
SEC. 41A-18.   ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.
   (a)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time
that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping
room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have
a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a
person and, within 10 hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or
subrents the same sleeping room again.
   (c)   For purposes of Subsection (b) of this section, the terms “rent” or
“subrent” mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 24440; 24699)
SEC. 41A-18.1.   ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT CABARETS.
   (a)   A licensee or an operator of an adult cabaret commits an offense if he
employs, contracts with, or otherwise allows a person to act as an adult
cabaret entertainer if the person has been convicted of an offense listed in
Section
41A-5(a)(8)(A) for which the time period required in Section
41A-5(a)(8)(B) has not elapsed.
   (b)   An employee of an adult cabaret, while exposing any specified
anatomical areas, commits an offense if the employee touches a customer or the
clothing of a customer.
   (c)   A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if the customer
touches an employee who is exposing any specified anatomical areas or touches
the clothing of the employee.
   (d)    An adult cabaret may not contain any VIP rooms, except that any VIP
room contained in a lawfully operating adult cabaret on April 21, 2008 may
continue in existence until April 21, 2009, provided that no adult cabaret
entertainment occurs in the VIP room.
   (e)   Except for a restroom or an area of which the entire interior is
clearly and completely visible from the exterior of the area, no area of an
adult cabaret that is accessible to a customer may be separated from any other
customer-accessible area by a door, wall, curtain, drape, partition, or room
divider of any kind. Nothing in this subsection precludes the installation or
maintenance of any wall or column that is essential to the structural integrity
of the building. Any adult cabaret lawfully operating on April 21, 2008 must
comply with the requirements of this subsection not later than April 21, 2009.
   (f)   A licensee, an operator, or an employee of an adult cabaret commits an
offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises:
      (1)   not visible from the manager’s station or not visible by a walk
through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom;
or
      (2)   not regularly open to all customers of the business.
   (g)   Adult cabaret entertainment must occur only in the presence of, and be
visually observable by, an employee who is not an adult cabaret entertainer. A
licensee or operator commits an offense if he knowingly allows adult cabaret
entertainment to be performed in violation of this subsection.
   (h)   The purpose of Subsections (d), (e), (f), and (g) of this section is
to reduce the opportunity for unlawful activity such as indecent exposure,
solicitation for prostitution, and prostitution that occurs in VIP rooms and
other areas of adult cabarets that are not open to the view of management
personnel, law enforcement officers, and customers. By prohibiting VIP rooms
and requiring adult entertainment to be performed in more open and visible
surroundings, unlawful activity will be deterred because it will be more
readily observable by management personnel, law enforcement officers, and
customers. (Ord. Nos. 23137; 24440; 24699; 27139)
SEC. 41A-19.   REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS
OR VIDEOS.
   (a)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, or other video reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application must be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not
exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram must also designate the place
at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally
prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint is not
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted
and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since
it was prepared.
      (2)   The application must be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or the
chief’s designee.
      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager’
      (5)   The interior of the premises must be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of
the premises must be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in
this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in Paragraph (5) of this subsection remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure
that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to Paragraph (1) of this subsection.
      (7)   The premises must be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0) footcandle as measured at
the floor level.
      (8)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that
the illumination described in Paragraph (7) of this subsection is maintained at
all times that any patron is present in the premises.
   (b)   A person having a duty under Paragraphs (1) through (8) of Subsection
(a) commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. (Ord. Nos.
19196; 24440; 24699)
SEC. 41A-20.   DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL TO MINORS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to
minors, the person displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or
video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse
sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or
perversion for commercial gain, any of the following:
      (1)   human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy;
      (2)   fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breasts;
      (3)   less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks,
or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or
      (4)   human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered
or uncovered.
   (b)   In this section “display” means to locate an item in such a manner
that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business
establishment:
      (1)   it is available to the general public for handling and inspection;
or
      (2)   the cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of
the general public. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 24440; 24699; 27139)
SEC. 41A-20.1.   PROHIBITIONS AGAINST MINORS IN SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (a)   A licensee or operator commits an offense if he knowingly:
      (1)   allows a minor to enter the interior premises of a sexually
oriented business;
      (2)   employs, contracts with, or otherwise engages or allows a person
under 21 years of age to perform adult cabaret entertainment; or
      (3)   employs a person under 21 years of age in a sexually oriented
business.    
   (b)   Knowledge on the part of the licensee or operator is presumed under
Paragraph (2) or (3) of Subsection (a) if identification records were not kept
in accordance with the requirements of Section
41A-7.1, and properly kept records would have informed the licensee or operator
of the person's age.   
   (c)   An employee commits an offense if the employee knowingly:
      (1)   allows a minor to enter the interior premises of a sexually
oriented business;
      (2)   employs, contracts with, or otherwise engages or allows a person
under 21 years of age to perform adult cabaret entertainment; or
      (3)   employs a person under 21 years of age in a sexually oriented
business.
   (d)   A minor commits an offense if the minor knowingly enters the interior
premises of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. Nos. 27139; 32125)
SEC. 41A-21.   ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Whenever a person does an act that is forbidden, fails to perform an
act that is required, or commits an act that is made an offense by any
provision of this chapter, the violation is punishable as provided by Section
243.010(b) of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. A person violating a
provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part
of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
   (b)   Except where otherwise specified, a culpable mental state is not
required for the commission of an offense under this chapter.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Section
41A-4(a),
41A-13, or
41A-16(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:
      (1)   by a proprietary school licensed by the state of Texas; a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
      (2)   by a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      (3)   in a structure:
         (A)   that has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
         (B)   where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
         (C)   where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Section
41A-4(a) or Section
41A-13 that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered
for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 19963; 20552; 24440; 24699)
SEC. 41A-22.   INJUNCTION.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid license or in violation of Section
41A-13 of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for criminal violations. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 24440; 24699)
SEC. 41A-23.   AMENDMENT OF THIS CHAPTER.
   Sections
41A-13 and
41A-14 of this chapter may be amended only after compliance with the procedure
required to amend a zoning ordinance. Other sections of this chapter may be
amended by vote of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 19196; 24440; 24699)
CHAPTER 42
HOME SOLICITATIONS
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
Sec.
42-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
42-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
42-3.   Authority of chief.
Sec.
42-4.   Delivery of notices.
Sec.
42-5.   Violations; penalty.
Sec.
42-6.   Presumption of distribution of commercial printed matter.
ARTICLE II.
REGISTRATION OF HOME SOLICITORS.
Sec.
42-7.   Registration required; defenses.
Sec.
42-8.   Application for registration; fee; expiration; nontransferability;
material changes.
Sec.
42-9.   Issuance, denial, and display of registration; identification badge.
Sec.
42-10.   Suspension.
Sec.
42-11.   Revocation.
Sec.
42-12.   Appeals.
ARTICLE III.
MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS FOR HOME SOLICITATIONS.
Sec.
42-13.   Time and manner for conducting home solicitations.
Sec.
42-14.   Exhibiting signs prohibiting home solicitors.
Sec.
42-15.   Records.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
SEC. 42-1.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect against criminal activity
(including, but not limited to, burglary and fraud), to minimize the unwelcome
disturbance of citizens and the disruption of privacy, and to otherwise
preserve the public health, safety, and welfare by providing a registration
program for home solicitors. (Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
SEC. 42-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   AGENT means any person employed by or contracting with a home
solicitor.
      (2)   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION or REGISTRATION means a certificate of
registration issued to a home solicitor under this chapter.
      (3)   CHIEF means the chief of police for the city of Dallas or a
designated representative.
      (4)   COMMERCIAL PRINTED MATTER means any printed or written matter,
whether on a sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, or
booklet, and whether printed, reproduced, or copied that:
         (A)   advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
service;
         (B)   directs attention to a business or commercial establishment or
other activity for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting
sales;
         (C)   directs attention to or advertises a meeting, performance,
exhibition, or event, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of
private gain or profit, unless an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up at the meeting, performance, exhibition, or event only for the purpose
of defraying the expenses; or
         (D)   while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as the advertiser or distributor.
      (5)   CONVICTION means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any
state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation
that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned.
      (6)   DISTRIBUTION means:
         (A)   to hand or attempt to hand commercial printed matter to an owner
or occupant of a residential premises or to any other person then present on
the residential premises; or
         (B)   to place, deposit, or distribute commercial printed matter on
residential premises.
      (7)   GOODS means property of every kind.
      (8)   HOME SOLICITATION means the business of soliciting, selling, or
taking orders for goods or services or distributing commercial printed matter
by going to one or more residential premises in the city in person or by an
agent.
      (9)   HOME SOLICITOR means a person who engages in home solicitations.
      (10)   IDENTIFICATION BADGE means a badge issued to a registrant under
this chapter that contains:
         (A)   the registrant’s photograph;
         (B)   the number and expiration date of the registrant’s certificate
of registration; and
         (C)   the phrase “Home Solicitor Registered under Chapter 42 of the
Dallas City Code,” or similar language approved by the chief.
      (11)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, trust, partnership,
association, or any other legal entity.
      (12)   REGISTRANT means a person issued a certificate of registration as
a home solicitor under this chapter.
      (13)   RESIDENTIAL PREMISES means any dwelling, house, building, or other
structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes (whether inhabited, uninhabited, or vacant), including any yard,
grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or
appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
      (14)   SERVICES means any work done for the benefit of another person.
(Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
SEC. 42-3.   AUTHORITY OF CHIEF.
   The chief shall implement and enforce this chapter and may by written order
establish such rules, regulations, or procedures, not inconsistent with this
chapter, as the chief determines are necessary to discharge any duty under or
to effect the policy of this chapter. (Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
SEC. 42-4.   DELIVERY OF NOTICES.
   Any written notice that the chief is required to give an applicant or
registrant under this chapter is deemed to be delivered:
      (1)   on the date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or
registrant; or
      (2)   three days after the date the notice is placed in the United States
mail with proper postage and properly addressed to the applicant or registrant
at the address provided for the applicant or registrant in the most recent
registration application. (Ord. 29245, eff. 4- 22-14)
SEC. 42-5.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to
perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits an offense. A
person commits a separate offense for:
      (1)   each day or portion of a day during which a violation is committed,
permitted, or continued;
      (2)   each item placed, deposited, or distributed on residential premises
in violation of this chapter; and
      (3)   each residential premises to which a home solicitation is conducted
in violation of this chapter.
   (b)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than
$500.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (d)   The penalties provided for in Subsection (b) are in addition to any
other enforcement remedies and penalties that the city may have under city
ordinances and state law. (Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
SEC. 42-6.   PRESUMPTION OF DISTRIBUTION OF COMMERCIAL PRINTED MATTER.
   Whenever commercial printed matter is placed, deposited, or distributed, or
caused to be placed, deposited, or distributed, in violation of this chapter,
it is presumed that the person named on the commercial printed matter is the
person who committed the violation, either personally or through an agent.
(Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
ARTICLE II.
REGISTRATION OF HOME SOLICITORS .
SEC. 42-7.   REGISTRATION REQUIRED; DEFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, within the city, the person:
      (1)   personally, by an agent, or as the agent of another, engages in a
home solicitation without a valid certificate of registration issued to the
person under this chapter;
      (2)   engages in a home solicitation by using an agent who does not hold
a valid certificate of registration issued under this chapter; or
      (3)   engages in a home solicitation by acting as an agent of another
person who does not hold a valid certificate of registration issued under this
chapter.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   the person was soliciting for a noncommercial purpose, including
but not limited to a charitable, educational, civic, patriotic, philanthropic,
political, or religious purpose;
      (2)   the person was on the residential premises by express invitation of
the owner, occupant, or other person in control of the premises;
      (3)   the person was a wholesale agent or factory representative who
sells or exhibits for sale goods, wares, or merchandise and was conducting
business with a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, and dealing
in the same type of goods, wares, or merchandise;
      (4)   the person was soliciting newspaper sales, or delivering newspapers
pursuant to a request by or contract with the owner, occupant, or other person
in control of a residential premises;
      (5)   the solicitation, sale, or taking of orders for goods or services
took place upon residential premises owned, leased, or controlled by the person
or by the person’s employer;
      (6)   the person was a governmental entity, or an officer, employee, or
agent of a governmental entity, placing a notice or other information on the
premises in the performance of official duties; or
      (7)   the person was the United States Postal Service or a private
courier service registered with the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration, or an employee or agent of those services, delivering an item
of mail, a notice, or a package to the premises.
   (c)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, the chief,
any police officer, or any city code enforcement officer shall ask the apparent
offender’s reason for being on the residential premises or for depositing any
item on the premises. The chief, the police officer, or the city code
enforcement officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
section unless he or she reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and
that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in Subsection
(b) is present. (Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
SEC. 42-8.    APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION; FEE; EXPIRATION;
NONTRANSFERABILITY; MATERIAL CHANGES.
   (a)   To obtain a certificate of registration to conduct home solicitations,
a person must file a written application with the chief on a form provided for
that purpose. The application must include the following:
      (1)   If the applicant is a company:
         (A)   the company name, address, and telephone number;
         (B)   the name, address, telephone number, and title of each of its
officers;
         (C)   the date and place of incorporation or establishment of the
business; and
         (D)   the name, address, and telephone number of each person who will
be conducting a home solicitation in the city for the applicant.
      (2)   If the applicant is an individual:
         (A)   the applicant’s name, address, and telephone number;
         (B)   the name, address, and telephone number of any individual or
company for which the applicant is acting as an agent;
         (C)   the name, address, and telephone number of each person who will
be conducting a home solicitation in the city for the applicant;
         (D)   a photograph of the applicant, taken within the preceding 12
months, that clearly depicts the applicant’s facial features; and
         (E)   the applicant’s date of birth and driver’s license number (with
the state of issuance) or, if the applicant does not have a driver’s license,
the number from another government-issued personal identification card
containing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth.
      (3)   The names of other communities in which the applicant has worked as
a home solicitor in the past 12 months and, if the applicant was an agent of
different companies in the other communities, the names of those companies.
      (4)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services to be
advertised, offered for sale, or delivered as part of the home solicitation.
      (5)   Whether the applicant, upon obtaining an order for goods or
services, will demand, accept, or receive payment or a deposit of money in
advance of final delivery of the goods or services.
      (6)   The dates, times, and locations for which the applicant proposes to
conduct home solicitations in the city.
      (7)   An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the
home solicitations.
      (8)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime listed in
Section
42-9(a)(2)(A) within the time period listed in Section
42-9(a)(2)(B), and the applicant’s signed consent authorizing the city to
obtain a criminal history report on the applicant.
      (9)   Proof that the applicant possesses all licenses or permits required
by this code or by state or federal law for the operation of the proposed
business.
      (10)   If the applicant is an agent of an individual or company, written
proof of the applicant’s authority to represent the individual or company.
      (11)   Any other information the chief determines necessary to the
enforcement and administration of this chapter.
   (b)   An application filed under this section must be accompanied by a
nonrefundable registration fee of $50.
   (c)   A certificate of registration expires one year after the date of
issuance. Upon expiration, the registrant may apply for a registration renewal
in the same manner prescribed by this section for a new registration.
   (d)   Neither a certificate of registration nor an identification badge is
transferable from one person to another, but both may be used by the registrant
to act as an agent for different individuals or companies during the
registration term if the chief is notified in accordance with Subsection (e).
   (e)   A registrant shall notify the chief within 10 days after any material
change in the information on the application during the registration term. A
material change includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   when a registrant becomes an agent for another individual or
company;
      (2)   when a registrant terminates an individual’s authority to serve as
the registrant’s agent;
      (3)   a change in the nature, character, and quality of the goods or
services; or
      (4)   a change in the dates, times, and locations proposed for conducting
home solicitations in the city. (Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
SEC. 42-9.   ISSUANCE, DENIAL, AND DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION; IDENTIFICATION
BADGE.
   (a)   The chief shall issue a certificate of registration to the applicant
within 30 days after receipt of the application unless any of the following
applies:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide material information requested
or made a false statement of a material fact on the application form or in a
hearing concerning the application or registration.
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   criminal homicide as described in Chapter 19 of the Texas
Penal Code, as amended;
            (ii)   kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal
Code, as amended;
            (iii)   a sexual offense as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas
Penal Code, as amended;
            (iv)   an assaultive offense as described in Chapter 22 of the
Texas Penal Code, as amended;
            (v)   robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code,
as amended;
            (vi)   burglary as described in Chapter 30 of the Texas Penal Code,
as amended;
            (vii)   theft as described in Chapter 31 of the Texas Penal Code,
as amended, but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom
the applicant came in contact while engaged in a home solicitation business;
            (viii)   fraud as described in Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code,
as amended, but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom
the applicant came in contact while engaged in a home solicitation business;
            (ix)   the transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in
violation of Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended, or of any
comparable state or federal law, but only if the violation is punishable as a
felony under the applicable law; or
            (x)   criminal attempt to commit any of offenses listed in
Paragraph (2) (A) (i) through (ix) of this subsection;
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony
offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the
applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination
of misdemeanor offenses.
      (3)   The applicant has failed to provide proof of a license or permit
required by this code or another city ordinance or by state law for the
operation of the proposed business.
      (4)   The applicant or an agent, individually or cumulatively, has been
convicted of two violations of this chapter, other than the offense of
conducting a home solicitation without a certificate of registration, within
the 24 months immediately preceding the application.
      (5)   The required registration fee has not been paid.
      (6)   The applicant has failed to comply with or the proposed business
will violate any applicable ordinance or regulation of the city or applicable
state or federal law.
   (b)   If the chief determines that a certificate of registration should be
denied the applicant, the chief shall notify the applicant in writing that the
application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and a
statement informing the applicant of the right of appeal.
   (c)   Upon issuing a certificate of registration, the chief shall also issue
the registrant an identification badge. At all times the registrant is
conducting home solicitations in the city, the registrant shall prominently
display the identification badge on the registrant’s clothing and maintain the
certificate of registration on the registrant’s person. The registrant shall
allow the certificate of registration and the identification badge to be
examined upon request by the chief, any police officer, any city code
enforcement officer, or the owner or occupant of the residential premises on
which a home solicitation is being conducted.
   (d)   If a registrant’s identification badge is lost, mutilated, or
destroyed, the chief shall issue the registrant a duplicate identification
badge upon payment of a $10 duplicate badge fee. (Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
SEC. 42-10.   SUSPENSION.
   (a)   The chief may suspend a certificate of registration for a definite
period of time not to exceed 30 days if the chief determines that:
      (1)   a violation of this code or any other law concerning the sale or
distribution of goods or services, or the distribution of commercial printed
matter, by the registrant or the registrant’s agent has occurred; or
      (2)   the registrant or a representative authorized to supervise the
registrant’s agents has failed to establish policy and take action to
discourage, prevent, or correct violations of this chapter by agents.
   (b)   The chief shall send to the registrant by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a written statement setting forth the reasons for the
suspension and notifying the registrant of the right to appeal. A timely
request for appeal by the registrant stays the effect of the suspension unless
the chief determines that an emergency exists.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, an emergency exists if the chief
determines that a violation has occurred and constitutes an imminent and
serious threat to the public health or safety. In case of an emergency, the
chief may order the registrant or the registrant’s representative to correct
the violation immediately or cease home solicitations to the extent the chief
determines is necessary to abate the threat until the violation is corrected.
(Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22- 14)
SEC. 42-11.   REVOCATION.
   (a)   The chief shall revoke a certificate of registration if the chief
determines that:
      (1)   the registrant or an agent of the registrant, individually or
cumulatively, has been convicted in any court of two violations of this code or
any other law concerning the sale or distribution of goods or services, or the
distribution of commercial printed matter, within a 12-month period (the fact
that a conviction is being appealed has no effect);
      (2)   the registrant has given false or misleading information of a
material nature or has withheld material information on the application or in
any hearing concerning the application or registration;
      (3)   the registrant or an agent of the registrant has intentionally or
knowingly impeded a lawful inspection by the chief, the chief’s authorized
representative, or any representative of another department who has the
authority to inspect the registrant and the registrant’s business procedure; or
      (4)   a cause for suspension under Section
42-10 occurs and the certificate of registration has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.
   (b)   The chief shall send to the registrant by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a written statement setting forth the reasons for the
revocation and notifying the registrant of the right to appeal.
   (c)   If the chief revokes a certificate of registration, the fee already
paid for the registration will be forfeited. A person whose certificate of
registration has been revoked under this section may not apply for or be issued
a new registration for a period of one year after the date the revocation took
effect, except that, if the chief determines that the basis for the revocation
has been corrected, the person may apply for and be issued a new certificate of
registration if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation
took effect. (Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
SEC. 42-12.   APPEALS.
   If the chief denies issuance or renewal of a certificate of registration or
suspends or revokes a certificate of registration, this action is final unless
the applicant or registrant files an appeal with the permit and license appeal
board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
ARTICLE III.
MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS FOR HOME SOLICITATIONS.
SEC. 42-13.   TIME AND MANNER FOR CONDUCTING HOME SOLICITATIONS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person conducts or attempts to
conduct (either personally or through an agent) a home solicitation at a
residential premises:
      (1)   before 9:00 a.m. or after sunset of any day, Monday through
Saturday;
      (2)   at any time on a Sunday; or
      (3)   at any time on New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day,
Presidents’ Day (Washington’s Birthday), Memorial Day, Independence Day (July
4th), Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas
Day.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the visit to
the residential premises was the result of a request or an appointment made by
the owner or occupant.
   (c)   In this section “sunset” means the time of day published on the
weather page of the Dallas Morning News as the time for sunset on that day in
the city.
   (d)   A person shall conduct a home solicitation only at the front or main
entrance to the residential premises, and shall only gain access to the front
or main entrance by using public sidewalks and paved approaches to the
entrance. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the owner
or occupant of the residential premises consented to another location or manner
of access for the home solicitation.
   (e)   A home solicitor commits an offense if he uses any adhesive material,
or other material that may cause damage to a door or property, when placing,
depositing, or distributing commercial printed matter on residential premises.
(Ord. Nos. 14300; 18875; 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
SEC. 42-14.   EXHIBITING SIGNS PROHIBITING HOME SOLICITORS.
   (a)   Any person desiring to prohibit home solicitations on the person’s
residential premises shall exhibit in a conspicuous place upon or near the
front or main entrance to the residential premises a weatherproof sign
containing the words, “NO SOLICITORS OR HANDBILLS,” or any similar notice
indicating that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be bothered,
have their right of privacy disturbed, or have commercial printed matter left
upon the premises.
   (b)   Every home solicitor, before going onto any residential premises, or
placing, depositing, or distributing commercial printed matter upon any
residential premises, shall first examine the premises to determine if any sign
prohibiting home solicitations is exhibited upon or near the front or main
entrance to the premises. If such a sign is exhibited, the home solicitor shall
immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the owner or occupant
or leaving any commercial printed matter. It is a defense to prosecution under
this subsection that the visit was the result of a request or an appointment
made by the owner or occupant or that the particular commercial printed matter
was left on the premises with the express consent of the owner or occupant.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person, either personally or
through an agent, engages in or attempts to engage in a home solicitation at a
residential premises if a sign is exhibited on the premises in accordance with
Subsection (a). It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the
visit was the result of a request or an appointment made by the owner or
occupant of the residential premises or that the particular commercial printed
matter was left on the premises with the express consent of the owner or
occupant.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person removes, defaces, or renders
illegible a sign placed by the owner or occupant on residential premises in
accordance with Subsection (a) of this section. It is a defense to prosecution
under this subsection that the person was the owner or occupant of the premises
or an agent of the owner or occupant.
   (e)   Any home solicitor who has gained entrance to a residential premises,
or an audience with the owner or occupant, whether invited or not, shall
immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the owner or occupant
further when requested to leave by the owner or occupant. (Ord. Nos. 14300;
29245, eff. 4-22-14)
SEC. 42-15.   RECORDS.
   (a)   Any registrant who uses an agent to conduct home solicitations in the
city shall maintain records containing:
      (1)   the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons the
registrant contracts with or employs to engage in home solicitations in the
city;
      (2)   each agent’s date of birth and driver’s license number (with the
state of issuance) or, if the agent does not have a driver’s license, the
number from another government-issued personal identification card containing
the agent’s photograph and date of birth; and
      (3)   the dates, times, and locations of each home solicitation conducted
by the registrant or the registrant’s agent in the city.
   (b)   Records required by Subsection (a) must be maintained by the
registrant for at least one year and must be made available for examination by
the chief, any police officer, or any city code enforcement officer at
reasonable times upon request. (Ord. 29245, eff. 4-22-14)
CHAPTER 42A
SPECIAL EVENTS; NEIGHBORHOOD MARKETS; DALLAS FARMERS MARKET FARMERS MARKET;
STREETLIGHT POLE BANNERS
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
42A-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
42A-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
42A-3.   General authority and duty of director.
Sec.
42A-4.   Chapter cumulative.
Sec.
42A-5.   Exemptions.
Sec.
42A-6.   Fees.
Sec.
42A-7.   Indemnification.
Sec.
42A-8.   Appeal from denial or revocation of a permit.
Sec.
42A-9.   Amplified outdoor sound and lighting.
Sec.
42A-10.   High impact areas.
Sec.
42A-11.   Clean zone.
ARTICLE II.
SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS.
Sec.
42A-12.   Application; issuance.
Sec.
42A-13.   Security; crowd control; and traffic control.
Sec.
42A-14.   Emergency medical services.
Sec.
42A-15.   Insurance.
Sec.
42A-16.   Street closures.
Sec.
42A-17.   Parking.
Sec.
42A-18.   Notice.
Sec.
42A-19.   Portable restroom and trash receptacle requirements.
Sec.
42A-20   Denial or revocation.
ARTICLE III.
NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET.
Sec.
42A-21.   Application; issuance.
Sec.
42A-22.   Location of a neighborhood market.
Sec.
42A-23.      Operation of a neighborhood market.
Sec.
42A-24.   Street closures.
Sec.
42A-25.   Parking.
Sec.
42A-26.   Products at a neighborhood market.
Sec.
42A-27.   Vendor's statement.
Sec.
42A-28.   Denial or revocation.
ARTICLE IV.
DALLAS STREET SEATS PROGRAM.
Sec.
42A-28.1.   Establishment of rules and regulations.
Sec.
42A-28.2.   Application; issuance.
Sec.
42A-28.3.   Location, design, and operations.
Sec.
42A-28.4.   Public safety review.
Sec.
42A-28.5.   Community support and property authorization.
Sec.
42A-28.6.   Public notice.
Sec.
42A-28.7.   Insurance requirements.
Sec.
42A-28.8.   Street seat removal.
Sec.
42A-28.9.   Denial or revocation.
ARTICLE V.
DALLAS FARMERS MARKET FARMERS MARKET.
Sec.
42A-29.   Application; issuance.
Sec.
42A-30.   Street closures.
Sec.
42A-31.   Parking.
Sec.
42A-32.      Operations of Dallas Farmers Market farmers market.
Sec.
42A-33.   Products at Dallas Farmers Market.
Sec.
42A-34.   Denial or revocation.
ARTICLE VI.
STREETLIGHT POLE BANNERS.
Sec.
42A-35.   Application; issuance.
Sec.
42A-36.   Permit extension.
Sec.
42A-37.   Insurance.
Sec.
42A-38.   Streetlight pole banner regulations.
Sec.
42A-39.   Denial or revocation.
ARTICLE VII.
ENFORCEMENT.
Sec.
42A-40.   Offenses.
Sec.
42A-41.   Penalty.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 42A-1.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the promotion of temporary
outdoor activities including special events, neighborhood markets, the Dallas
Farmers Market farmers market, and streetlight pole banners within the city, as
defined in this chapter. The city's overall goal is to encourage activities
that benefit the city, stimulate economic growth, and provide a vibrant, active
community for all citizens. The city gives priority to established special
events. (Ord. Nos. 21934; 31144)
SEC. 42A-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   AMPLIFIED SOUND means any sound projected or transmitted by
artificial means, including but not limited to, loudspeakers, amplifiers,
powered megaphones, or similar devices.
      (2)   APPLICANT means a person who has submitted an application for a
permit under this chapter. This term includes the person submitting the
application, the secondary person listed on the application, and any person or
organization that an applicant applies for a permit on behalf of, as well as
any third party providing contracted functions to an activity permitted under
this chapter, and the owner or property manager of the property or venue where
a permitted activity will occur if a lease or contract has been executed, or
will be executed, or if the property owner has provided written approval for
the proposed permitted activity, and the property owner or manager is providing
services to the event.
      (3)   APPLICATION PROCESSING FEE means a non-refundable fee required at
the time of application submission.
      (4)   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT means the area bounded by Woodall Rodgers
Freeway on the north, Central Expressway and Julius Schepps Freeway on the
east, Interstate Highway 30 on the south, and Interstate Highway 35E on the
west.
      (5)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (6)    CITY-SPONSORED ACTIVITY means a temporary outdoor activity that
the city council, by resolution, or the city manager, by written notice, has:
         (A)   determined to be directly related to a recognized function of
city government;
         (B)   declared the city a cosponsor of the event; and
         (C)   committed the city to significantly sharing in initiating,
financing, supporting, and conducting the event.
      (7)   CLEAN ZONE means a geographically defined area surrounding a
permitted activity footprint or event host venues, where temporary restrictions
are enforced related to temporary advertising, signage, structures, transient
merchants, vendors, or otherwise licensed activities.
      (8)   DALLAS FARMERS MARKET means a permanent, indoor and outdoor market
on public and private property where produce, merchandise, food, or other
products are distributed, offered for sale, or sold and that is:
         (A)   bounded by Marilla Street on the north, northbound Cesar Chavez
Boulevard on the east, Interstate Highway 30 on the south, and Harwood Street
on the west; and
         (B)   described in and subject to a master agreement with the city
adopted on February 27, 2013 by Resolution No. 13-0447 and the operating
covenants with the city contained in lease and deed documents authorized on
March 27, 2013 by Resolution Nos. 13-0535, 13-0536, 13-0537, 13-0538, and 13-
0539, inclusive of future agreements and leases executed between the city and
the Dallas Farmers Market and amendments to existing agreements and leases.
      (9)   DIRECTOR means the person designated by the city manager to
implement, administer, and enforce this chapter, and includes any designated
representative of the director.
      (10)   DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION BANNER means a long-term banner that
identifies a geographic location or place of interest with defined perimeters.
      (11)   ESTABLISHED SPECIAL EVENT means an event or activity that:
         (A)   occurs at least once a year;
         (B)   has an average expected attendance exceeding 1,000 for each day
of the event or activity;
         (C)   contributes to positive advertising and economic growth of the
city; and
         (D)   is open to the public, with or without an entry fee.
      (12)   EXPECTED TOTAL ATTENDANCE means the estimated attendance at a
permitted activity as estimated by the applicant on an application. Expected
total attendance includes all event staff, vendors, spectators, participants,
and attendees.
      (13)   FIRST AMENDMENT ACTIVITY means all expressive personal religious
or political beliefs and associative activity on the public right-of-way that
is protected by the United States and Texas constitutions, including freedom of
speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, and the right to petition.
      (13.1)   GUIDEBOOK means the Dallas Street Seats Pilot Program Guidebook,
published annually by the director on the office of special events website and
containing city requirements and regulations for street seats.
      (14)   HIGH IMPACT AREA means an area included on the list published
annually in accordance with Section
42A-10.
      (15)   MAJOR CHANGE means any change to an application that requires
subsequent public safety or departmental review. Examples include, but are not
limited to, route changes, location or venue changes, date changes, changes in
expected total attendance, adding alcohol distribution, and changes to complex
scenes.
      (16)   MOVING EVENT means an event that is not confined to a fixed
location.
      (16.1)   NACTO means the National Association of City Transportation
Officials.
      (17)   NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET means a temporary outdoor marketplace, outside
of the central business district, on private property, or on city property with
approval of the department controlling the property, where produce,
merchandise, food, or other products are distributed, offered for sale, or sold
directly to consumers by the persons that have raised, grown, made, crafted,
processed, or produced the products.
      (18)   PERMIT means an official document authorizing the activation of an
approved activity granted by the director as required under this chapter.
      (19)   PERMIT HOLDER means a person issued a permit under this chapter.
This term includes the applicant and any person or organization on behalf of
which an applicant applies for a permit on behalf of, as well as the owner or
manager of property where a permitted activity will occur.
      (20)   PERSON means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
      (21)   PRELIMINARY LETTER means a document sent by the director to the
applicant outlining all requirements that must be met prior to permit issuance.
      (21.1)   PRIVATE STREET SEAT means a street seat that is permitted within
the public rights-of-way for use by an establishment with an abutting property
interest as an extension of its business capacity.
      (21.2)   PUBLIC STREET SEAT means a street seat that is open to the
public and is permitted to a non-abutting person, property owner, or business
operator with consent of abutting owners.
      (22)   SPECIAL EVENT means a temporary outdoor gathering, with an
expected total attendance greater than 100, which involves one or more of the
following on private or public property where otherwise prohibited by
ordinance:
         (A)   closing or restricting of a public street lane, alley, or
sidewalk;
         (B)   restricting access to public property;
         (C)   sale of merchandise, food, alcohol, or other beverages where
otherwise not permitted as a neighborhood market or by an annual Dallas Farmers
Market farmers market permit;
         (D)   erection of a tent larger than 399 square feet in area or
erection of multiple tents with a cumulative area of over 399 square feet;
         (E)   installation of a temporary stage, bandshell, outdoor projection
technology, trailer, van, grandstand, bleachers, or portable toilets for public
use;
         (F)   use of city hall plaza;
         (G)   a run, walk, ride, or special event parade;
         (H)   placement of temporary no parking, directional, oversized, or
identification signs or banners in connection with an event that are placed in
or over a public right-of-way, or on private property where otherwise
prohibited by ordinance; or
         (I)   clean zone enforcement.
      (23)   SPECIAL EVENT PARADE means the assembly of 100 or more persons
whose gathering is for the common design of traveling or marching in procession
from one location to another location for the purpose of advertising,
promoting, celebrating, or commemorating a thing, person, date, or event that
is not directly related to the expression of feelings and beliefs on current
political, religious, or social issues.
      (24)   STREET CLOSURE means any lane or street closure that impacts or
disrupts the flow of traffic, unless the closure is intermittent.
      (24.1)    STREET SEATS PROGRAM means the city council approved pilot
program using one of the city's pre-approved plans to transition no more than
two unobstructed street parking spaces into a small useable area by installing
a safe perimeter and a platform that extends the sidewalk into the abutting
rights-of-way and is accompanied by amenities like benches, tables, bicycle
parking, and planters. All street seats in the pilot program are managed and
maintained by the permit holder.
      (25)   STREETLIGHT POLE BANNER means a temporary sign suspended between
brackets and attached to utility or streetlight poles in city right-of-way,
designed for an approved activity, an historical or commemorative event within
the city, or identification of a public improvement district.
      (25.1)   TEMPORARY PARKLET PROGRAM means the program approved by the
Dallas City Council in response to the impacts of COVID-19 to permit the
activation of adjacent parking spaces or sidewalks for use as additional
seating or service areas in an effort to assist local businesses with their
economic recovery.
      (26)   TENT means any structure, enclosure, or shelter constructed of
fabric or other pliable material supported by any manner except by air or the
contents protected by the material.
      (27)   TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN means a plan designed for the purpose of
safely and efficiently managing traffic or arranging for DART detours
associated with an activity permitted under this chapter.
      (28)   UNOBSTRUCTED STREET PARKING means a dedicated parking spot without
time restrictions. (Ord. Nos. 18702; 19869; 21934; 29016; 31144; 31557; 31708)
SEC. 42A-3.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The director shall implement, administer, and enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
   (b)   The director has authority to issue a permit that authorizes one or
more of the activities described in this chapter when requirements of this
chapter have been met.
   (c)   The director, police chief, and fire chief may require public safety
measures that exceed the minimum standards set forth in this chapter based on
specific event risk and threat factors identified by the appropriate city
departments.
   (d)   The director may impose additional permit requirements upon the
applicant or permit holder for any activity as required in this chapter if the
total attendance is expected to exceed the applicant's expected total
attendance, if the activity is held in a high impact area, or there will be an
impact to residents and businesses.
   (e)   The director may decline or propose alternate dates, times, street
closures, venues, or routes, or impose additional requirements upon a permit
holder based on public safety or impact on local residents and businesses.
(Ord. Nos. 18702; 21934; 29016; 31144)
SEC. 42A-4.   CHAPTER CUMULATIVE.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative of all city ordinances.
Except as provided in Subsection (c), all other permits and licenses required
by ordinance or other law for specific activities to be conducted in
conjunction with or as part of the activities permitted under this chapter must
be applied for separately, in accordance with the applicable ordinance or law.
   (b)   Application for a permit under this chapter authorizes appropriate
city departments to issue permits for the activities authorized by this chapter
with office of special events approval.
   (c)   A license for the use of the public right- of-way required by
Article VI of Chapter 43 of this code, and any fees applicable to obtaining the
license, is not required for a special event, neighborhood market, or Dallas
Farmers Market farmers market conducted in compliance with this chapter and the
terms of a valid permit issued under this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 18702; 21934;
29016; 31144)
SEC. 42A-5.   EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
      (1)   a special event conducted entirely on:
         (A)   property under the control of the park and recreation board;
         (B)   the "convention center" as defined in Section
43-127 of this code; or
         (C)   public property managed by an organization with a lease or
operating agreement with the city that details special event permit exemptions.
      (2)   a funeral procession;
      (3)   First Amendment activities, except that a special event permit must
be secured for any activity that triggers a special event permit as detailed in
Section
42A-2(22) of this chapter that is activated in conjunction with the First
Amendment activity. All applicable fees will apply;
      (4)   a neighborhood block party that is conducted on a single block and
is expected to have fewer than 200 attendees;
      (5)   escort vehicles;
      (6)   moving a structure in accordance with the Dallas Building Code; or
      (7)   the regular indoor permanent daily operations of the Dallas Farmers
Market. (Ord. Nos. 18702; 19869; 21934; 26136; 28046; 29016; 31144)
SEC. 42A-6.   FEES.
   (a)   Special event permit. An applicant for a special event permit shall
pay the following application processing fees:
Special Event Application Processing Fees*
Special Event Application Processing Fees*
Base Application Fee Based On Expected Total Attendance
<200                                                                       $50
201 - 400                                                                  $80
401 - 800                                                                  $100
801 - 1000                                                                 $150
1,001 - 2,000                                                              $200
2,001 - 4,000                                                              $300
4,001 - 8,000                                                              $400
8,001 - 12,000                                                             $500
12,001 - 20,000                                                            $600
20,001+                                                                    $700
In addition, select the applicable street closure fee:
No Street Closure - An event with no street closures.                      $0
Static Street Closure Event (Simple) - An event with a set footprint that
is limited to one block on residential/neighborhood streets and does not   $50
involve the closure of any intersections.
Static Street Closure Event (Moderate) - An event with a set footprint     $100
that includes the closure of one to three street blocks or intersections.
Static Street Closure Event (Complex) - An event with a set footprint that
includes the closure of four or more street blocks or intersections, or    $200
any closure in a high impact area.
Moving Event (Simple) - A moving event that is limited to trails and       $75
residential or neighborhood streets.
Moving Event (Moderate) - A moving event on city streets other than        $150
residential/neighborhood streets and outside of a high impact area.
Moving Event (Complex) - A moving event of which any part moves through a  $300
high impact area.
 
* No application processing fees for a special event that is open to the public
and being conducted at the Dallas Farmers Market as produced by the Dallas
Farmers Market in compliance with the market's agreements and covenants with
the city. An application under the temporary parklet program must pay a one-
time base application fee of $50 based on an application with an expected total
attendance of less than 200.
   (b)   Neighborhood market. An applicant for a neighborhood market permit
shall pay the following application processing fees:
 
NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET ANNUAL APPLICATION PROCESSING FEES
Base Application Fee                                    $100
Per every 10 vendors                                    $25
Street Closure Fee - Simple (1 block, no intersections) $50
 
   (c)   Street seats. An applicant for a street seats permit shall pay the
following application processing fees:
 
STREET SEATS PERMIT PROCESSING FEES
Base Application Fee : Phase I Permit (construction approved) $500
Phase II Permit (occupancy approved)                          $500
 
   (d)   Streetlight pole banners. An applicant for a streetlight pole banner
shall pay the following application processing fees:
 
STREET POLE BANNER APPLICATION PROCESSING FEES
Base Application Fee                                      $100
Per Pole Fee                                              $20
Permitted event - First 5 poles at no charge, additional
poles will be invoiced at full price (banners must be     5 poles at no charge
related to permitted event).
District Identification Banners - District identification
banners do not include short-term event banners designed  No charge
to promote events, festivals, major sporting events, or
tourism programs with specific dates or time periods.
 
   Streetlight Pole Banners
   (e)   Dallas Farmers Market. An applicant for a Dallas Farmers Market
farmers market permit shall pay an annual application processing fee of $400.
   (f)   Additional application processing fees for all permit types.
      (1)   A late application processing fee of $40 per day is required, in
addition to the applicable application processing fees required by Subsections
(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) of this section, if the application is filed
with the director less than the minimum number calendar days required by
Sections
42A-12,
42A-21, 42A-28.2,
42A-29, or
42A-35 before the scheduled activity is to begin. This fee is limited to five
days.
      (2)   An application processing fee of $50 per minor change to an
application requested by the applicant.
      (3)   An application processing fee of $5,000 for a full or half street
closure of the Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge for a period of 24 hours or less.
      (4)   An application processing fee of $2,000 for a partial lane closure
of the Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge for a period of 24 hours or less.
      (5)   An application processing fee of $500 for a clean zone.
      (6)   An application processing fee of $50 if alcohol will be provided at
a permitted activity.
      (7)   An application processing fee of $150 if alcohol will be sold at a
permitted activity.
   (g)   Additional city department related fees when applicable.
      (1)   A fee of $1,500 for the required activation of the office of
emergency management and crisis response for a planned permitted activity where
the expected attendance is 30,000 or more.
      (2)   A parking meter hooding or removal fee, computed in accordance with
Section
28-114.12 of this code, for each parking meter required by the applicant to be
hooded or removed for a planned permitted activity.
      (3)   A rental fee for city equipment and property used by the applicant
for a planned permitted activity.
      (4)   A fee for the number of Dallas police officers, Dallas fire-rescue
officers, or vehicles required by Sections
42A-13 and
42A-14 to provide security, crowd control, and traffic control at a permitted
activity.
      (5)   A fee to reimburse the city for direct costs incurred by the city
in providing services at a permitted activity; direct costs include, but are
not limited to, the reasonable costs of setup, cleanup, public safety,
oversight of city facilities and equipment, electrical services, construction,
placement and retrieval of city equipment, and other related services beyond
what the city would provide to the general public in the ordinary course of its
daily operations.
      (6)   Fee for all other required permits and licenses must be paid.
   (h)   Non-profit applicants. The base application fee for all application
types will be reduced by 50 percent for a certified 501(c)(3) non-profit
applicant.
   (i)   List of charges. A current list of charges for the items, services,
and personnel described in Subsections (g)(3), (4), and (5) and in Subsection
(k), and for any other items, services, or personnel that may be required under
this chapter, must be maintained by the director and published annually to the
office of special events website. The chiefs of the police department and fire-
rescue department shall provide to the director the current schedule of charges
for the personnel and vehicles described in Subsection (g)(5).
   (j)   Security deposit. Not less than 10 days before the date of the planned
permitted activity, the applicant shall deposit with the appropriate city
department an amount equal to a security deposit for any city equipment or
property rented under Subsection (g)(3), to be refunded to the applicant if the
equipment or property is returned undamaged to the city.
   (k)   Police and fire-rescue fees. The applicant shall pay any remaining
fees owed for all public safety expenses incurred by a special event,
neighborhood market, street seats, or Dallas Farmers Market farmers market
within 15 business days after receipt of an invoice from the city.
   (l)   Waiver. All or part of the application processing fees required by
this section to be paid to the city for a city-sponsored activity may be waived
by approval of the city manager or by city council resolution.
   (m)   Fee credit. If an application or permit is cancelled due to an Act of
God and the permitted activity is rescheduled for an available date within 60
days from the original event date, any previously paid application processing
fees will be credited toward the rescheduled date. (Ord. Nos. 21934; 31144;
31557; 31708; 32864)
SEC. 42A-7.   INDEMNIFICATION.
   An applicant for a permit issued under this chapter shall execute an
agreement to indemnify the city and its officers and employees against all
claims of injury or damage to persons or property, whether public or private,
arising out of the permitted activity. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-8.   APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT.
   (a)   If the director denies the issuance of a permit or revokes a permit,
after three attempts to contact by phone or email, the director shall send the
applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written
notice of the denial or revocation and of the right of appeal. Mailed notice
shall be deemed received and effective three days after the date of mailing
whether the notice was actually received or not or whether the notice was
returned unclaimed or undeliverable.
   (b)   The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the director
to the permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-9.   AMPLIFIED OUTDOOR SOUND AND LIGHTING.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, amplified outdoor sound and
lighting is allowed in conjunction with a permit issued under this chapter only
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (b)   The director may grant a variance to Subsection (a) if he determines
that allowing outdoor amplified sound or lighting during additional hours will
not result in an excessive negative impact on the quality of life of
surrounding residences and businesses. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-10.   HIGH IMPACT AREAS.
   (a)   The director shall publish a list of high impact areas on the office
of special events website annually.
   (b)   A committee shall meet at least once annually to determine the list of
high impact areas. The committee must be comprised of the office of special
events and representatives of at least five city departments and partner
agencies.
   (c)   The committee shall consider the following factors in determining
which areas to designate as high impact areas:
      (1)   Construction in the area.
      (2)   Complaints received by the director.
      (3)   Input from citizens.
      (4)   Historical event and location knowledge of committee members. (Ord.
31144)
SEC. 42A-11.   CLEAN ZONE.
   (a)   The operational restrictions within a clean zone are imposed to negate
the impact of a planned permitted activity on neighboring businesses and
residents and to protect the integrity of the host and sponsors of the
permitted activity. A clean zone does not affect any existing operations,
signage, or permitted activity associated with a business's typical operations.
   (b)   The director may designate the duration and geographic boundaries of a
clean zone following consultation with the chief of police and all applicable
departments.
   (c)   The boundaries of a clean zone, as well as any requirements and
restrictions for the clean zone, must be in writing and included in the terms
of the permit.
   (d)   If a clean zone is approved, the applicant shall deliver notice a
minimum of seven days before the permitted activity begins, at the applicant's
expense, to all registered homeowners' associations, religious institutions,
schools, and owners or occupants of real property within the boundaries of the
area of the clean zone. Notice must include, but not be limited to, the
location, boundaries, effective dates and times, and the requirements and
restrictions of the clean zone. Complete documentation of this effort must be
submitted to the director and approved prior to permit issuance. (Ord. 31144)
ARTICLE II.
SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS.
SEC. 42A-12.   APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   A person desiring to hold a special event shall submit an online
application with the office of special events. An application must be filed not
less than the number of calendar days indicated in the following table before
the special event is to begin. The director may waive the filing requirement if
the application is submitted within five days of the submission due deadline
and the application can be processed in less than the number of calendar days
indicated on the chart, taking into consideration the number and types of
additional licenses and permits that may be required to be issued in
conjunction with the special event permit and the extent of public safety,
department, or agency review required based on the scope of the event.
 
   APPLICATION SUBMISSION DUE DEADLINES
No Street Closures     30 calendar days
Static Street Closures 60 calendar days
Moving Events          120 calendar days
 
   (b)   An application must be completed in full before it can be invoiced. An
application will not be processed, and the date and venue will not be confirmed
until the application processing fee has been paid. Submission of a complete
application does not guarantee a special event permit will be issued. All
requirements must be met prior to permit issuance.
   (c)   Upon receipt of the completed application, the director shall forward
a copy of the application to all applicable city departments and partner
agencies for review. If the application must be reviewed for public safety,
public safety agencies will review the application first, followed by a review
by city departments and partner agencies. If any part of the scheduled activity
is to be held on or adjacent to property that is exempt from this chapter under
Section
42A-5, the director shall also include the entity that manages or controls the
exempt property in the review of the application. Each department and partner
agency shall review the application and return it, with any comments, to the
director within 10 business days of receipt of the request requiring a
response. If no response is received, the director may proceed with permitting,
however, if an application requires a public safety review, the director must
wait for the public safety review response before proceeding. If any department
denies the application, or a resolution cannot be reached, the permit will be
denied.
   (d)   If the proposed scheduled activity will be held on private property
and the applicant does not own the property, the applicant shall obtain the
written consent of the property owner to conduct the scheduled activity on the
property with the authorization including the date and time of the scheduled
activity. The written consent must be submitted at the time of application. The
applicant shall present the written consent to the director or any peace
officer upon request.
   (e)   The director may cancel a special event permit application if:
      (1)   a special event permit has been granted or is in the review process
for another special event at the same or a nearby place and the same time;
      (2)   an established special event is customarily held at the same or a
nearby place and the same time as the proposed special event;
      (3)   the proposed special event will occupy any part of a freeway,
expressway, or tollway;
      (4)   the proposed special event will unreasonably disrupt the orderly
flow of traffic, and no reasonable means of rerouting traffic or otherwise
meeting traffic needs is available;
      (5)   the proposed special event cannot comply with high impact area
parameters;
      (6)   the applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an
application for a special event permit or fails to properly complete an
application for a special event permit;
      (7)   the applicant received within the preceding 14 months, two or more
notices of violation or citations related to a provision of a special event
permit or this chapter;
      (8)   the applicant has conducted or sponsored one or more special events
within the city on at least 60 days of the same calendar year during which the
proposed special event is to be held; or
      (9)   the applicant has a history of conducting or sponsoring special
events in a disorderly, unsafe, unsanitary, or fiscally irresponsible manner.
   (f)   If the director determines that an application requires additional
information in order to make a decision, or if additional fees will be required
to process the application, the application will be considered incomplete and
cancelled if the applicant does not supply the additional information or fees
after the director has sent two reminder emails and made one reminder phone
call after a period of 10 calendar days without a response from the applicant.
   (g)   If the director determines that an applicant has failed to pay any
outstanding fees assessed under Section
42A-6 of this chapter for the proposed scheduled activity or a past scheduled
activity, the application will be deemed incomplete and the application will be
cancelled. An application that has been cancelled under this subsection cannot
be re-filed for 12 months.
   (h)   If the applicant makes major changes to the original submission of an
application, after the five- month courtesy review, this will result in the
original permit application being deemed incomplete and cancelled. A revised
permit application will be required, along with new application processing fees
if the applicant wishes to pursue the application.
   (i)   An application that has been cancelled because it is incomplete cannot
be appealed under Section
42A-8 and all application processing fees are forfeited.
   (j)   After reviewing and confirming all permit requirements have been met,
the director shall issue the special event permit unless denial or revocation
is required by Section
42A-20. Except as provided in this subsection, a special event permit will be
issued for a period not to exceed 10 consecutive days. A special event permit
for a city-sponsored event on city hall plaza will be issued for a period not
to exceed 30 consecutive days. Except as provided in this subsection, a special
event permit may be extended for additional consecutive 10-day periods not to
exceed 60 days in a calendar year. Except as provided in this subsection, all
applicable fees must be paid for any permit extensions. A special event permit
issued under the temporary parklet program may be extended for additional
consecutive 10-day periods until February 28, 2022. No fees are required for
extension of a special event permit issued under the temporary parklet program.
   (k)   In granting a permit, the city may provide city services and equipment
for city-sponsored activities and other events in accordance with the city's
special event in-kind sponsorship guidelines and subject to approval of the
city manager.
   (l)   Special event permits issued under the temporary parklet program may
not be extended beyond February 28, 2022. (Ord. Nos. 18702; 19312; 19869;
20612; 21934; 22026; 23694; 24554; 26136; 27697; 28126; 28424; 30239; 30654;
31144; 31557; 31708; 31841; 32017)
SEC. 42A-13.   SECURITY; CROWD CONTROL; AND TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (a)   An applicant for a special event permit shall provide police officers
for security, crowd control, and traffic control at the special event in
accordance with Subsection (b) and the following schedule:
 
Number of Participants and Spectators Minimum Number of Police Officers
at Special Event                      Required*
0 to 250                              0 or 2
251 to 1,500                          2 - 4
1,501 to 3,000                        4 - 6
3,001 to 5,000                        6 - 15
                                      15 plus 1 police officer for every 1,000
over 5,000                            participants and spectators over 5,000
                                      at the special event
 
* The minimum number of officers in the above table may vary depending on the
scope of the event, the sale or service of alcohol, on-stage talent, event
geography, historical knowledge of the event, police intelligence, and any
other factor that is determined to impact public safety.
   (b)   The director, upon recommendation from the chief of the Dallas police
department, may require a number of police officers, in addition to those
required in Subsection (a), if:
      (1)   any alcoholic beverage is sold, served, or otherwise made available
at the special event;
      (2)   special needs for increased security, crowd control, or traffic
control are created by:
         (A)   the topography or size of the special event location;
         (B)    weather conditions at the special event; or
         (C)   the time of day during which the special event is conducted;
      (3)   the special event requires street closures or rerouting of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
      (4)   the history of the particular special event indicates that a
greater number of police officers are required to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.
   (c)   The police officers required to be provided at a special event by this
section must be sworn members of the Dallas police department, except that the
chief of the Dallas police department may authorize a special event applicant
or permit holder to provide peace officers from other jurisdictions or entities
if the chief determines that an insufficient number of Dallas police officers
will be available for a particular special event. Off-duty jobs for Dallas
police officers at a special event must comply with the Dallas Police
Department General Orders and Code of Conduct.
   (d)   A permit holder must provide the name, phone number, and email address
of an individual who will be available following submission of an application
through the end of the event, as well as at the special event site the day of
the special event, to respond to any questions or concerns from police officers
or code compliance officers. This individual shall meet police officers or code
enforcement officers at the special event site within one hour of being
contacted by telephone or email.
   (e)   If the police department requires a traffic control plan in
conjunction with a special event, the plan must be submitted in the standard
format approved by the director.
   (f)   A traffic control plan required by Subsection (e) must receive
approval from applicable city departments. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-14.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
   (a)   An applicant for a special event permit shall provide, in accordance
with Subsection (b) and the following schedule, emergency medical personnel and
emergency medical vehicles to perform first aid and emergency medical services
at the special event as required in the preliminary letter:
 
NUMBER OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL PERSONNEL/VEHICLES REQUIRED
(based on estimated total attendance and scope of the special event)
Type of
Emergency   1 - 100       101 - 3,000   3,001 - 5,000 5,001 -       Over 25,000
Medical     participants/ participants/ participants/ 25,000        participants/
Personnel   spectators    spectators    spectators    participants/ spectators
or Vehicle                                            spectators
Required
Paramedics  0             2             6             8             14
EMS         0             1             1             3             5
Supervisors
Emergency
Medical     0             1             1             4             7
Vehicles
 
The fire chief may determine, based on the event scope, special needs, or
risks, that emergency medical services will be provided via the 911 emergency
response system.
   (b)   The director, upon recommendation of the chief of the Dallas fire-
rescue department, may require a number of emergency medical personnel and
emergency medical vehicles, in addition to those required in Subsection (a),
if:
      (1)   any alcoholic beverage is sold, served, or otherwise made available
at the special event;
      (2)   special needs for increased emergency medical services are created
by:
         (A)   the topography or size of the special event location;
         (B)   weather conditions at the special event; or
         (C)   the time of day during which the special event is conducted;
      (3)   the special event requires street closures or rerouting of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic that may affect emergency access to the special
event;
      (4)   the special event involves specific activities that create a higher
risk of illness or injury to persons participating in or attending the event,
including but not limited to rodeos, sporting or athletic events, events
involving motor vehicles, or marathons; or
      (5)   the history of the particular special event indicates that a
greater number of emergency medical personnel or emergency medical vehicles are
required to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (c)   The emergency medical personnel required to be provided at a special
event by this section must be sworn members of the Dallas fire-rescue
department, except that the chief of the Dallas fire-rescue department may
authorize a special event applicant or permit holder to provide emergency
medical personnel from other jurisdictions or entities if the chief determines
that an insufficient number of Dallas fire-rescue officers will be available
for a particular special event. Off-duty jobs for Dallas fire-rescue officers
at a special event must comply with the Dallas Fire-Rescue Rules and
Regulations. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-15.   INSURANCE.
   (a)   An applicant for a permit to hold a special event in which the
estimated number of participants and spectators exceeds 2,500 for any day of
the event shall procure and keep in full force and effect for the duration of
the event insurance written by an insurance company approved by the State of
Texas and acceptable to the city and issued in the standard form approved by
the Texas Department of Insurance. All provisions of each policy must be
acceptable to the city. Each policy must name the city and its officers,
employees, and appointed representatives as additional insureds. The coverage
provisions of each policy must provide coverage for any loss or damage that may
arise to any person or property by reason of the conduct of the special event
by the applicant.
   (b)   Insurance is required in the following types and amounts:
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance must be provided with
combined single limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage of
not less than:
         (A)   $500,000 for each occurrence, for an estimated daily number of
participants and spectators of 2,501 to 4,999; or
         (B)   $1,000,000 for each occurrence, for an estimated daily number of
participants and spectators of 5,000 or more.
      (2)   If a special event includes vehicles, aircraft, or other equipment,
devices, or activities that are excluded from coverage in the commercial
general liability insurance policy required in Paragraph (1) of this
subsection, then separate additional liability insurance coverage for the
applicable exclusion must be provided by the applicant or the aircraft provider
with combined single limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage
of not less than:
         (A)   $500,000 for each occurrence, for an estimated daily number of
participants and spectators of 2,501 to 4,999; or
         (B)   $1,000,000 for each occurrence, for an estimated daily number of
participants and spectators of 5,000 or more.
      (3)   If any alcoholic beverage is sold, served, or otherwise made
available at the special event, then separate additional liquor liability
insurance must be provided by the alcoholic beverage license holder in an
amount of not less than $1,000,000 for each claim.
      (4)   If any fireworks, pyrotechnics, explosives, or other special
effects are displayed at the special event, then separate additional general
liability insurance must be provided by the pyrotechnics company in an amount
of not less than $3,000,000 for each claim.
      (5)   If security guards (other than Dallas police officers or city
staff) are used at the special event, then separate additional security guard
liability insurance must be provided by the security guard company in an amount
of not less than $1,000,000 for each claim.
      (6)   If emergency response or first aid stations (other than stations
staffed by only Dallas fire-rescue officers or city staff) are provided at the
special event, then separate additional medical liability insurance must be
provided by the applicant in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 for each
claim, and if ambulance service (other than service provided by Dallas fire-
rescue officers and vehicles) is provided, then separate additional automobile
liability insurance must be provided by the emergency response or ambulance
provider in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit for
each claim.
      (7)   If amusement rides are provided at the special event, proof of
separate additional general liability insurance meeting the state liability and
coverage requirements for each particular ride must be provided by the
applicant or the amusement ride provider, along with a current certificate of
inspection for each ride.
      (8)   If animals are part of the special event, then separate additional
general liability insurance covering any bodily injury and property damage
caused by animals must be provided by the applicant or the animal provider in
an amount of not less than $500,000 for each claim.
      (9)   If the special event is conducted at a city-owned facility, general
liability insurance must be provided by the applicant in an amount of not less
than $500,000 for each claim.
   (c)   In addition to the insurance requirements of Subsection (b) of this
section, the director may require additional insurance for a special event if
such additional insurance is recommended by the city's risk manager as being
necessary for the protection of the city or the public health, safety, and
welfare.
   (d)   If a facility or other property owned or managed by the city is
subject to both the insurance requirements of this chapter and insurance
requirements established by another city ordinance, an official city action, a
city lease or use agreement, or other applicable law, then the insurance
requirements with the greater limits and coverages must be met to conduct the
special event at the facility or property.
   (e)   An original certificate of insurance completed by an authorized agent
of the insurance company and evidencing each insurance coverage required under
this section must be delivered to the director at least 15 days before the
special event begins.
   (f)   A special event permit will not be issued until the insurance
requirements have been verified by the city's third-party provider. (Ord.
31144)
SEC. 42A-16.   STREET CLOSURES.
   (a)   Street closures require approval from applicable partner agencies and
city departments.
   (b)   A permit holder must provide notice of street closures in accordance
with Section
42A-18.
   (c)   The police department may require a traffic control plan at the
expense of the applicant. If a traffic control plan is required, it must follow
the standard format approved by the director and be approved by the city prior
to permit issuance.
   (d)   All traffic apparatus required to fulfil a traffic control plan must
be acquired at the applicant's expense.
   (e)   The director may require accommodations if a proposed street closure
will restrict access to public or private parking, residences, businesses, or
places of worship. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-17.   PARKING.
   (a)   A complete parking plan must be submitted with each special event
application. The director may waive this requirement for special events with an
expected total attendance of less than 250.
   (b)   The parking plan must demonstrate that adequate parking will be
available to accommodate the expected total attendance.
   (c)   The parking plan must be approved prior to the issuance of a special
event permit.
   (d)   Meter hooding and no parking zones in connection with a special event
must be limited to the shortest time feasible. "No parking" signs must be
posted a minimum of 24 hours in advance of the special event and follow a
standard format approved by the director.
   (e)   When the main use of the property is open for business and the
designated parking is to be activated as part of the event space, the applicant
must demonstrate that provisions have been made to provide remote parking in an
amount that is adequate to replace the parking spaces being utilized as part of
the event space.
   (f)   When activating an event in a multi-tenant parking lot, and when the
tenants are open for business, not more than 25 percent of the total area of
the shared available parking may be activated for the permitted activity.
   (g)   When restricting public or private parking, including handicapped
accessible parking, the applicant must provide adequate alternate parking.
(Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-18.   NOTICE.
   (a)   An applicant for a permit under this chapter shall deliver notice at
the applicant's expense. The director will determine the most appropriate
method of notification according to the following table:
NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
COMMUNICATION TYPES NO STREET CLOSURE STATIC CLOSURE EVENTS MOVING EVENTS
NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
COMMUNICATION    NO STREET STATIC CLOSURE EVENTS   MOVING EVENTS
TYPES            CLOSURE
Notifications
are NOT required
for outdoor
events with an
expected         X         Simple Moderate Complex Simple Moderate Complex
attendance of
250 or fewer
people and with
no street/lane
closures.
Neighborhood/
Residential
based events:
notify all
owners and
occupants of
real property
abutting the
event area and
all those
impacted by the
event a minimum
of 15 days prior
to the event
date utilizing a
minimum of two
of the following
communication              X      X        X       X      X        X
methods: email
distribution;
electronic
notification
through web app.
e.g. NextDoor;
yard signs along
the event
footprint;
posting in a
neighborhood
association/PTA/
PTO newsletter
and/or social
media page; hand
delivered; or
mailed.
Deliver written
notice to all
owners and
occupants of
real property
abutting the
event area and
all those                                  X                       X
impacted by the
event a minimum
of 30 days prior
to the event
date (mail, hand
delivered, or
door hanger).
Deliver written
notice to all
owners and
occupants of
real property
abutting the
event area and
all those
impacted by the            X      X        X       X      X        X
event a minimum
of 15 days prior
to the event
date (mail, hand
delivered, or
door hanger).
Zone specific
communication
pieces apply.
Direct
communication
and notification
is required via
in-person or
phone and a
follow-up email
to all major
employers;
multi-family                      X        X       X      X        X
housing; places
of worship; and
neighborhood
associations
abutting the
event area and
all those
impacted by the
event.
Contact Waze,
Google etc. to
request street                             X              X        X
closures be
posted.
Council members
are encouraged
to post district X         X      X        X       X      X        X
specific event
details to
social media.
Council members
are encouraged
to distribute
district
specific street            X      X        X       X      X        X
closure details
to stakeholders
from OSE weekly
report.
Develop targeted
(zone specific)
communication.
Utilize digital
neighborhood
based platforms
and available                                      X      X        X
databases to
communicate
street closures
specific to
neighborhoods
and business
zones impacted.
Develop targeted
(zone specific)
communication.
Provide OSE a
final
communication
piece to
distribute to                              X       X      X        X
community
stakeholders
through the City
Council Office
and OSE
(available
database).
OSE to create
and distribute a                           X                       X
Traffic
Advisory.
OSE to create
and distribute a
City Hall
Announcement for
all City Hall    X                         X                       X
Plaza permitted
events and all
events that
impact city hall
garage access.
OSE to post
event to web
calendar with
hyperlink to
event website    X         X      X        X       X      X        X
for maps, street
closures,
rerouting
information etc.
Provide
communication
piece to be
distributed by             X      X        X       X      X        X
OSE through OSE
email database
(to be
developed).
 
The director will determine the specific notification requirements based on a
variety of factors including but not limited to: event size, dates, times,
footprint, anticipated impact, and historical knowledge of the event.
   (b)   Notice must include any information that is required to be provided in
the template approved by the director prior to distribution. (Ord. Nos. 18702;
19869; 21934; 31144)
SEC. 42A-19.   PORTABLE RESTROOM AND TRASH RECEPTACLE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   An applicant for a special event permit shall provide portable
restrooms and trash receptacles at the special event in accordance with
Subsection (b) and the following table:
MINIMUM NUMBER OF RESTROOM UNITS AND TRASH RECEPTACLES REQUIRED
EXPECTED ATTENDANCE HOURS OF EVENT
                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
MINIMUM NUMBER OF RESTROOM UNITS AND TRASH RECEPTACLES REQUIRED
EXPECTED ATTENDANCE HOURS OF EVENT
                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10
500 - 599           2   4   4   5   6   7   9   9    10   12
600 - 699           2   4   5   6   7   7   9   10   11   12
700 - 799           3   5   6   6   7   8   10  10   11   12
800 - 899           3   5   6   7   8   8   10  11   12   13
900 - 999           4   6   7   7   8   9   11  11   12   13
1,000 - 1,999       4   6   8   8   9   9   11  12   13   13
2,000 - 2,999       5   6   9   12  14  16  18  20   23   25
3,000 - 3,999       6   9   12  16  20  24  26  30   34   38
4,000 - 4,999       8   13  16  22  25  30  35  40   45   50
5,000 - 5,999       12  15  20  25  31  38  44  50   56   63
6,000 - 6,999       13  17  24  30  37  45  53  60   67   75
7,000 - 7,999       13  19  27  35  44  53  62  70   79   88
8,000 - 8,999       14  21  31  40  50  60  70  80   90   100
9,000 - 9,999       14  23  34  45  57  68  79  90   102  113
10,000 - 14,999     15  25  38  50  63  75  88  100  113  125
15,000 - 19,999     20  38  56  75  94  113 131 150  169  188
20,000 - 24,999     25  50  75  100 125 150 175 200  225  250
25,000 - 29,999     38  69  99  130 160 191 221 252  282  313
30,000 - 34,999     46  82  119 156 192 229 266 302  339  376
35,000 - 39,999     53  96  139 181 224 267 310 352  395  438
40,000 - 44,999     61  109 158 207 256 305 354 403  452  501
45,000 - 49,999     68  123 178 233 288 343 398 453  508  563
50,000 - 54,999     76  137 198 259 320 381 442 503  564  626
55,000 - 59,999     83  150 217 285 352 419 486 554  621  688
60,000 - 64,999     91  164 237 311 384 457 531 604  677  751
65,000 - 69,999     98  177 257 336 416 495 575 654  734  813
70,000 - 74,999     106 191 277 362 448 533 619 704  790  876
75,000 - 79,999     113 205 296 388 480 571 663 755  846  938
80,000 - 84,999     121 218 316 414 512 609 707 805  903  1001
85,000 - 89,999     128 232 336 440 544 647 751 855  959  1063
90,000 -94,999      136 246 356 466 576 686 796 906  1016 1126
95,000 - 99,999     143 259 375 491 607 724 840 956  1072 1188
100,000 or more     151 273 395 517 639 762 884 1006 1128 1251
 
   (b)   The director may require additional restroom units if:
      (1)   the estimated number of participants and spectators exceeds 100,000
during any day of the special event;
      (2)   the estimated duration of the special event exceeds 10 hours on any
day of the event;
      (3)   any alcoholic beverage is sold, served, or otherwise made available
at the special event; or
      (4)   the history of the particular special event indicates that a
greater number of portable restroom units are required for the public health,
safety, and welfare.
   (c)   At least five percent of the portable restrooms required by this
section must comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C.
Section 12101, et seq.
   (d)   The director may reduce restroom requirements with written
confirmation that restrooms will be serviced during the permitted event. (Ord.
Nos. 26136; 31144)
SEC. 42A-20.   DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   The director shall deny a special event permit if:
      (1)   the applicant fails to meet any of the requirements outlined and
defined in the preliminary letter;
      (2)   the applicant fails to provide proof that the applicant possesses
or is able to obtain a license or permit required by another city ordinance or
other applicable law for the conduct of all activities included as part of the
special event;
      (3)   the applicant has had a special event permit revoked within the
preceding 14 months;
      (4)   the applicant has received, within the preceding 14 months, two or
more notices of violation or citations related to a provision of a special
event permit or this chapter;
      (5)   the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire-rescue
department, or the director determines that the special event would pose a
serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
      (6)   the applicant or any other person responsible for the conduct or
sponsorship of the special event is overdue in payment to the city of taxes,
fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or
other person;
      (7)   the applicant has a history of conducting or sponsoring special
events in a disorderly, unsafe, unsanitary, or fiscally irresponsible manner;
      (8)   the director is notified of any code violation on the property
where the special event will be held; or
      (9)   an event will interfere with the rights of nearby residents to the
quiet, peaceable, and undisturbed enjoyment of their property.
   (b)    The director shall revoke a special event permit if:
      (1)   the applicant fails to comply with or the special event is in
violation of any provision of the special event permit, a city ordinance, or
any other applicable law;
      (2)   the permit holder made a false statement or omission of material
fact on an application for a special event permit;
      (3)   the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire-rescue
department, or the director determines that the special event poses a serious
threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
      (4)   the permit holder fails to maintain public order in and around the
special event location;
      (5)   the permit holder failed to pay any outstanding fees assessed under
Section
42A-6 of this chapter for the proposed special event or for a past special
event;
      (6)   the director is notified that the permit holder or any other person
responsible for the conduct or sponsorship of the special event is overdue in
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon the permit holder or other person; or
      (7)   the director is notified of any code violations on the property
where the special event will be held. (Ord. 31144)
ARTICLE III.
NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET.
SEC. 42A-21.   APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   A person desiring to hold a neighborhood market shall submit an online
application with the office of special events. An application must be filed not
less than 30 business days before the neighborhood market is to begin. The
director may waive the filing requirement if the application is submitted
within five days of the submission due deadline and the application can be
processed in less than the number of calendar days required, taking into
consideration the number and types of additional licenses and permits that may
be required to be issued in conjunction with the neighborhood market permit and
the extent of public safety, department, or agency review required based on the
scope of the market. An activity that qualifies for a neighborhood market
permit under this article is not required to obtain a special event permit
under Article II of this chapter.
   (b)   An application must be completed in full before it can be invoiced. An
application will not be processed, and the date and venue will not be confirmed
until the application processing fee has been paid. Submission of a complete
application does not guarantee a neighborhood market permit will be issued. All
requirements must be met prior to permit issuance.
   (c)   If the director determines that an application requires additional
information in order to make a decision, or if additional fees will be required
to process the application, the application will be considered incomplete and
cancelled if the applicant does not supply the additional information or fees
after the director has sent two reminder emails and made one reminder phone
call after a period of 10 business days without a response from the applicant.
   (d)   Upon receipt of the completed application, the director shall forward
a copy of the application to all applicable city departments and partner
agencies for review. If the application must be reviewed for public safety,
public safety agencies will review the application first, followed by a review
by city departments and partner agencies. If any part of the scheduled activity
is to be held on or adjacent to property that is exempt from this chapter under
Section
42A-5, the director shall also include the entity that manages or controls the
exempt property in the review of the application. Each department and partner
agency shall review the application and return it, with any comments, to the
director within 10 business days of receipt requiring a response. If no
response is received, the director may proceed with permitting; however, if an
application requires a public safety review, the director must wait for the
public safety review response before proceeding. If any department denies the
application, or a resolution cannot be reached, the permit will be denied.
   (e)   If the proposed neighborhood market will be held on private property
and the applicant does not own the property, the applicant shall obtain the
written consent of the property owner to conduct the neighborhood market on the
property with the authorization including the dates and times of the
neighborhood market. The written consent must be submitted at the time of
application. The applicant shall present the written consent to the director or
any peace officer upon request.
   (f)   The director shall cancel a neighborhood market permit application if:
      (1)   a neighborhood market permit has been granted or is in the review
process for another neighborhood market at the same or a nearby place and the
same time.
      (2)   an established neighborhood market is customarily held at the same
or a nearby place and the same time as the proposed neighborhood market.
      (3)   the proposed neighborhood market will occupy any part of a freeway,
expressway, or tollway.
      (4)   the proposed neighborhood market will unreasonably disrupt the
orderly flow of traffic, and no reasonable means of rerouting traffic or
otherwise meeting traffic needs is available.
      (5)   the proposed neighborhood market cannot comply with high impact
parameters.
      (6)   the applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an
application for a neighborhood market permit or fails to properly complete an
application for a neighborhood market permit.
      (7)   the applicant had a neighborhood market permit revoked within the
preceding 14 months.
      (8)   the applicant has received, within the preceding 14 months, two or
more notices of violations or citations related to a provision of a
neighborhood market permit or this chapter.
      (9)   the applicant has a history of conducting or sponsoring
neighborhood markets in a disorderly, unsafe, unsanitary, or fiscally
irresponsible manner.
   (g)   If the director determines that an applicant has failed to pay any
outstanding fees assessed under Section
42A-6 of this chapter for the proposed scheduled activity or a past scheduled
activity, the application will be deemed incomplete and the application will be
cancelled. An application that has been cancelled under this subsection cannot
be re-filed for 12 months.
   (h)   If the applicant makes major changes to the original submission of an
application, this will result in the original permit application being
cancelled. A revised permit application will be required, along with new
application processing fees if the applicant wishes to pursue the application.
   (i)   An application that has been cancelled because it is incomplete cannot
be appealed under Section
42A-8 and all application processing fees are forfeited.
   (j)   After reviewing the application and confirming all permit requirements
have been met, the director shall issue the permit unless denial is required by
Section
42A-35. A neighborhood market permit expires one year after issuance and may
only be issued for 46 nonconsecutive days in a year. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-22.   LOCATION OF A NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET.
   (a)   A neighborhood market may not be conducted:
      (1)   in the central business district;
      (2)   in a single family, duplex, or townhouse zoning district as defined
in the Dallas Development Code, except if the location has a valid certificate
of occupancy for a non-residential use or by a waiver granted by the director
in accordance with subsection (b);
      (3)   within one mile of another neighborhood market permitted under this
chapter that has the same or overlapping operating dates and times;
      (4)   at any location where one or more neighborhood markets have already
been conducted a total of 28 days during the particular calendar year;
      (5)   at any location other than the one listed in the permit
application;
      (6)   at a public park; or
      (7)   on a sidewalk.
   (b)   The director may grant a waiver to subsection (a)(2) if the director
finds that there will be no adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. Nos. 31144; 32213)
SEC. 42A-23.   OPERATION OF A NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET.
   (a)   A neighborhood market must operate a minimum of 12 days in a calendar
year at the same location, but may not be operated more than 46 days at the
same location in a calendar year and may not be operated on consecutive days.
   (b)   A neighborhood market may only be operated between the hours of 8 a.m.
and 10 p.m. on any day of the week.
   (c)   The neighborhood market may only be operated in accordance with the
schedule filed with the director at the time of permit application. An
amendment to the schedule may be approved by the director during the calendar
year. An amendment request and the required change fee must be received by the
director at least 15 days before implementing any changes. Date changes do not
constitute a major change.
   (d)   Except as provided in this subsection, no more than 75 vendors may
participate in a neighborhood market. Two of the 46 market days may be
designated as holiday or specialty markets, and as such, will be allowed up to
100 vendors. A current vendor list must be on file with the office of special
events. Changes or additions to this vendor list may be made throughout the
year. Current vendor fees will be assessed with each submission. No change fees
will apply.
   (e)   Each stall area used by a vendor may not exceed 10 feet by 15 feet.
   (f)   All litter, tents, stalls, food, merchandise, and other evidence of
the neighborhood market must be removed from the premises at the end of each
market day.
   (g)   A permit holder must provide the name, phone number, and email address
of an individual who will be available following submission of an application
through the end of the neighborhood market, as well as at the neighborhood
market site the day of the neighborhood market, to respond to any questions or
concerns from police officers or code compliance officers. This individual
shall meet police officers or code enforcement officers at the neighborhood
market site within one hour of being contacted by telephone or email. (Ord.
31144)
SEC. 42A-24.   STREET CLOSURES.
   (a)   Street closures are limited to one block with no intersections.
   (b)   Street closures require approval from applicable partner agencies and
city departments.
   (c)   A permit holder must provide notice of street closures in accordance
with Section
42A-18.
   (d)   The police department may require a traffic control plan at the
expense of the applicant. If a traffic control plan is required, it must follow
the standard format approved by the director and be approved by the city prior
to permit issuance.
   (e)   All traffic apparatus required to fulfill a traffic control plan must
be acquired at the applicant's expense.
   (f)   The director may require accommodations if a proposed street closure
will restrict access to public or private parking, residences, businesses, or
places of worship. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-25.   PARKING.
   (a)   A complete parking plan must be submitted with each neighborhood
market application. The director may waive this requirement for neighborhood
markets with an expected total attendance of less than 250.
   (b)   The parking plan must demonstrate that adequate parking will be
available to accommodate the expected total attendance.
   (c)   The parking plan must be approved prior to the issuance of a
neighborhood market permit.
   (d)   Meter hooding and no parking zones in connection with a neighborhood
market must be limited to the shortest time feasible. "No parking" signs must
be posted a minimum of 24 hours in advance of the neighborhood market and
follow a standard format approved by the director.
   (e)   When the main use of the property is open for business and the
designated parking is to be activated as part of the neighborhood market space,
the applicant must demonstrate that provisions have been made to provide remote
parking in an amount that is adequate to replace the parking spaces being
utilized as part of the neighborhood market space.
   (f)   When activating neighborhood market in a multi-tenant parking lot, and
when the tenants are open for business, not more than 25 percent of the total
area of the shared available parking may be activated for the permitted
activity. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-26.   PRODUCTS AT A NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET.
   (a)   Products that may be sold at a neighborhood market include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Fruits, vegetables, honey, eggs, nuts, herbs, and mushrooms.
      (2)   Meats.
      (3)   Dairy products.
      (4)   Prepared foods, including but not limited to baked goods, packaged
foods, and oils.
      (5)   Arts and crafts, including but not limited to jewelry, candles,
natural skin care products, soaps, art, knitting, quilts, and pottery.
      (6)   Garden items, including but not limited to plants, flowers, and
soil.
   (b)   At least 30 percent of the vendors participating in a neighborhood
market must sell produce or other food items.
   (c)   All products distributed, offered for sale, or sold at a neighborhood
market must have been raised, grown, made, crafted, processed, or produced by
the vendor in a Texas county completely or partially located within a 150-mile
radius of Dallas County, except that the 150-mile radius requirement does not
apply to produce or other food items determined by the director to be
unavailable from vendors in the radius area.
   (d)   No products may be offered for resale.
   (e)   Live animals may not be distributed, offered for sale, or sold at a
neighborhood market. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-27.   VENDOR'S STATEMENT.
   (a)   Each calendar year before vending at a neighborhood market, a vendor
shall sign and provide the permit holder with a written statement that:
      (1)   all products to be distributed, offered for sale, or sold at the
neighborhood market have been raised, grown, made, crafted, processed, or
produced by the vendor in a Texas county completely or partially located within
a 150-mile radius of Dallas County, except that the 150-mile radius requirement
does not apply to produce or other food items determined by the director to be
unavailable from vendors in the radius area; and
      (2)   no product is being offered for resale.
   (b)   The permit holder shall maintain a vendor statement for each vendor
operating at the neighborhood market and shall present the vendors' statements
to the director or any peace officer upon request. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-28.   DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   The director shall deny a neighborhood market permit if:
      (1)   the proposed neighborhood market will be located within one mile of
another neighborhood market permitted under this chapter that has the same or
overlapping operating dates and times;
      (2)   the proposed neighborhood market will unreasonably disrupt the
surrounding areas or the orderly flow of traffic, and no reasonable means of
rerouting traffic or otherwise meeting traffic needs is available;
      (3)   the applicant fails to adequately provide for:
         (A)   the protection of the vendors and attendees at the neighborhood
market;
         (B)   maintenance of public order in and around the neighborhood
market location;
         (C)   crowd security, taking into consideration the size of the
neighborhood market; or
         (D)   emergency vehicle access.
      (4)   the applicant fails to comply with or the proposed neighborhood
market will violate a city ordinance or other applicable law, unless the
prohibited conduct or activity would be allowed under this article;
      (5)   the applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an
application for a neighborhood market permit or fails to properly complete an
application for a neighborhood market permit;
      (6)   the applicant has had a neighborhood market permit revoked within
the preceding 14 months;
      (7)   the applicant or a vendor at the applicant's neighborhood market
has received, within the preceding 14 months, two or more notices of violations
or citations related to a provision of a neighborhood market permit or this
chapter;
      (8)   a neighborhood market has been conducted at the location of the
proposed neighborhood market on at least 40 days during the same calendar year
in which the proposed neighborhood market is to be conducted;
      (9)   the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire-rescue
department, or the director determines that the neighborhood market would pose
a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
      (10)   the applicant or any other person responsible for the conduct or
sponsorship of the neighborhood market is overdue in payment to the city of
taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant
or other person or the applicant fails to pay any outstanding fees assessed
under Section
42A-6 for the proposed neighborhood market or for a past neighborhood market;
or
      (11)   the applicant has a history of conducting or sponsoring a
neighborhood market in a disorderly, unsafe, unsanitary, or fiscally
irresponsible manner.
   (b)   The director shall revoke a neighborhood market permit if:
      (1)   the permit holder failed to comply with or the neighborhood market
is in violation of any provision of the neighborhood market permit, a city
ordinance, or any other applicable law;
      (2)   the permit holder made a false statement of material fact on an
application for a neighborhood market permit or failed to properly complete an
application for a neighborhood market permit;
      (3)   the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire-rescue
department, or the director determines that the neighborhood market poses a
serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
      (4)   the permit holder failed to pay any outstanding fees assessed under
Section
42A-6 of this chapter for the proposed neighborhood market or for a past
neighborhood market;
      (5)   the permit holder or any other person responsible for the conduct
or sponsorship of the neighborhood market is overdue in payment to the city of
taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the permit
holder or other person;
      (6)    the applicant fails to provide proof that the applicant possesses
or is able to obtain a license or permit required by another city ordinance or
other applicable law for the conduct of all activities included as part of the
neighborhood market; or
      (7)   the director is notified of any code violations on the property
where the neighborhood market will be held. (Ord. 31144)
ARTICLE IV.
DALLAS STREET SEATS PROGRAM.
SEC. 42A-28.1.   ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The director shall publish a guidebook entitled Dallas Street Seats
Pilot Program Guidebook on the office of special events website.
   (b)   Before adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule, the director shall
hold a public hearing on the proposal.
   (c)   The director shall fix the time and place of the hearing and, in
addition to notice required under the Open Meetings Act (Chapter 551, Texas
Government Code), as amended, shall notify each street seats permit holder and
such other persons as the director determines are interested in the subject
matter of the hearing.
   (d)   After the public hearing, the director shall notify all street seats
permit holders and other interested persons of the director's action and shall
post an order adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule on the official bulletin
board in city hall for a period of not fewer than 10 days. The order becomes
effective immediately upon expiration of the posting period. (Ord. 31708)
SEC. 42A-28.2.   APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   A person desiring to host a street seat shall submit an online
application with the office of special events. A complete application must be
filed a minimum of 90 days before the proposed street seat opening date or a
minimum of 60 days before the proposed construction start date. A Phase II
permit issued under the street seats program will expire two years after
issuance. An applicant may apply for a new Phase II permit 60 days before the
expiration date listed on the permit. All Phase II permit processing fees
apply.
   (b)   An application must be completed in full before it can be invoiced.
The application review process will not begin until the application processing
fee has been paid. Submission of a complete application does not guarantee a
street seats permit will be issued. All requirements must be met prior to
permit issuance. Applications are processed on a first come first serve basis.
   (c)   An applicant shall provide a $1,000 refundable bond to secure removal
of the street seat prior to issuance of the Phase I permit. The bond will be
refunded upon removal of the street seat to the satisfaction of the city.
   (d)   If the director determines that an application requires additional
information in order to make a decision, or if additional fees will be required
to process the application, the application will be considered incomplete and
cancelled if the applicant does not supply the additional information or fees
after the director has sent two reminder emails and made one reminder phone
call after a period of 10 calendar days without a response from the applicants.
   (e)   If the director determines that an applicant has failed to pay any
outstanding fees assessed under Section
42A-6 of this chapter for the proposed scheduled activity or a past scheduled
activity, the application will be deemed incomplete and the application will be
cancelled. An application that has been cancelled under this subsection cannot
be re-filed for 12 months.
   (f)   If the applicant makes major changes to the original submission of an
application after the review has been initiated, this will result in the
original permit application being deemed incomplete and cancelled. A revised
permit application will be required, along with new application processing fees
if the applicant wishes to pursue the application.
   (g)   An application may be cancelled if there is a scheduled utility
repair/installation, street improvement, adjacent development project, parking
space reassignment, or other restoration project, or if the location is deemed
inappropriate by the director of transportation and public works or office of
special events. The applicant may be given the option to proceed with a
shorter-term permit or to delay installation.
   (h)   An application that has been cancelled because it is incomplete cannot
be appealed under section
42A-8 and all application processing fees are forfeited.
   (i)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the application processing
fee, and a $1,000 refundable removal bond, the director shall forward a copy of
the application to all applicable city departments and partner agencies for
review. Consideration will be given based on accessibility, public safety,
location, potential to enhance street scape, community and property owner
support, adherence to design and public safety standards, quality of design,
and capacity to construct, maintain, and remove the street seat among other
factors.
   (j)   After reviewing and confirming all permit requirements have been met,
the director shall issue a street seats permit unless denial or revocation is
required by Section
42A-28.9.
      (1)   Private street seats permits are issued for parking spaces
immediately abutting the applicant's business for the purpose of expanding the
businesses seating capacity.
      (2)   Public street seats permits may be issued to a non-abutting person
or entity after obtaining consent from abutting properties and required public
support.
      (3)   A street seats Phase I permit will be issued within 60 days of
receipt of the application processing fee and proof of compliance with all
requirements.
      (4)   A street seats Phase II permit may be issued within 30 days after
construction commences based on successful site inspections, construction
completion, and confirmation of compliance with all requirements
   (k)   No more than one street seat permit may be issued on a given block
without written support from additional stakeholders as defined by director.
(Ord. 31708; 32213; 32485; 32864)
SEC. 42A-28.3.   LOCATION, DESIGN, AND OPERATIONS.
   (a)   A street seat must meet the requirements in this subsection which are
further described in the guidebook.
      (1)   Street seats may only be placed adjacent to the curb in an
unrestricted parking lane, on a street with dedicated permanent parking, and a
posted speed limit of 30 miles-per-hour or less.
      (2)   A street seat may only activate in a space no larger than two
parking spaces.
      (3)   A street seat may not interfere with other curb uses.
      (4)   A street seat must not create any interference with existing
utility access and maintenance (i.e. manholes, storm and wastewater, telecom,
etc.).
      (5)   Street seats are prohibited within a designated fire lane.
      (6)   Street seats must maintain required distances from other street
amenities in accordance with the guidebook.
   (b)   Each street seat application must include a site plan as detailed in
the guidebook.
   (c)   A street seat may require site visits or inspections by city staff. If
site visits or inspections are required, the applicant or the applicant's
design and installation contractors shall accompany city staff on scheduled
site visits or inspections.
   (d)   The design submitted with the application must be approved by all
applicable city departments and must comply with NACTO parklet guidelines.
   (e)   A permit holder is responsible for providing and maintaining all
street seats elements including furniture and amenities.
   (f)   Designs must meet all city requirements and safety regulations as
detailed in the guidebook. (Ord. Nos. 31708; 32485)
SEC. 42A-28.4.   PUBLIC SAFETY REVIEW.
   The applicant shall provide a road safety review produced by a professional
engineer licensed in the state of Texas within 14 days of application
acceptance. The review must be specific to the proposed street seat location
and must confirm that the proposed street seat follows the NACTO parklet
guidelines and all city requirements and safety regulations as detailed in the
guidebook. (Ord. 31708)
SEC. 42A-28.5.   COMMUNITY SUPPORT AND PROPERTY AUTHORIZATION.
   (a)   An applicant must provide written approval from the following parties
as part of the permit application:
      (1)   the property owner of the real estate immediately adjacent to the
proposed street seat,
      (2)   all adjacent tenants if utilizing any public property that is
immediately adjacent to or abutting an establishment other than the applicant's
establishment,
      (3)   from the property owner if utilizing any private property other
than property owned exclusively by the applicant.
   (b)   An applicant shall secure permission for utilizing restrooms owned by
another establishment. (Ord. 31708)
SEC. 42A-28.6.   PUBLIC NOTICE.
   (a)   Public notice must be displayed within the window of the abutting
establishment for a minimum of 30 days during the application review to allow
for public input.
   (b)   Written notice must be given to owners and occupants of real property
abutting the proposed street seat and those impacted by the street seat
utilizing the template provided by the director a minimum of five days prior to
the first date of construction. Notice may be delivered by hand, mail, or
email. (Ord. 31708)
SEC. 42A-28.7.   INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)    An applicant for a street seat permit shall procure and keep in full
force and effect no less than the insurance coverage required by this section
through a policy or policies written by an insurance company that:
      (1)   is authorized to do business in the State of Texas; and
      (2)   is acceptable to the city.
   (b)   The insured provisions of the policy must name the city and its
officers and employees as additional insureds, and the coverage provisions must
provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or
property by reason of the operation of a street seat.
      (1)   The certificate of insurance or policy and endorsements will be
evidenced by delivery to Office of Special Events, 650 S. Griffin St., Dallas
TX 75201.
      (2)   All certificates of insurance must name the City of Dallas as the
certificate holder.
   (c)   An applicant shall maintain commercial general liability insurance and
must provide single limits of liability for bodily injury (including death) and
property damage of $500,000 for each occurrence, with a $1 million annual
aggregate.
   (d)   Insurance required under this article must:
      (1)   include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is
required to notify the director in writing not fewer than 30 days before
cancelling the insurance policy (for a reason other than non-payment) or before
making a reduction in coverage;
      (2)   include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is
required to notify the director in writing not fewer than 10 days before
cancelling for non-payment;
      (3)   include an endorsement to waive subrogation in favor of the city
and its officers and employees for bodily injury (including death), property
damage, or any other loss.
      (4)   comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.
   (e)   Any insurance policy required by this article must be on file with the
city within 45 days of the issuance of the initial street seat permit, and
thereafter within 45 days of the expiration or termination of a previously
issued policy.
   (f)   Liquor liability insurance is required if street seats will be used
for alcohol consumption, with a minimum limit of $1 million each claim.
   (g)   In addition to the insurance requirements in this section, the
director may require additional insurance for a permit if such additional
insurance is recommended by the city's risk manager as being necessary for the
protection of the city or the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 31708)
SEC. 42A-28.8.   STREET SEAT REMOVAL.
   (a)   The city reserves the right to require removal of a street seat for
street improvements, utility work, emergencies, public safety, violation of
agreements or permits, or other outstanding circumstances deemed necessary by
the city.
   (b)   If at any time the directors of the office of special events or the
department transportation and public works, require the removal of the street
seat, the permit holder shall promptly remove the street seat within three
business days in order to conform to the requirement, without any cost to the
city.
   (c)   A permit holder shall, at its own expense, remove a street seat within
five business days of permit expiration and return the area to the same
condition as it was prior to installation. (Ord. Nos. 31708; 32864)
SEC. 42A-28.9.   DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   The director shall deny a street seats permit if:
      (1)   the applicant fails to meet any of the requirements outlined and
defined in the guidebook;
      (2)   the applicant fails to provide proof that the applicant possesses
or is able to obtain a license or permit required by another city ordinance or
other applicable law for the conduct of all activities included as part of the
street seat;
      (3)   the applicant has had a street seats permit revoked within the
preceding 14 months;
      (4)   the applicant has received, within the preceding 14 months, two or
more notices of violation or citations related to a provision of a street seat
permit or this chapter;
      (5)   the director of transportation and public works, office of special
events, the chief of the police department, or the chief of the fire-rescue
department, determines that the street seat would pose a serious threat to the
public health, safety, or welfare;
      (6)   the applicant or any other person responsible for the conduct or
sponsorship of the street seat is overdue in payment to the city of taxes,
fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or
other person;
      (7)   the applicant has a history of conducting or sponsoring street
seats in a disorderly, unsafe, unsanitary, or fiscally irresponsible manner;
      (8)   the director is notified of any code violation on the abutting
property; or
      (9)   a street seat will interfere with the rights of nearby residents to
the quiet, peaceable, and undisturbed enjoyment of their property.
      (10)   A street seat interferes with other curb uses including but not
limited to:
         (i)   Fire hydrant.
         (ii)   Valet operation.
         (iii)   Bus stop or transit station.
         (iv)   Loading zone.
         (v)   Taxi zones.
         (vi)   Handicapped-access parking spaces.
         (vii)   Other specially designated zones.
         (viii)   Licensing to another establishment.
   (b)   The director shall revoke a street seats permit if:
      (1)   the applicant fails to comply with, or the street seat is in
violation of, any provision of the street seats permit, a city ordinance, or
any other applicable law;
      (2)   the permit holder made a false statement or omission of material
fact on an application for a street seat permit;
      (3)   the director of transportation and public works, office of special
events, or the chief of the police department or the chief of the fire-rescue
department determines that the street seat would pose a serious threat to the
public health, safety, or welfare;
      (4)   the permit holder fails to maintain public order in and around the
street seat;
      (5)   the permit holder failed to pay any outstanding fees assessed under
Section
42A-6 of this chapter for the proposed street seat or for a past street seat;
      (6)   the director is notified that the permit holder or any other person
responsible for the conduct or sponsorship of the street seats is overdue in
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon the permit holder or other person; or
      (7)   the director is notified of any code violations on the abutting
property. (Ord. Nos. 31708; 32864)
ARTICLE V.
DALLAS FARMERS MARKET FARMERS MARKET.
SEC. 42A-29.   APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   This article only applies to the leased premises as defined in the
Dallas Farmers Market Shed 1 lease.
   (b)   The Dallas Farmers Market shall submit an online application with the
office of special events. An application must be filed not less than 30
business days before the Dallas Farmers Market farmers market is to begin.
   (c)   An application must be completed in full before it can be invoiced. An
application will not be processed, and the date and venue will not be confirmed
until the application processing fee has been paid. Submission of a complete
application does not guarantee a permit will be issued. All requirements must
be met prior to permit issuance.
   (d)   If the director determines that an application requires additional
information in order to make a decision, or if additional fees will be required
to process the application, the application will be considered incomplete and
cancelled if the applicant does not supply the additional information or fees
after the director has sent two reminder emails and made one reminder phone
call after a period of 10 business days without a response from the applicant.
   (e)   Upon receipt of the completed application, the director shall forward
a copy of the application to all applicable city departments and partner
agencies for review. If the application must be reviewed for public safety,
public safety agencies will review the application first, followed by a review
by city departments and partner agencies. Each department and partner agency
shall review the application and return it, with any comments, to the director
within 10 business days of receipt requiring a response. Each review phase is
allowed 10 business days. Review phases run sequentially with public safety
review getting the first 10 business days and department and partner agency
review getting the second 10 business days. If no response is received, the
director may proceed with permitting, however, if an application requires a
public safety review, the director must wait for the public safety review
response before proceeding. If any department denies the event request, or a
resolution cannot be reached, a permit will be denied.
   (f)   The director shall cancel a Dallas Farmers Market farmers market
permit application if:
      (1)   the proposed Dallas Farmers Market farmers market will occupy any
part of a freeway, expressway, or tollway.
      (2)   the proposed Dallas Farmers Market farmers market will unreasonably
disrupt the orderly flow of traffic, and no reasonable means of rerouting
traffic or otherwise meeting traffic needs is available.
      (3)   the proposed Dallas Farmers Market farmers market cannot comply
with high impact parameters.
      (4)   the applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an
application for a Dallas Farmers Market farmers market permit or fails to
properly complete an application for Dallas Farmers Market farmers permit.
      (5)   the applicant had a Dallas Farmers Market farmers market permit
revoked within the preceding 14 months.
      (6)   the applicant has received, within the preceding 14 months, two or
more notices of violations or citations related to a provision of a Dallas
Farmers Market farmers market permit or this chapter.
      (7)   the applicant has a history of conducting or sponsoring a Dallas
Farmers Market farmers market in a disorderly, unsafe, unsanitary, or fiscally
irresponsible manner.
   (g)   The building official, departments, and the director may prescribe
licenses, permits, and authorizations required by other city ordinances or
applicable law, restrictions, regulations, safeguards, and other conditions
necessary for the safe and orderly conduct of the Dallas Farmers Market farmers
market to be incorporated into the permit before issuance.
   (h)   Major changes to the original submission of an application require the
submission of a new permit application along with new application processing
fees. The original permit application will be deemed incomplete and cancelled.
   (i)   After reviewing and confirming all permit requirements have been met,
the director shall issue a Dallas Farmers Market farmers market permit unless
denial is required by Section
42A-34. A Dallas Farmers Market farmers market permit expires one year after
issuance. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-30.   STREET CLOSURES.
   (a)   Street closures shall require approval from applicable partner
agencies and city departments.
   (b)   An applicant must provide notice of street closures in accordance with
Section
42A-18.
   (c)   The police department may require a traffic control plan at the
expense of the applicant. If a traffic control plan is required, it must follow
a standard format approved by the director and be approved by the applicable
departments prior to permit issuance.
   (d)   All traffic apparatus required to fulfil a traffic control plan must
be acquired at the applicant's expense.
   (e)   The director may require accommodations if a proposed street closure
will restrict access to public or private parking, residences, businesses, or
places of worship. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-31.   PARKING.
   (a)   A complete parking plan must be submitted with each application. The
director may waive this requirement for markets with an expected total
attendance of less than 250.
   (b)   The parking plan must demonstrate that adequate parking will be
available to accommodate the expected total attendance.
   (c)   The parking plan must be approved prior to the issuance of a permit.
   (d)   Meter hooding and no parking zones in connection with a market must be
limited to the shortest time feasible. "No parking" signs must be posted a
minimum of 24 hours in advance of the market and follow a standard format
approved by the director.
   (e)   When the main use of the property is open for business and the
designated parking is to be activated as part of the market space, the
applicant must demonstrate that provisions have been made to provide remote
parking in an amount that is adequate to replace the parking spaces being
utilized as part of the event space.
   (f)   When activating a market in a multi- tenant parking lot, and when the
tenants are open for business, not more than 25 percent of the total area of
the shared available parking may be activated for the permitted activity.
   (g)   When restricting public or private parking, including handicapped
accessible parking, the applicant must provide adequate alternate parking.
(Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-32.   OPERATIONS OF DALLAS FARMERS MARKET FARMERS MARKET.
   (a)   A Dallas Farmers Market farmers market may only be operated between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week.
   (b)   A Dallas Farmers Market farmers market may only be operated in
accordance with the schedule filed with the director at the time of permit
application. An amendment to the schedule may be approved by the director
during the calendar year. The request and the required change fee must be
received by the director in writing at least 15 days before implementing any
changes.
   (c)   A permit holder must provide the name, phone number, and email address
of an individual who will be available following submission of an application
through the end of the Dallas Farmers Market farmers market, as well as at the
Dallas Farmers Market site the day of the permitted activity, to respond to any
questions or concerns from police officers or code compliance officers. This
individual shall meet police officers or code enforcement officers at the
Dallas Farmers Market site within one hour of being contacted by telephone or
email. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-33.   PRODUCTS AT DALLAS FARMERS MARKET.
   (a)   Products that may be sold at the Dallas Farmers Market farmers market
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Fruits, vegetables, honey, eggs, nuts, herbs, and mushrooms.
      (2)   Meats.
      (3)   Dairy products.
      (4)   Prepared foods, including but not limited to baked goods, packaged
foods, and oils.
      (5)   Arts and crafts, including but not limited to jewelry, candles,
natural skin care products, soaps, art, knitting, quilts, and pottery.
      (6)   Garden items, including but not limited to plants, flowers, and
soil.
   (b)   At least 40 percent of the vendors participating in the Dallas Farmers
Market farmers market must sell produce or other food items.
   (c)   Live animals may not be distributed, offered for sale, or sold at the
Dallas Farmers Market farmers market. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-34.   DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   The director shall deny a Dallas Farmers Market farmers market permit
if:
      (1)    the applicant fails to meet any of the requirements outlined and
defined in the preliminary letter;
      (2)    the applicant fails to provide proof that the applicant possesses
or is able to obtain a license or permit required by another city ordinance or
other applicable law for the conduct of all activities included as part of a
Dallas Farmers Market farmers market;
      (3)   the applicant has had a Dallas Farmers Market farmers market permit
revoked within the preceding 14 months;
      (4)   the applicant has received within the preceding 14 months, two or
more notices of violations or citations related to a provision of a Dallas
Farmers Market farmers market permit or this chapter;
      (5)   the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire-rescue
department, or the director determines that the Dallas Farmers Market farmers
market would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
      (6)    the applicant or any other person responsible for the conduct or
sponsorship of a Dallas Farmers Market farmers market is overdue in payment to
the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon
the applicant or other person;
      (7)   the applicant has a history of conducting or sponsoring a Dallas
Farmers Market farmers market in a disorderly, unsafe, unsanitary, or fiscally
irresponsible manner;
      (8)   the director is notified of any code violation on the property
where the Dallas Farmers Market farmers market will be held; or
      (9)   the Dallas Farmers Market farmers market will interfere with the
rights of nearby residents to the quiet, peaceable, and undisturbed enjoyment
of their property.
   (b)   The director shall revoke a Dallas Farmers Market farmers market
permit if:
      (1)   the applicant fails to comply with or the Dallas Farmers Market
farmers market is in violation of any provision of the Dallas Farmers Market
farmers market permit, a city ordinance, or any other applicable law;
      (2)   the permit holder made a false statement or omission of material
fact on an application for the Dallas Farmers Market farmers market permit;
      (3)   the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire-rescue
department, or the director determines that the Dallas Farmers Market farmers
market poses a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
      (4)   the permit holder fails to maintain public order in and around the
market location;
      (5)   the permit holder failed to pay any outstanding fees assessed under
Section
42A-6 for the market or for a past market;
      (6)   the director is notified that the permit holder or any other person
responsible for the conduct or sponsorship of the market is overdue in payment
to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed
upon the permit holder or other person; or
      (7)   the director is notified of any code violations on the property.
(Ord. 31144)
ARTICLE VI.
STREETLIGHT POLE BANNERS.
SEC. 42A-35.   APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   Except as provided for a streetlight pole banner in a special
provision sign district in Chapter 51A of this code, an application for a
streetlight pole banner permit must comply with the requirements in this
section. If there is a conflict between a requirement in this section and a
requirement for a streetlight pole banner in a special provision sign district
in Chapter 51A, the requirement in Chapter 51A prevails.
   (b)   The application for a permit authorizing the placement of streetlight
pole banners must be submitted online to the office of special events at least
30 business days prior to the proposed streetlight pole banner installation
date.
   (c)   The director shall respond in writing by email to the applicant within
three business days of receipt of the application acknowledging receipt of the
application.
   (d)   Upon receipt of the completed application, the director shall forward
a copy of the application to all applicable city departments and partner
agencies for review. If the application must be reviewed for public safety,
public safety agencies will review the application first, followed by a review
of city departments and partner agencies. If any part of the scheduled activity
is to be held on or adjacent to property that is exempt from this chapter under
Section
42A-5, the director shall also include the entity that manages or controls the
exempt property in the review of the application. Each department and partner
agency shall review the application and return it, with any comments, to the
director within 10 business days of receipt of the request requiring a
response. If no response is received, the director may proceed with permitting,
however, if an application requires a public safety review, the director must
wait for the public safety review response before proceeding. If any department
denies the application, or a resolution cannot be reached, the permit will be
denied.
   (e)   An application must be completed in full before it can be invoiced. An
application will not be processed, and the streetlight poles will not be
confirmed until the application processing fee has been paid. Submission of a
complete application does not guarantee a permit will be issued. All
requirements must be met prior to permit issuance.
   (f)   The director shall review the application to determine whether the
requested streetlight poles are available for the erection of streetlight pole
banners. If the requested streetlight poles are not available, the applicant
must resubmit an alternate list of requested streetlight poles within 48 hours
of receiving the preliminary letter. If alternate streetlight poles are not
submitted within 48 hours of receiving the preliminary letter, the process will
continue with only the available poles.
   (g)   The director shall provide the applicant with a preliminary letter
containing the requirements for permit issuance upon completion of departmental
and partner agency review.
   (h)   The director may cancel an application for a streetlight pole banner
permit if:
      (1)   a streetlight pole banner permit has been granted or is in the
review process for another streetlight pole banner permit with the same poles
and during the same time period;
      (2)   the applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an
application for a streetlight pole banner permit or fails to properly complete
an application for a streetlight pole banner permit;
      (3)   the applicant had a streetlight pole banner permit revoked within
the preceding 14 months;
      (4)   the applicant has received, within the preceding 14 months, two or
more notices of violations or citations related to a provision of a streetlight
pole banner permit or this chapter; or
      (5)   the applicant has a history of conducting the installation,
maintenance, or removal of streetlight pole banners in a disorderly or unsafe
manner.
   (i)    If the director determines that an application requires additional
information in order to make a decision, or if additional fees will be required
to process the application, the application will be considered incomplete and
cancelled if the applicant does not supply the additional information or fees
after the director has sent two reminder emails and made one reminder phone
call after a period of 10 calendar days without a response from the applicant.
   (j)   If the director determines that an applicant has failed to pay any
outstanding fees assessed under Section
42A-6 of this chapter for the proposed installation of the streetlight pole
banners, the application will be deemed incomplete and the application will be
cancelled. An application that has been cancelled under this subsection cannot
be re-filed for 12 months.
   (k)   If the applicant makes major changes to the original submission of an
application after the preliminary letter has been issued, this will result in
the original permit application being deemed incomplete and cancelled. A
revised permit application will be required, along with new application
processing fees if the applicant wishes to pursue the application.
   (l)   An application that has been cancelled cannot be appealed under
Section
42A-8 and all application processing fees are forfeited.
   (m)   An applicant may not hold more than one streetlight pole banner permit
application at a time.
   (n)   A streetlight pole banner permit application may not be submitted more
than one year prior to the banner installation date.
   (o)   Applications for streetlight pole banners in the arts district must be
from cultural institutions located in the arts district. The Arts District
Foundation shall provide the office of special events a map with pole
assignments for each cultural institution each calendar year.
   (p)   Applications for streetlight pole banners for pre-determined signature
events within the downtown area including, but not limited to, Main Street,
Commerce Street, and Elm Street, have a right of first refusal. All other
permit applications will be processed on a first-come, first-serve basis.
   (q)   After reviewing and confirming all permit requirements have been met,
the director shall issue the streetlight pole banner permit unless denial or
revocation is required by Section
42A-31. Except as provided in this subsection, a streetlight pole banner permit
will be issued for a period of 60 consecutive days. A streetlight pole banner
permit may be extended for additional consecutive 60-day periods not to exceed
a year. All applicable fees must be paid for any permit extension. A
streetlight pole banner permit for a public improvement district will be issued
for a period of one calendar year. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-36.   PERMIT EXTENSION.
   (a)   An applicant may not submit a request to extend a streetlight pole
banner permit earlier than two weeks prior to the expiration of an existing
streetlight pole banner permit.
   (b)   A streetlight pole banner permit may be extended in additional 60-day
increments based upon availability of the streetlight poles.
   (c)   Streetlight pole banner permits may be extended for a maximum of one
year.
   (d)   The director shall assess all applicable streetlight pole banner fees
in 60-day increments.
   (e)   This section does not apply to a public improvement district annual
streetlight pole banner permit. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-37.   INSURANCE.
   (a)   A person installing a streetlight pole banner shall procure and keep
in full force and effect insurance written by an insurance company approved by
the State of Texas and acceptable to the city and issued in the standard form
approved by the Texas Department of Insurance. All provisions of each policy
must be acceptable to the city. Each policy must name the city and its
officers, employees, and appointed representatives as additional insureds. The
coverage provisions of each policy must provide coverage for any loss or damage
that may arise to any person or property by reason of the installation of the
streetlight pole banner by the applicant.
   (b)   Insurance required under this article must include a cancellation
provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the director in
writing not fewer than 30 days before cancelling the insurance policy or before
making a reduction in coverage.
   (c)    Insurance is required in the following types and amounts:
      (1)    Commercial general liability insurance must be provided with
combined single limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage of
not less than $1,000,000 for each occurrence with a $2,000,000 annual
aggregate.
      (2)    Business automotive liability insurance covering owned, hired, and
non-owned vehicles, with a combined single limit for bodily injury (including
death) and property damage of $1,000,000 per occurrence.
      (3)   Worker's compensation insurance with statutory limits.
      (4)    Employer's liability insurance with the following minimum limits
for bodily injury by:
         (A)   accident, $1,000,000 per each accident; and
         (B)   disease, $1,000,000 per employee with a per policy aggregate of
$1,000,000.
      (5)   Umbrella liability insurance following the form of the primary
liability coverage described in Subsection (a) and providing coverage with
minimum combined bodily injury (including death) and property damage limit of
$1,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 annual aggregate.
   (d)   In addition to the insurance requirements of Subsection (c) of this
section, the director may require additional insurance for a streetlight pole
banner if such additional insurance is recommended by the city's risk manager
as being necessary for the protection of the city or the public health, safety,
and welfare.
   (e)   If a facility or other property owned or managed by the city is
subject to both the insurance requirements of this chapter and insurance
requirements established by another city ordinance, an official city action, a
city lease or use agreement, or other applicable law, then the insurance
requirements with the greater limits and coverages must be met to erect a
streetlight pole banner at the facility or property.
   (f)   A streetlight pole banner permit will not be issued until the
insurance requirements have been verified by the city's designated third-party
provider. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-38.   STREETLIGHT POLE BANNER REGULATIONS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Except as provided for a streetlight pole banner in a special
provision sign district in Chapter 51A of this code, streetlight pole banners
must comply with the requirements in this section. If there is a conflict
between a requirement in this section and a requirement for a streetlight pole
banner in a special provision sign district in Chapter 51A, the requirement in
Chapter 51A prevails.
      (2)   A streetlight pole banner must be in general compliance with the
streetlight pole design manual published by the office of special events.
      (3)   The sign hardware for a streetlight pole banner may be left in
place between displays of a banner.
      (4)   A streetlight pole banner and its sign hardware must:
         (A)   be mounted on a streetlight pole;
         (B)   be at least 12 feet above grade, unless it overhangs a roadway,
in which case it must be at least 15 feet above grade;
         (C)   be made out of weather resistant and rust proof material
especially designed for outdoor use;
         (D)   be printed on both sides of material;
         (E)   not be illuminated;
         (F)   not project more than three feet from the pole onto which it is
mounted;
         (G)   not exceed 25 square feet in effective area;
         (H)   not obstruct the view of traffic or any traffic control devices
or impede or endanger the flow of traffic; and
         (I)   not interfere with emergency equipment, including fire, police,
medical, electrical, commercial vehicles and trucks, or bus transportation.
      (5)   The maximum number of streetlight pole banners is two per pole,
with each banner on one opposite side of the pole.
   (b)   Public improvement districts.
      (1)   This section applies only to public improvement district management
corporations.
      (2)   District identification banners are defined as long-term banners
that identify a geographic location or place of interest. Streetlight poles
must be located within the defined geographic boundaries of the public
improvement district.
      (3)   Streetlight pole banner permits granted to a public improvement
district management corporation must comply with the standards in this
subsection and will be issued on an annual basis.
      (4)   District identification banners are excluded from all permit
application processing fees.
      (5)   Public improvement district have first right-of-refusal for
streetlight poles previously permitted to a public improvement district before
being reissued to an applicant other than that of the public improvement
district management corporation; however, an active permit must be maintained
by the public improvement management corporation to prevent poles from being
reissued to another entity. (Ord. 31144)
SEC. 42A-39.   DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   The director shall deny a streetlight pole banner permit if:
      (1)    the applicant fails to meet any of the requirements outlined and
defined in the preliminary letter;
      (2)    the applicant fails to provide proof that the applicant possesses
or is able to obtain a license or permit required by another city ordinance or
other applicable law for the conduct of all activities included as part of the
installation, maintenance, or removal of the streetlight pole banners;
      (3)   the applicant has had a streetlight pole banner permit revoked
within the preceding 14 months;
      (4)   the applicant has received, within the preceding 14 months, two or
more notices of violations or citations related to a provision of a streetlight
pole banner permit or this chapter;
      (5)   the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire-rescue
department, or the director determines that the installation, maintenance, or
removal of the streetlight pole banners would pose a serious threat to the
public health, safety, or welfare;
      (6)   the applicant or any other person responsible for the installation,
maintenance, or removal of the streetlight pole banners is overdue in payment
to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed
upon the applicant or other person; or
      (7)   the applicant has a history of conducting the installation,
maintenance, or removal of streetlight pole banners in a disorderly or unsafe
manner.
   (b)    The director shall revoke a streetlight pole banner permit if:
      (1)   the applicant fails to comply with, or the streetlight pole banners
are in violation of any provision of the streetlight pole banner permit, a city
ordinance, or any other applicable law;
      (2)   the permit holder made a false statement or omission of material
fact on an application for a streetlight pole banner permit;
      (3)   the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire-rescue
department, or the director determines that the installation, maintenance, or
removal of the streetlight pole banners pose a serious threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare;
      (4)    the permit holder fails to maintain public order in and around the
installation, maintenance, or removal of the streetlight pole banners;
      (5)   the permit holder failed to pay any outstanding fees assessed under
Section
42A-6 of this chapter for the installation, maintenance, or removal of the
streetlight pole banners; or
      (6)    the director is notified that the permit holder or any other
person responsible for the conduct or sponsorship of the installation,
maintenance, or removal of the streetlight pole banners is overdue in payment
to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed
upon the permit holder or other person. (Ord. 31144)
ARTICLE VII.
ENFORCEMENT.
SEC. 42A-40.   OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he commences set up or conducts a
special event, or neighborhood market, or erects a street seat or a streetlight
pole banner:
      (1)   without a permit issued under this chapter or, for a streetlight
pole banner in a special provision sign district, a sign permit issued under
Chapter 51A of this code; or
      (2)   in violation of any provision of a permit issued under this
chapter, this chapter, or any other city ordinance or applicable law.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he is the individual named by the
permit holder as the contact person for the event and he fails to meet police
officers or code enforcement officers at the site of the special event,
neighborhood market, or street seat within one hour of being contacted by a
police officer or code enforcement officer by telephone or email.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (d)   This chapter may be enforced by the director of the office of special
events, the director of code compliance, the chief of police, the fire chief,
the director of mobility, and the director of transportation and public works,
or their designated representatives. (Ord. Nos. 18702; 19869; 21934; 31144;
31708; 32864)
SEC. 42A-41.   PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter or a requirement of
a permit issued under this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day
or part of a day during which the violation is committed or continued.
   (b)   Each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed:
      (1)   $2,000 for a violation of a provision of this chapter or a
requirement of a permit governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and
sanitation, including dumping of refuse; or
      (2)   $500 for all other violations of this chapter or requirements of a
permit issued under this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 18702; 19869; 21934; 31144)
CHAPTER 42B
SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Sec.
42B-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
42B-2.   Authority of director.
Sec.
42B-3.   Establishment of rules and regulations.
Sec.
42B-4.   Short-term rental registration and posting requirements.
Sec.
42B-5.   Short-term rental registration; fees; renewal.
Sec.
42B-6.   Short-term rental registration application.
Sec.
42B-7.   Review and acceptance of registration application.
Sec.
42B-8.   Property inspections.
Sec.
42B-9.   Issuance and denial of registration.
Sec.
42B-10.   Revocation of short-term rental registration.
Sec.
42B-11.   Required emergency response.
Sec.
42B-12.   Operation of short-term rental.
Sec.
42B-13.   Hosting platform registration; revocation.
Sec.
42B-14.   Hosting platform operations.
Sec.
42B-15.   Criminal offenses.
Sec.
42B-16.   Review of chapter.
SEC. 42B-1.    DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   BEDROOM means any room in a short-term rental other than a kitchen,
dining room, living room, bathroom, or closet.
      (2)   BOOKING TRANSACTION means any reservation or payment service
provided by a person who facilitates a short-term rental transaction between a
prospective visitor and a host.
      (3)   DEPARTMENT means the department designated by the city manager to
enforce and administer this chapter.
      (4)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter and includes
representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director.
      (5)   EGREGIOUS OFFENSE means an offense that caused or could cause a
serious threat to public health and safety, including but not limited to,
commission of crimes that are related to drugs, prostitution, or a serious
breach of the peace.
      (6)   EMERGENCY CONDITION means any fire, natural disaster, collapse
hazard, burst pipe, lack of operable utilities, serious police incident, noise
violation, or other condition that requires an immediate response to prevent
harm to the property, the occupants of the property, or the public.
      (7)   HOST means a person who operates a short-term rental and includes
representatives, agents, and employees of the host.
      (8)   HOSTING PLATFORM means a person who participates in the short-term
rental business by collecting or receiving a fee, directly or indirectly
through an agent or intermediary, for conducting a booking transaction using
any medium of facilitation.
      (9)   LOCAL RESPONSIBLE PARTY means a natural person who represents the
owner or host who may be contacted 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the
event of an emergency condition at a short-term rental.
      (10)   MULTITENANT STRUCTURE means a structure with three or more
rentable units.
      (11)   OWNER means a person who owns property used as a short-term rental
and includes representatives, agents, and employees of the owner.
      (12)   RENTABLE UNIT means one or more rooms designed to accommodate
tenants containing one or more kitchens, one or more bathrooms, and one or more
bedrooms.
      (13)   SHORT-TERM RENTAL means a full or partial rentable unit containing
one or more kitchens, one or more bathrooms, and one or more bedrooms that is
rented to occupants for fewer than 30 consecutive days or one month, whichever
is less, per rental period. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-2.    AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this chapter and may by written
order establish such rules, regulations, or procedures, not inconsistent with
this chapter or other city ordinances, and state or federal law, as the
director determines are necessary to discharge any duty under or to affect the
policy of this chapter. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-3.   ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Before adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule, the director shall
hold a public hearing on the proposal.
   (b)   The director shall fix the time and place of the hearing and, in
addition to the notice required under the Open Meetings Act (Chapter 551, Texas
Government Code), as amended, shall notify each owner, host, hosting platform,
and such other persons as the director determines are interested in the subject
matter of the hearing.
   (c)   After the public hearing, the director shall notify all owners, hosts,
hosting platforms, and other interested persons of the director's action and
shall post an order adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule on the official
bulletin board in city hall for a period of not fewer than 10 days. The order
becomes effective immediately upon expiration of the posting period. (Ord.
32473)
SEC. 42B-4.   SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION AND POSTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he owns or operates a short-term rental
without a valid short-term rental registration issued under this chapter.
   (b)   A person other than a hosting platform commits an offense if the
person advertises a property for rent as a short-term rental without a valid
short-term rental registration issued under this chapter.
   (c)   The owner and host of a short-term rental commits an offense if he
fails to post the following in a conspicuous place in a common area of the
property or as otherwise approved by the director:
      (1)   the short-term rental certificate of occupancy; and
      (2)   the certificate of registration for short-term rental. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-5.   SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION; FEES; RENEWAL.
   (a)   Each short-term rental lodging use must be separately registered.
   (b)   A short-term rental registration expires on the earlier of:
      (1)   one year after the registration date, or
      (2)   when ownership of the property changes.
   (c)   The annual registration fee for a short-term rental is $248.00.
   (d)   The registration fee is nonrefundable. The registration fee may not be
prorated or applied to another property.
   (e)   The initial inspection fee is included in the annual registration fee.
If a property must be reinspected, the reinspection fee is $144.00.
   (f)   A host shall keep the information contained in its registration
application current and accurate. If there is any change in the application
information, the host shall notify the director in writing within 10 days of
the changes of information.
   (g)   A registration may be renewed by making application for a renewal in
accordance with this chapter on a form provided by the director. In the
application for renewal, the host shall certify that all information in the
then-current registration application is still accurate as of the date of the
renewal application or otherwise correct any information that is not accurate
as of the date of the renewal application. (Ord. Nos. 32473; 32556)
SEC. 42B-6.   SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   To obtain a registration to operate a short-term rental, a person must
submit a complete application to the director on a form provided for that
purpose. If the applicant is not an individual, an authorized officer or agent
of the applicant must file the form. The application must contain the following
information and be accompanied by the annual registration fee required under
Section
42B-5 before it is considered complete:
      (1)   The name, mailing address, and telephone number for:
         (A)   the owner;
         (B)   the host;
         (C)   the local responsible party;
         (D)   if the owner of the short-term rental is not a natural person,
then an agent, employee, or officer of the owner authorized to receive legal
notices and service of legal process on behalf of the owner, and in the case of
an entity required to be registered with the State of Texas, the registered
agent for service of process for the entity;
         (E)   if the host is not a natural person, then an agent, employee, or
officer of the host authorized to receive legal notices and service of legal
process on behalf of the host, and in the case of an entity required to be
registered with the State of Texas, the registered agent for service of process
for the entity;
         (F)   the holder of any deed of trust or mortgage lien on the short-
term rental property being registered; and
         (G)   any agent, employee, officer, property manager, and other
persons in control of, managing, or operating the short-term rental property on
behalf of the owner or host;
      (2)   the property address;
      (3)   if the property being registered is part of a multitenant property
or a condominium:
         (A)    the name of the property, all legal addresses comprising the
property, and the main telephone number, if any, of the property;
         (B)   the apartment or unit number of the short-term rental unit being
registered; and
         (C)   an affidavit signed by the owner acknowledging that the owner is
responsible for ensuring that no unregistered short-term rentals operates on
the property and that the owner may be liable for code violations committed by
hosts or short-term rental guests, such as being declared a habitual nuisance
property under
Chapter 27 of this code;
      (4)    if the owner is not a natural person, the form of the entity,
including, but not limited to, a corporation, general partnership, limited
partnership, trust, or limited liability company, and the state or foreign
jurisdiction of organization and registration, if other than the State of
Texas, as well as the name and mailing address for each principal officer,
director, general partner, trustee, manager, member, or other person charged
with the operation, control, or management of the entity;
      (5)   if the host is not a natural person, the form of the entity,
including, but not limited to, a corporation, general partnership, limited
partnership, trust, or limited liability company, and the state or foreign
jurisdiction of organization and registration, if other than the State of
Texas, as well as the name and mailing address for each principal officer,
director, general partner, trustee, manager, member, or other person charged
with the operation, control, or management of the entity;
      (6)   a copy of the host's current driver's license or other government-
issued personal identification card containing a photograph of the host, if the
host is a natural person;
      (7)   the hotel occupancy tax registration number issued in accordance
with
Chapter 44 of this code;
      (8)   any additional information the host desires to include or that the
director deems necessary to aid in the determination of whether the application
will be deemed complete;
      (9)    an acknowledgement by the host of the following:
         (A)    occupancy limits;
         (B)   parking requirements;
         (C)   noise limits;
         (D)   revocation process; and
         (E)   advertisement and signage limitations; and
      (10)   if the host is not the owner, a statement that is signed and
acknowledged by the owner giving the host permission to operate the short-term
rental. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-7.   REVIEW AND ACCEPTANCE OF REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (a)   An application will not be processed until the annual registration fee
required by Section
42B-5 has been paid.
   (b)   The director shall review an application within 10 business days of
receipt to determine completeness.
   (c)   If the director finds that the applicant has failed to submit a
complete application or that any of the information on the application is
materially incorrect or misleading, the director shall promptly notify the
applicant by United States or electronic mail that the application is defective
or incomplete and the director shall list the defects and missing items.
   (d)   An application shall expire and be void ab initio if by the 10th
business day after the applicant is notified that the application is defective
or incomplete, the applicant fails to provide documents or other information
necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (e)   If the director finds that the applicant submitted a complete
application and all criteria have been met, the director shall promptly notify
the applicant that the application has been received and found to be complete.
(Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-8.   PROPERTY INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   After the director deems an application complete, but before an
application is approved, the director shall conduct an inspection of the
property to determine if there are any code violations. If the inspection
reveals any violations of the Dallas City Code, the director shall issue a
notice of violation to the owner, operator, or person in control to remedy the
violations. The director shall not approve the registration until the
identified code violations at the property have been abated.
   (b)   The director may conduct inspections of short-term rental properties
at any time the director deems necessary when determined to be in the interest
of the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (c)   Except as provided in this section, the director shall conduct a
property inspection of each short-term rental upon application for renewal of a
registration.
   (d)   For a registration renewal, no inspection is required if code
violations were not found on the property in the previous 12 calendar months.
   (e)   The director may conduct inspections at the property if any complaint
is received alleging violations occurring at the property including, but not
limited to, violations of noise or parking regulations. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-9.   ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Upon the submission of a complete application, the director shall
issue a registration to operate a short-term rental if the director determines:
      (1)   the applicant has complied with all requirements for issuance of
the registration;
      (2)   the applicant has not made a false statement as to a material
matter in the application;
      (3)   the property being registered has passed all inspections and the
condition and use of the short-term rental comply with the zoning regulations
in the Dallas Development Code and the minimum property standards in
Chapter 27;
      (4)   there have not been two or more citations for violations of the
Dallas City Code found on the property being registered within the preceding 12
calendar months prior to the registration application;
      (5)   if the property is a multitenant property, registration of the
rentable unit will not exceed the density requirements in Section
42B-12;
      (6)   the owner and host are not delinquent in any ad valorem taxes,
fees, fines, or penalties owed to the city in relation to the property where
the short-term rental is located;
      (7)   the owner and host are not delinquent in any hotel occupancy taxes
owed to the city; and
      (8)   the owner and host have not had a short-term rental registration
revoked within the past 12 months.
   (b)   If the director determines that the requirements of Subsection (a)
have not been met, the director shall deny the registration.
   (c)   If the director determines that the applicant should be denied a
registration, the director shall notify the applicant in writing, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, that the application is denied and include in
the notice the reason for denial and a statement informing the applicant of the
right to appeal. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-10.   REVOCATION OF SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The director may revoke a short-term rental registration if the
property registered as a short-term rental is the site of two or more citations
for violations of the Dallas City Code or state or federal law two or more
times in the preceding year. Violations considered under this provision
include, but are not limited to, parking on unapproved surfaces, failure to
maintain the property free of litter, exceeding noise limitations, disorderly
or criminal conduct, failure to pay hotel occupancy tax, or any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   A short-term rental registration issued under this chapter may be
revoked at the director's discretion if an egregious offense occurs at the
property.
   (c)   The director may revoke all registrations associated with a single
owner or host upon revocation of any registration.
   (d)   If the director determines that a registration should be revoked, the
director shall notify the owner and host in writing, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that the registration is revoked and include in the notice
the reason for revocation and a statement informing the owner and host of the
right to appeal.
   (e)   An owner or host that has had a registration revoked under this
section shall not be permitted to apply for a short-term rental registration
for a period of one year following the date of the revocation.
   (f)   A revocation under this section is final unless the owner or host
files an appeal with the permit and license appeal board in accordance with
Section
2-96.
   (g)   The filing of an appeal stays the action of the director in revoking a
registration until the permit and license appeal board makes a final decision.
   (h)   The permit and license appeal board shall consider the facts as they
existed at the time of the registration denial, suspension, or revocation in
making its decision. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-11.   REQUIRED EMERGENCY RESPONSE.
   (a)   A host shall provide the director with the name, address, and
telephone number of a local responsible party. This designation shall be
provided on a notarized form designated by the director that is signed by the
local responsible party.
   (b)    A host shall notify the director immediately of any change in the
emergency response information on a notarized form designated by the director.
   (c)    The local responsible party shall arrive at the property within one
hour after being notified by the city or emergency response personnel that an
emergency condition has occurred on the property.
   (d)   Upon arrival at the short-term rental when requested as provided
above, the local responsible party shall notify the requesting city personnel
of his arrival and shall take reasonable actions to resolve the emergency
condition.
   (e)    A local responsible party must be authorized to make decisions
regarding the premises and its occupants. A local responsible party may be
required to, and shall not refuse to, accept service of citation for any
violations on the premises. Acceptance of service shall not act to release
owner of any liability under this chapter. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-12.   OPERATION OF SHORT-TERM RENTAL.
   (a)   Maximum occupancy for a short-term rental is three people per bedroom
with a total occupancy of 12.
   (b)   The number of short-term rentals in a single rentable unit may not
exceed one.
   (c)   The maximum density for short-term rentals located in a multifamily
structure is:
      (1)   three percent of rentable units if the multitenant structure has
more than 20 rentable units and is located in a multifamily or multiple-family
zoning district or a planned development district or conservation district
whose base zoning is multifamily or multiple-family;
      (2)   20 percent of rentable units if the multitenant structure has more
than 20 rentable units and is located in a nonresidential zoning district;
      (3)   zero rentable units if the multitenant structure has 20 rentable
units or less.
   (d)   The use of amplified sound equipment that produces a sound audible
beyond the property line of the premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m. is prohibited.
   (e)   The host shall limit the number of guest vehicles to the number of
available off-street parking spaces available at the short-term rental
property.
   (f)   The minimum allowable rental period is two nights.
   (g)   Any public listing or advertisement for a property as a short-term
rental must include:
      (1)   the City of Dallas short-term rental registration number;
      (2)   occupancy limitations;
      (3)   limitations on the use of amplified sound equipment;
      (4)   the number of vehicles allowed;
      (5)   city regulations related to parking on unapproved surfaces and
oversized vehicles; and
      (6)    a minimum allowable rental period of two nights.
   (h)   A short-term rental may not be used as a commercial amusement,
restaurant, or similar business unless the property has a valid certificate of
occupancy for the use. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-13.   HOSTING PLATFORM REGISTRATION; REVOCATION.
   (a)   To obtain a registration to operate as a hosting platform, a person
shall submit a complete application to the director on a form provided for that
purpose. If the applicant is not an individual, an authorized officer or agent
of the applicant must file the form. The application must contain the following
information before it is considered complete:
      (1)   the name, telephone number, and email address of a contact person
at the hosting platform; and
      (2)   any other information the director deems necessary.
   (b)   A registration issued under this section is valid for one year.
   (c)   The director may revoke the registration of a hosting platform if the
hosting platform collects a fee or fails to submit a report in violation of
Section
42B-14.
   (d)   If the director determines that a registration should be revoked, the
director shall notify the hosting platform in writing, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, that the registration is revoked and include in the
notice the reason for revocation and a statement informing the owner and host
of the right to appeal.
   (e)   A hosting platform that has had a registration revoked under this
section shall not be permitted to apply for a hosting platform registration for
a period of one year following the date of the revocation.
   (f)   A revocation under this section is final unless the hosting platform
files an appeal with the permit and license appeal board in accordance with
Section
2-96.
   (g)   The filing of an appeal stays the action of the director in revoking a
registration until the permit and license appeal board makes a final decision.
   (h)   The permit and license appeal board shall consider the facts as they
existed at the time of the revocation in making its decision. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-14.   HOSTING PLATFORM OPERATIONS.
   (a)   Hosting platforms shall not collect or receive a fee, directly or
indirectly, through an agent or intermediary, for completing a booking
transaction for a short-term rental unless the hosting platform has registered
with the city in compliance with this Section
42B-13 and the short-term rental has a valid registration number issued by the
director in accordance with Section
42B-9.
   (b)   Hosting platforms shall not collect or receive a fee, directly or
indirectly, through an agent or intermediary, for facilitating or providing
services ancillary to an unregistered short-term rental, including, but not
limited to, insurance, concierge services, catering, restaurant bookings,
tours, guide services, entertainment, cleaning, property management, or
maintenance.
   (c)   A hosting platform registered under this chapter shall provide the
director, on a monthly basis, an electronic report, in a format determined by
the director, of the listings maintained, authorized, facilitated, or
advertised by the hosting platform within the city for the applicable reporting
period. The report must include a breakdown of where the listings are located
and whether the listing is for a room or a whole rentable unit. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-15.   CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   A person commits an offense if he violates or attempts to violate a
provision of this chapter, or a rule or regulation established by the director
under this article, that is applicable to a person. A culpable mental state is
not required for an offense under this chapter unless the provision defining
the conduct expressly requires a culpable mental state. A separate offense is
committed each day in which an offense occurs. (Ord. 32473)
SEC. 42B-16.   REVIEW OF CHAPTER.
   The regulations in this chapter must be reviewed by a city council committee
by June 14, 2025. (Ord. 32473)
CHAPTER 43
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
43-1.   Reserved.
Sec.
43-2.   Driving horses, cattle, etc., on certain streets forbidden.
Sec.
43-3.   Moving horses and vehicles at request of street cleaner.
Sec.
43-4.   Fruit stands, stalls, etc., on sidewalks.
Sec.
43-5.   Attracting crowds on sidewalks.
Sec.
43-6.   Unsafe scaffolds.
Sec.
43-7.   Open cellar or trap doors; permitting sidewalk to remain in disrepair.
Sec.
43-8.   Each day obstruction remains deemed separate offense.
Sec.
43-9.   Glass to be removed from highway after a wreck.
Secs. 43-10 thru 43-11.   Reserved.
Sec.
43-12.   Depositing trash on streets and sidewalks.
Sec.
43-13.   Trash, etc., not to accumulate or remain on sidewalks.
Sec.
43-14.   Leaving rubbish in street after completion of building.
Sec.
43-15.   Allowing weeds, grass, etc., to obstruct gutters and sidewalks.
Sec.
43-16.   Throwing fruit peelings on sidewalks.
Sec.
43-17.   Playing ball, throwing stones, etc., in streets.
Sec.
43-18.   Skating on streets and sidewalks.
Sec.
43-19.   Mixing concrete on paved streets.
Sec.
43-20.   Reserved.
Sec.
43-21.   Permits required for alterations, obstructions, etc., of sewers,
gutters, etc.
Sec.
43-22.   Marking sidewalks with stencils, etc.
Sec.
43-23.   Injuring or defacing street signs and signposts.
Sec.
43-24.   Heavy articles not to be carried along sidewalks.
Sec.
43-25.   Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
AWNINGS.
Sec.
43-26.   Height above sidewalk.
Sec.
43-27.   Fastening to buildings; supports.
Sec.
43-28.   Coverings to be fireproof; exceptions.
Sec.
43-29.   Awning posts.
Sec.
43-30.   Extending over public property.
ARTICLE III.
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
Division 1. Generally.
Subdivision I. In General.
Sec.
43-31.   Purpose of article.
Sec.
43-32.   Definitions.
Sec.
43-33.   Liability of abutting property owners for injuries caused by defective
sidewalks.
Sec.
43-34.   Liability of persons making special use of sidewalks.
Sec.
43-35.   Administration and enforcement of article; police power of director.
Sec.
43-36.   Director not personally liable for good faith actions.
Sec.
43-37.   Authority of director generally.
Sec.
43-38.   Effect of article on responsibility for damages.
Sec.
43-39.   Construction permit - Required.
Sec.
43-40.   Same - Application - Information to be furnished by applicants.
Sec.
43-41.   Same - Same - Lot plan to be furnished when requested.
Sec.
43-42.   Same - Expiration; new permit required before recommencing work.
Sec.
43-43.   Surety bond - Required.
Sec.
43-44.   Surety bond - Conditions of issuance.
Sec.
43-45.   Same - Effect of article on persons now engaged in construction, etc.
Sec.
43-46.   Standards for raw materials used in construction.
Sec.
43-47.   Specifications for concrete reinforcing steel.
Sec.
43-48.   Specifications and placement of concrete expansion joint filler.
Sec.
43-49.   Subgrade determination.
Sec.
43-50.   Form, specifications, and placement.
Sec.
43-51.   Concrete - Ingredients and consistency required.
Sec.
43-52.   Same - Placement
Sec.
43-53.   Same - Protecting against extreme temperatures, etc.
Sec.
43-54.   Examination and approval of materials prior to use.
Sec.
43-55.   All work to comply with established lines and grades.
Sec.
43-56.   Protection of grade and line stakes.
Sec.
43-57.   Lights and safeguards.
Sec.
43-58.   Removal of debris, etc., upon completion of work.
Sec.
43-59.   Construction of retaining walls on public property.
Sec.
43-60.   Traffic barriers for service stations and parking lots.
Sec.
43-61.   Same - Placement of curbs.
Sec.
43-62.   Indented parking.
Sec.
43-63.   Repair of defective sidewalks or driveways by abutting property
owners.
Sec.
43-64.   Mixing concrete or mortar on existing pavement; unused mixture to be
immediately removed.
Sec.
43-65.   Sidewalk drainage openings to have metal covers.
Sec.
43-66.   Alternative materials and construction methods.
Subdivision II. Sidewalks.
Sec.
43-67.   Minimum dimensions; finishing.
Sec.
43-68.   Concrete specifications.
Sec.
43-69.   Form, placement and slope.
Sec.
43-70.   Joints.
Division 2. Material Specifications and Construction Methods.
Subdivision I. Curbs and Gutters.
Sec.
43-71.   Description; composition of concrete and mortar used in construction.
Sec.
43-72.   Construction of joints.
Sec.
43-73.   Forms.
Sec.
43-74.   Placement of concrete and mortar.
Sec.
43-75.   Finishing.
Sec.
43-76.   Protection of new work from traffic; backfilling.
Sec.
43-77.   Final dimensions; gutter ratio required for curb facing; dwelling for
driveway construction.
Subdivision II. Driveway Approaches.
Sec.
43-78.   Specifications for materials used in construction.
Sec.
43-79.   Placement and compaction of concrete.
Sec.
43-80.   Finishing.
Sec.
43-81.   Protection from vehicular traffic.
Sec.
43-82.   Removal of curb and gutter where required.
Sec.
43-83.   Maximum space to be occupied.
Sec.
43-84.   Number of approaches permitted.
Sec.
43-85.   Separation of driveway approaches.
Sec.
43-86.   Location; provision for joint approaches.
Sec.
43-87.   Minimum angle in relation to curb line.
Sec.
43-88.   Minimum requirements for approaches near street intersections.
Sec.
43-89.   Location of approaches near traffic interchanges, etc.
Sec.
43-90.   Location of approaches at pedestrian crossings, etc., prohibited.
Sec.
43-91.   Construction in existing angle parking areas prohibited; exceptions.
Sec.
43-92.   Standing or parking of vehicles, etc., on driveway approaches
prohibited.
Sec.
43-93.   Abandonment; duty of abutting property owner to restore curb.
Sec.
43-94.   Residential driveway approaches.
Sec.
43-95.   Commercial driveway approaches.
ARTICLE IV.
SNOW AND ICE.
Sec.
43-96.   Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks required.
Sec.
43-97.   Covering snow and ice with sand, ashes, etc.
Sec.
43-98.   Where removed snow and ice to be placed.
Sec.
43-98.1.   Causing ice to form on streets and alleys.
Sec.
43-98.2.   Enforcement.
ARTICLE V.
BUILDING NUMBERING.
Sec.
43-99.   Owner or occupant to number buildings.
Sec.
43-100.   Official numbering plan must be followed.
Sec.
43-101.   Specifications for numbers.
Sec.
43-102.   Odd and even numbers.
Sec.
43-103.   Basic units of space for numbering.
Sec.
43-104.   Numbering within building complexes.
Sec.
43-105.   Directional signs within building complexes.
Sec.
43-106.   Diagram of mall areas.
Secs. 43-107 thru 43-110.   Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
LICENSE FOR THE USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
Division 1. Licenses for Other than Bicycle Parking Devices, Valet Parking
Services, and Newsracks.
Sec.
43-111.   Definitions.
Sec.
43-112.   Application; fee.
Sec.
43-113.   Grant by city council.
Sec.
43-114.   Terms and conditions; duration; right of termination reserved by
city.
Sec.
43-115.   Annual fee for use of public right-of- way.
Sec.
43-115.1.   Special fees for the use of public right- of-way.
Sec.
43-115.2.   Licenses for subdivision signs.
Sec.
43-115.3.   Sidewalk Cafe Design Standards Manual.
Sec.
43-116.   Temporary license.
Sec.
43-117.   Penalties.
Sec.
43-118.   Breach by grantee.
Sec.
43-119.   Waiver.
Division 2. Bicycle Parking Devices.
Sec.
43-120.   Definitions.
Sec.
43-121.   License required; application; issuance.
Sec.
43-122.   Denial or revocation of license.
Sec.
43-123.   Expiration of license.
Sec.
43-124.   Standards for installation, operation, and maintenance of a bicycle
parking device.
Sec.
43-125.   Location of a bicycle parking device.
Sec.
43-126.   Restrictions on the use of a bicycle parking device prohibited.
Sec.
43-126.1.   Indemnification.
Sec.
43-126.2.   Restoration of the right-of-way.
Division 3. Valet Parking Services.
Sec.
43-126.3.   Definitions.
Sec.
43-126.4.   Purpose.
Sec.
43-126.5.   License required; application; issuance.
Sec.
43-126.6.   Fees.
Sec.
43-126.7.   Denial or revocation of license; temporary suspension.
Sec.
43-126.8.   Expiration of license.
Sec.
43-126.9.   Standards for operation of a valet parking service.
Sec.
43-126.10.   Valet parking service stands.
Sec.
43-126.11.   Location of a valet parking service.
Sec.
43-126.12.   Insurance.
Sec.
43-126.13.   Indemnification.
Sec.
43-126.14.   Signs.
Division 4. Newsracks.
Sec.
43-126.15.   Purpose and intent.
Sec.
43-126.16.   Definitions.
Sec.
43-126.17.   License required.
Sec.
43-126.18.   License application; issuance of license.
Sec.
43-126.19.   Conditions of a license and annual fees.
Sec.
43-126.20.   Denial or revocation of a license.
Sec.
43-126.21.   Appeal from license denial or revocation.
Sec.
43-126.22.   Expiration and renewal of a license.
Sec.
43-126.23.   Reserved.
Sec.
43-126.24.   Standards for installation, operation, and maintenance of
newsracks.
Sec.
43-126.25.   Locational requirements for newsracks.
Sec.
43-126.26.   Display and distribution of harmful materials through newsracks.
Sec.
43-126.27.   Restoration of the right-of-way.
Sec.
43-126.28.   Removal of newsracks and publications.
Sec.
43-126.29.   Multiple newsrack unit zones.
Sec.
43-126.30.   Split-door newsracks.
Sec.
43-126.31.   Violations; penalty.
ARTICLE VII.
SALE OF MERCHANDISE AND PRODUCE ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
Sec.
43-127.   Unlawful solicitation at the convention center and reunion arena.
Sec.
43-128.   Reserved.
Sec.
43-129.   Causing crowd to congregate on sidewalk.
Secs. 43-130 thru 43-132.   Reserved.
Sec.
43-133.   Use of sidewalk for display of merchandise.
Sec.
43-134.   Use of sidewalk to forward or receive merchandise.
ARTICLE VIII.
CERTAIN USES OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
Sec.
43-135.   Definitions.
Sec.
43-136.   Director’s authority; enforcement; offenses.
Sec.
43-137.   Registration; other requirements.
Sec.
43-138.   Plans of record.
Sec.
43-139.   Permit required; exceptions; conditions; denial and revocation.
Sec. 43-139.1.   Network nodes and related infrastructure.
Sec.
43-140.   Insurance and indemnity requirements; exceptions.
Sec.
43-140.1.   Performance bond; letter of credit; cash deposit.
Sec.
43-140.2.   Waiver of bonding requirements.
Sec.
43-141.   Miscellaneous requirements for street excavation and installations,
trench safety, and above ground utility structures.
Sec.
43-142.   Restoration requirements.
Sec.
43-143.   Clearance for street paving and storm drainage projects.
Sec.
43-144.   Conformance with public improvements.
Sec.
43-145.   Improperly constructed facilities.
Sec.
43-146.   Emergency repairs.
Sec.
43-147.   Effect of article on persons engaged in construction.
Sec.
43-148.   Marking existing underground utilities.
ARTICLE IX.
DRIVEWAYS GENERALLY.
Sec.
43-149.   Director defined.
Sec.
43-150.   Driveways not to be within three feet of poles, etc.
Sec.
43-151.   Removal of poles, etc., to permit construction of driveways -
Required.
Sec.
43-152.   Same - Plans to be approved by director.
Sec.
43-153.   Same - Allocation of costs for relocation.
Sec.
43-154.   Permit for driveway to be issued after poles, etc., removed.
Sec.
43-155.   Appeals.
Sec.
43-156.   Fee where poles, etc., to be relocated.
ARTICLE X.
SHARED DOCKLESS VEHICLE OPERATING PERMIT.
Sec.
43-157.   Definitions.
Sec.
43-158.   General authority and duty of director.
Sec.
43-159.   Establishment of rules and regulations.
Sec.
43-160.   Operating authority permit.
Sec.
43-161.   Application for operating authority permit.
Sec.
43-162.   Changes to information in operating authority application.
Sec.
43-163.   Expiration of operating authority permit.
Sec.
43-164.   Refusal to issue or renew operating authority permit.
Sec.
43-165.   Suspension or revocation of operating authority permit.
Sec.
43-166.   Appeals.
Sec.
43-167.   Nontransferability.
Sec.
43-168.   Reserved.
Sec.
43-169.   Reserved.
Sec.
43-170.   Insurance requirements.
Sec.
43-171.   Reserved.
Sec.
43-172.   Vehicle fee and ride fee.
Sec.
43-173.   Performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit.
Sec.
43-174.   Enforcement.
Sec.
43-175.   Criminal offenses.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 43-1.   RESERVED.
(Repealed by Ord. 22413)
SEC. 43-2.   DRIVING HORSES, CATTLE, ETC., ON CERTAIN STREETS FORBIDDEN.
   It shall not be lawful for any person to drive or have any drove of horses,
cattle, sheep or hogs in any park or street in the city. (Code 1941, Art. 139-
2)
SEC. 43-3.   MOVING HORSES AND VEHICLES AT REQUEST OF STREET CLEANER.
   No person in charge of horses and vehicles on the streets or alleys of the
city shall fail or refuse to move the same when requested so to do by any
street cleaner when engaged in cleaning the streets or alleys. (Code 1941, Art.
139-3)
SEC. 43-4.   FRUIT STANDS, STALLS, ETC., ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall have or maintain any fruit stand, huckster’s stand or other
stall on any sidewalk in the city. (Code 1941, Art. 139-4)
SEC. 43-5.   ATTRACTING CROWDS ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall, by loud talking, unusual acts or exhibitions, attract a
crowd on any sidewalk or refuse to desist when requested to do so by any police
or other officer. (Code 1941, Art. 139-5)
SEC. 43-6.   UNSAFE SCAFFOLDS.
   No person shall erect, use or cause or suffer to be erected or used within
the city any insecure or unsafe scaffold, whereby the safety of persons working
thereon or passing thereunder may be in any manner endangered. (Code 1941, Art.
139-6)
SEC. 43-7.   OPEN CELLAR OR TRAP DOORS; PERMITTING SIDEWALK TO REMAIN IN
DISREPAIR.
   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)    keeps, leaves open, or allows to be left open any cellar door,
trap door, sidewalk lift, or grating of any vault in or upon any sidewalk,
street, or passageway;
      (2)    makes, keeps, or maintains any uncovered opening in any sidewalk
or footway; or
      (3)    allows any sidewalk or footway, which it is the person’s duty to
maintain or repair, to become broken or continue so broken, uneven, or out of
repair. (Code 1941, Art. 139-7; Ord. Nos. 19963; 21186)
SEC. 43-8.   EACH DAY OBSTRUCTION REMAINS DEEMED SEPARATE OFFENSE.
   Every day that any partial or entire obstruction shall remain upon any
sidewalk in the city shall be considered a violation of the regulations
contained in this article and shall constitute a separate offense and be
punished as such. (Code 1941, Art. 139-9)
SEC. 43-9.   GLASS TO BE REMOVED FROM HIGHWAY AFTER A WRECK.
   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove
any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such
vehicle. (Code 1941, Art. 86-61)
SECS. 43-10 THRU 43-11.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 13764)
SEC. 43-12.   DEPOSITING TRASH ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall sweep out or deposit on any of the sidewalks or streets of
the city any loose paper, filth or trash of any kind.
   All persons using cans or barrels as trash containers shall have them
emptied and all trash deposited therein removed at least once in every 24
hours. (Code 1941, Arts. 140-1, 140-2)
SEC. 43-13.   TRASH, ETC., NOT TO ACCUMULATE OR REMAIN ON SIDEWALKS.
   No property owner, occupant or agent of any property that abuts or adjoins
any paved street in the city shall allow or permit any animal or vegetable
substance whatever, any tin, glass or pieces of iron or any trash, mud, slop,
refuse matter or filth of any kind or description whatever to accumulate or
remain on any part of the sidewalk abutting or adjacent to the premises owned
or occupied by such person on such paved street in the city. (Code 1941, Art.
140-4)
SEC. 43-14.   LEAVING RUBBISH IN STREET AFTER COMPLETION OF BUILDING.
No person who has occupied a portion of a street for building purposes shall
leave any rubbish in the street after the completion of such building and the
expiration of the time of permit. Any person violating this article is guilty
of an offense for each day rubbish is so left. (Code 1941, Art. 140-6; Ord.
19963)
SEC. 43-15.   ALLOWING WEEDS, GRASS, ETC., TO OBSTRUCT GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS.
   No owner, agent or occupant of any lot in the city shall allow weeds or
grass to grow or remain upon the sidewalks so as to obstruct the sidewalks or
gutters fronting or abutting on any lot of which they may be the owner, agent
or occupant. A person who fails to remove or to have removed such weeds or
grass on the sidewalk or gutters in front of, adjoining or abutting on his lot,
after 10 days notice to remove them, is guilty of an offense. Each day after
notification is a separate offense. (Code 1941, Art. 140-8; Ord. 19963)
SEC. 43-16.   THROWING FRUIT PEELINGS ONSIDEWALKS.
   No person shall throw banana peelings or fruit peelings of any kind upon any
public sidewalk in the city. (Code 1941, Art. 140-9)
SEC. 43-17.   PLAYING BALL, THROWING STONES, ETC., IN STREETS.
   No person shall play at a game of ball, practice at passing a ball, throw
stones, use a slingshot or sling, or discharge gravel, marbles, shot or any
other object or anything, out of a gravel shooter, blow gun or other device of
like kind or character along, across or upon any highway, street or alley in
the city. (Code 1941, Art. 140-10; Ord. 12700)
SEC. 43-18.   SKATING ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall skate on roller skates or otherwise along, upon or across
any street in the city except when crossing a street at an authorized
pedestrian crossing. Whenever a person is skating on a sidewalk either on
roller skates or skate board, the person shall yield the right of way to any
pedestrian using such sidewalk. (Code 1941, Art. 140-11; Ord. Nos. 11003;
16691)
SEC. 43-19.   MIXING CONCRETE ON PAVED STREETS.
   No person shall mix concrete on any paved street in the city except on a
platform or in a box or other receptacle so constructed as to prevent the
concrete from falling on the pavement of such street. (Code 1941, Art. 140-12)
SEC. 43-20.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 14762)
SEC. 43-21.   PERMITS REQUIRED FOR ALTERATIONS, OBSTRUCTIONS, ETC., OF SEWERS,
GUTTERS, ETC.
   No person, under any pretext whatever, shall interfere with, obstruct,
injure or alter in any manner any sewer, culvert, gutter or drain in the city
without a written permit from the city engineer. Each day such interference,
obstruction, alteration or injury shall be permitted to remain after a
notification by the city engineer to remove the same shall constitute a
separate offense. (Code 1941, Art. 140-14)
SEC. 43-22.   MARKING SIDEWALKS WITH STENCILS, ETC.
   No person shall deface by placing upon a sidewalk in the city any marks or
signs by stencils or otherwise of any nature or character whatsoever. (Code
1941, Art. 140-15)
SEC. 43-23.   INJURING OR DEFACING STREET SIGNS AND SIGNPOSTS.
   No person shall abuse, deface or injure any street signs maintained on the
streets by the city by throwing any rocks, stones or other hard substances
against same, by scratching or defacing same in any manner, or otherwise
injuring same in any manner, or injure or deface the posts upon which such
signs are erected by throwing any rocks, stones or other hard substances
against same or by scratching, cutting or defacing same in any manner. (Code
1941, Art. 140-16)
SEC. 43-24.   HEAVY ARTICLES NOT TO BE CARRIED ALONG SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall move or carry any safe or other heavy article over, across,
along or upon any sidewalk in the city or over, along, across or upon any
timbers or other substance resting either wholly or partially upon any
sidewalk. (Code 1941, Art. 140-23)
SEC. 43-25.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 12408)
ARTICLE II.
AWNINGS.
SEC. 43-26.   HEIGHT ABOVE SIDEWALK.
   No person shall erect or construct any awnings on, over or across any
sidewalk in the city lower, at any point, than eight feet from the surface of
the sidewalk. (Code 1941, Art. 139-8; Ord. 20743)
SEC. 43-27.   FASTENING TO BUILDINGS; SUPPORTS.
   All awnings shall be securely fastened to the side of the building and shall
be firmly supported by iron brackets. (Code 1941, Art. 139-8)
SEC. 43-28   COVERINGS TO BE FIREPROOF; EXCEPTIONS.
   All awnings, except cloth awnings, within the fire limits, shall be covered
with tin, sheet iron, zinc or some fireproof material. (Code 1941, Art. 139-8)
SEC. 43-29.   AWNING POSTS.
   No person shall erect any awning post on any sidewalk in the city. All
awning posts now standing on any sidewalk shall be removed as soon as the
awnings they support are removed for repairs or other purposes. (Code 1941,
Art. 139-8)
SEC. 43-30.   EXTENDING OVER PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No awning shall extend over public property further than to the outer edge
of the sidewalk. (Code 1941, Art. 139-8)
ARTICLE III.
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
Division 1. Generally.
Subdivision I. In General.
SEC. 43-31.   PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.
   The purpose and intent of this article is to provide minimum standards,
provisions and requirements for safe and convenient access to abutting private
property along streets, roads and highways and to provide for suitable
materials and methods of construction of sidewalks, driveways, curbs, gutters
and appurtenances on public property which are constructed, surfaced, paved,
changed, altered, repaired, replaced, removed or eliminated or changed in use.
The intent herein is to assure that access is provided to abutting private
property with a minimum of interference with the free and safe movement of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, to prevent traffic congestion along the
streets and to prevent or alleviate traffic congestion arising from vehicular
entry to or exit from abutting private property. This article shall be deemed
to be remedial and is enacted for the beneficial interests of the public and
for the public safety and general welfare. The right of the public to the free
and unhampered passage on the streets and sidewalks shall be held paramount to
other interest. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-32.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   ANGLE PARKING means parking where the longitudinal axis of a
vehicle forms an angle with the alignment of the roadway.
      (2)   ARTERIAL means a street designated as either a principal or minor
arterial in the city’s thoroughfare plan.
      (3)   A.S.T.M. (AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING MATERIALS) means any
publication, pamphlet, booklet, book, or document referred to by number,
letter, or other designation in this article in connection with this
definition, as amended. Such publication is a part of this article and
incorporated into this article by reference.
      (4)   CONTRACTOR means any person engaged in the business of installing
or altering walks, drives, curbs, gutters, or pavements or appurtenances on
public property. This term also includes those who represent themselves to be
engaged in the business whether actually doing the work or not and includes any
person who subcontracts to do such work.
      (5)   CURB means a vertical or sloping member along the edge of a
pavement forming part of a gutter, strengthening or protecting the pavement
edge, and clearly defining the pavement edge to vehicle operators. The surface
at the curb facing the general direction of the pavement is called the “face.”
      (6)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article, or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (7)   DRIVEWAY APPROACH means an area, construction, or facility between
the roadway of a public street and private property intended to provide access
for vehicles from the roadway of a public street to private property.
      (8)   GUTTER means the artificially surfaced and generally shallow
waterway provided usually at the side of the street adjacent to, and part of,
the curb of the curb for the drainage of surface water.
      (9)   INDENTED PARKING means angle parking or parallel parking adjacent
to, but outside of, the travel lane of a public roadway where a portion of the
public roadway is required for maneuvering into or out of the parking space.
      (10)   INTERSECTION means the area embraced within the prolongation of
connection of the edges of the roadway of two or more streets that join at an
angle whether or not one such street crosses the other. Where a street includes
two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then each crossing of each roadway of such
divided street by an intersecting street is regarded as a separate
intersection. If the intersecting street also includes two or more roadways 30
feet or more apart, then each crossing of each roadway of such street is
regarded as a separate intersection.
      (11)   OFF-STREET PARKING means a type of parking wherein the maneuvering
of the vehicle while parking and unparking, as well as the actual parking
itself, is done entirely on private property.
      (12)   ROADWAY means that portion of a highway, street, or road that is
improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a street
includes two or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” refers to each
roadway separately and not to all roadways collectively.
      (13)   SIDEWALK OR WALK means that portion of a street between the curb
lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines that is
for the use of pedestrians.
      (14)   SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT means any of the single family districts
described in Section
51A-4.112 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (15)   STREET means a public way for purposes of vehicular travel,
including the entire area within the right of way. This term in urban areas
means a highway or street and in rural areas means a highway or road.
      (16)   STREET SEGMENT means the portion of a street between two
intersections.
      (17)   TRAFFIC ISLAND means a barrier within a roadway to exclude
vehicles, designed for the purpose of separating or directing streams of
vehicular traffic. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 21186; 22026; 27227)
SEC. 43-33.   LIABILITY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS FOR INJURIES CAUSED BY
DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS.
   The abutting property owner or person enjoying the use of any property
abutting on a sidewalk that has become defective and has resulted in causing
damage or injury as a result of such defective condition shall be primarily
liable in damages for any loss or damage sustained as a result of such
defective condition. The city shall not be held as assuming any such liability
by reason of inspection or reinspection authorized herein or by reason of the
approval or disapproval of any access, facilities, surfacing or appurtenance
not made in accordance with standards or specifications of this article. (Ord.
Nos. 8590; 15123)
SEC. 43-34.   LIABILITY OF PERSONS MAKING SPECIAL USE OF SIDEWALKS.
    It shall be the duty of any property owner, landlord, tenant, lessee,
sublessee, person, firm or corporation making special use of any sidewalk for
the purpose of ingress or egress, for loading elevators, downspout drains or
any other special use of whatsoever kind or character, whether recited herein
or not, to keep such sidewalk, parkway and driveway abutting such property in a
good and safe condition and free from any defects or hazards of whatsoever kind
and character. Such special user shall be liable in damages for any loss or
damage sustained as a result of any defective condition of the sidewalk,
driveway, loading elevator, downspout drain or any other special use or
facility of whatsoever kind or character. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 15123)
SEC. 43-35.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE; POLICE POWER OF
DIRECTOR.
   The director shall administer and enforce this article and, for this
purpose, shall have police power. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 22026)
SEC. 43-36.   DIRECTOR NOT PERSONALLY LIABLE FOR GOOD FAITH ACTIONS.
   When action is taken by the director to enforce this article, such action is
in the name of and on behalf of the city, and the director so acting for the
city is not personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any action committed in good faith in the discharge of
official duties. Any suit brought against the director by reason thereof will
be defended by the city attorney throughout the proceedings. (Ord. Nos. 8590;
22026)
SEC. 43-37.   AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR GENERALLY.
   (a)   The director has authority to take the legal steps necessary to secure
compliance with this article.
   (b)   The director has the right to enter any premises in the discharge of
official duties or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection, or
test or otherwise to ensure compliance with this article.
   (c)   The director has the power to inspect or reinspect surfacing and the
laying of surfacing materials and issue notices or affix them to premises or to
reject surfacing materials not meeting the standards provided in this article,
and shall have such other powers provided in this article. The director has the
power to control and regulate improvements and facilities placed upon public
property and the power to cause to be removed all obstructions and
encroachments not in conformance with a valid permit and the requirements of
this article. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 22026)
SEC. 43-38.   EFFECT OF ARTICLE ON RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   This article shall not be construed to relieve from or to lessen the
responsibility or liability for damages of any person owning, controlling or
installing any surfaces to persons or property caused by any defect therein.
(Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-39.   CONSTRUCTION PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove, replace,
pave, repave, surface or resurface any walk, drive, curb, gutter, paved area or
appurtenance on public property in the city without first obtaining from the
building inspector a permit so to do. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-40.   SAME - APPLICATION - INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED BY APPLICANTS.
   To obtain a permit as required by the preceding section, a bonded contractor
or his authorized representative shall file with the building inspector an
application in writing therefor on a form to be furnished for that purpose.
Such bonded contractor shall be registered with the building inspector and
shall furnish a list of the authorized representatives who are to secure
permits for him. Each application for a permit shall describe the abutting
property adjacent to which the proposed work on public property is to be done,
either by lot, block or tract and house number, location on the street or
similar description which will readily identify and definitely locate the site
of the proposed work. Each applicant shall give such other pertinent
information as shall be required by the building inspector. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-41.   SAME - SAME - LOT PLAN TO BE FURNISHED WHEN REQUESTED.
   When required by the building inspector, an applicant for a permit shall
file a lot or plot plan in triplicate showing the following:
   (1)   The exact location of the proposed building or structure.
   (2)   Every existing building or structure on abutting property.
   (3)   Every existing facility on public property adjacent thereto to the
center line of the street right of way.
   (4)   All proposed walks, drives, curbs, gutters, pavements, public utility
poles, fire hydrants, gas meters, water meters, storm sewer inlets, manholes or
any other appurtenances.
   Such plan shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper and shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the nature, character and extent of the work
proposed, and shall show in detail that the work will conform to this article
and to all related rules and regulations. Plans submitted at the time an
application is made as provided in the Building Code, for construction on
abutting property, may be used to meet this requirement. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-42.   SAME - EXPIRATION; NEW PERMITREQUIRED BEFORE RECOMMENCING WORK.
   Each permit shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized
therein is not commenced within six months of the date of permit or if the work
authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned after the expiration of the
initial six month period. Before the work may be recommenced a new permit shall
be obtained. No permit issued in violation of this article shall operate as
granting any vested right, and such permit shall be deemed to be null and void
and confer no right whatsoever under it. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-43.   SURETY BOND - REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk, curb, gutter
or driveway approach in the city without executing and delivering to the city a
bond in the sum of $2,000, payable to the city of Dallas, Dallas County, Texas,
with a good and sufficient corporate surety thereon, authorized to do business
in the state, (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-44.   SURETY BOND - CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE.
   (a)   The surety bond required by Section
43-43 must include the following conditions:
      (1)   that all work is done in a good and workmanlike manner and in
faithful and strict compliance with the specifications and with the terms of
this article and such ordinances, resolutions, or regulations that may be
passed by the governing body relating to the construction, reconstruction, or
repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or driveway approaches;
      (2)   that the city must be fully indemnified and be held whole and
harmless from any and all costs, expense, or damage, whether real or asserted,
on account of any injury done to any person or property in the prosecution of
such work, or that may arise out of or be occasioned by the performance of such
work;
      (3)   that the person performing the work shall, without additional cost
to the person for whom the work was done, maintain all construction for a
period of five years from the date of the construction, reconstruction, or
repair, to the satisfaction of the director, and reconstruct or repair the
facility to the satisfaction of the director at any time within five years
after the construction, reconstruction, or repair of such facility, and after
10 days’ notice from the director to reconstruct or repair the same.
   (b)   The opinion of the director as to the necessity of such reconstruction
or repair is binding on all parties, and the bond must for such purpose be in
force for five years after the construction, reconstruction, or repair of the
facility. One recovery may not exhaust the bond, but the bond must be a
continuing obligation against the sureties on it until the entire amount
provided for is exhausted.
   (c)   If the bond is decreased because of any recovery that may be obtained,
arising out of the violation of any condition of the bond, the governing body
shall require, upon receiving notice of that fact, an additional bond to be
given by any person in accordance with this article in an amount sufficient,
when added to the unexhausted amount of the original bond, to be at all times
equal to the sum of $2,000.
   (d)   The city may for itself, or for the use and benefit of any person
injured or damaged by reason of any defective construction, reconstruction, or
repair of any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or driveway approach by any person, firm,
or corporation, maintain suit on the bond in any court having jurisdiction, or
suit may be maintained by any person injured or damaged by reason of the
failure of any person, firm, or corporation who constructs, reconstructs, or
repairs any sidewalk, curb, gutters or driveway approach in the city to observe
the conditions of the bond. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 22026)
SEC. 43-45.   SAME - EFFECT OF ARTICLE ON PERSONS NOW ENGAGED IN CONSTRUCTION,
ETC.
   Nothing in this article shall affect the bond of any person, firm or
corporation now engaged in constructing, reconstructing or repairing such
facilities which have already been executed in accordance with the terms of
existing city laws, nor shall this be construed to in any manner diminish the
liability of any surety or principal on such bond. No person having a bond to
construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace sidewalks, curbs,
gutters or driveways on public property within the city shall be permitted to
take out a permit for the reconstruction, alteration or repair of any such
facility on any public property within the city and allow any person other than
the bona fide holder of such bond to do any of the work. No permit for the
construction, alteration or repair of any sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway on
any public property within the city shall be granted unless the five year
maintenance bond provided for herein shall be in full force and effect at the
time of request for such permit and the doing of the work. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-46.   STANDARDS FOR RAW MATERIALS USED IN CONSTRUCTION.
   Materials used in sidewalks, curbs, drives, gutters, and pavements shall be
in accordance with the following standards:
   CEMENT. Portland cement shall conform to the Standard Specifications for
Portland Cement (Serial Designation C-150-56) of the A.S.T.M. High-Early-
Strength Portland Cement shall conform to the standard specifications for High-
Early-Strength Portland Cement (Serial Designation C-150-56) of the A.S.T.M.
    FINE AGGREGATE. Fine aggregate shall consist of a natural sand or a
combination of natural sand and not more than 50 percent of stone screenings.
Sand shall be uniformly graded, composed of clean, hard, durable particles of
natural materials free from adherent coatings. It shall contain no lumps, soft
or flaky particles, clay, loam, foreign, organic, or other deleterious matter.
Stone screenings shall consist of the clean, dustless product resulting from
the crushing of stone or gravel, meeting all the requirements for coarse
aggregate except for grading. Fine aggregate containing more than five per cent
by weight of deleterious substances shall not be used. Fine aggregate shall be
well graded in size from coarse to fine, and shall conform to the city of
Dallas Addendum to the Public Works Construction Standards – North Central
Texas as Published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, current
edition.
   All tests for fine aggregate shall be made in accordance with the current
applicable methods of tests of the A.S.T.M.
   COARSE AGGREGATE. Coarse aggregate shall consist of the uniformly graded,
clean, hard, durable, uncoated particles of natural gravel or crushed stone or
gravel, free from adhering coatings. Coarse aggregate shall not contain more
than five per cent by weight of deleterious substances. Coarse aggregate shall
be well graded in size from coarse to fine, and shall conform to the city of
Dallas Addendum to the Public Works Construction Standards – North Central
Texas as Published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, current
edition.
   All tests for coarse aggregate shall be made in accordance with the current
applicable methods of tests of the A.S.T.M.
   PIT-RUN AGGREGATE. Pit-run aggregate will be permitted provided that portion
passing the No. 4 sieve shall conform to these specifications for fine
aggregate, and that portion retained on the No. 4 sieve shall conform to these
specifications for coarse aggregate.
   WATER. Water used in mixing and curing concrete and mortar shall be clean
and free from oil, acid, alkali, foreign organic matter, or other deleterious
substances. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 31313)
SEC. 43-47.   SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONCRETE REINFORCING STEEL.
   Material for reinforcement shall conform to requirements of the Standard
Specifications for Billet Steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement (A.S.T.M.
Designation A-15-57T) for structural, intermediate or hard grade; or for Rail
Steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement (A.S.T.M. Designation A-16-57-T) or for
Axle Steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement (A.S.T.M. Designation A-160-57T) or
for Cold-Drawn Steel Wire for Concrete Reinforcement (A.S.T.M. Designation A-
82-34) or for Welded Steel Wire Fabric for Concrete Reinforcement (A.S.T.M.
Designation A-185-56T). All reinforcement shall be free from rust, scale, oil,
paint and other substances which prevent bonding to the concrete. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-48.   SPECIFICATIONS AND PLACEMENT OF CONCRETE EXPANSION JOINT FILLER.
   Expansion joint filler shall be of the pre-moulded type, one-half inch in
thickness; the width shall conform to the section of concrete in which
incorporated. Expansion joint filler shall be placed where new work abuts old
concrete work. Upon completion of the work, expansion joint filler shall be cut
off level with the top of the finished concrete. Expansion joint filler shall
conform to the Standard Specifications for Bituminous Types (A.S.T.M.
Designation D-994-53) or Non-extruding and Resilient Types (A.S.T.M.
Designation D-544-56T). (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-49.   SUBGRADE DETERMINATION.
   Foundations or subgrades for all work shall be set at the grades determined
by the director. Inspection of such foundation or subgrade must be made and
approved by the director before concrete is placed on it. (Ord. Nos. 8590;
22026)
SEC. 43-50.   FORM, SPECIFICATIONS, AND PLACEMENT.
   Forms must be straight, smooth, free from warps, and aligned with the stakes
set by the director and must be of sufficient strength to retain this
alignment. Depth must be not less than the total thickness of the section for
which used. Forms must be securely staked, anchored, braced, and set to the
established line and grade, the upper edge conforming to the grade of the
finished work. Forms must be cleaned of all mortar and dirt. Surface for forms
next to concrete may be required to be oiled. Forms must be of either wood or
metal. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 22026)
SEC. 43-51.   CONCRETE - INGREDIENTS AND CONSISTENCY REQUIRED.
   Concrete shall consist of a mixture of Portland cement, fine and coarse
aggregate and water in such proportions that will secure a dense, plastic,
workable concrete of the strength specified at 28 days. The quantity of water
specified per sack of Portland cement shall include the moisture on the surface
of the aggregate, but shall not include the amount of water absorbed by the
aggregates in 30 minutes. Concrete which has partially set shall not be
retempered or remixed by adding additional ingredients. Concrete shall not be
mixed during freezing weather, and shall not be placed when the temperature is
40°F. or less. No frozen ingredients or conglomerates shall be used in
concrete. Test for slump of concrete shall be made in accordance with the
Method of Test for Consistency of Portland Cement Concrete (Serial Designation
C-143-52) of the A.S.T.M. All tests for ingredients and concrete shall be made
in accordance with the current applicable methods of tests of the A.S.T.M.
(Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-52.   SAME - PLACEMENT.
   Concrete shall be placed in as near its final position as possible, and in
such manner as to prevent separation or segregation of the ingredients.
Concrete shall be placed in such quantities that after being thoroughly
compacted it will be the required thickness, the upper surface true, uniform
and parallel to the finished surface. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-53.   SAME - PROTECTING AGAINST EXTREME TEMPERATURES, ETC.
   Concrete shall be protected against freezing or excessive heat. Concrete
shall be kept continuously moist for four days. Concrete shall be protected
from traffic until it has developed 80 percent of the required strength. (Ord.
8590)
SEC. 43-54.   EXAMINATION AND APPROVAL OF MATERIALS PRIOR TO USE.
   The director may inspect any and all materials before pouring the concrete.
The contractor shall furnish the required samples when requested for the making
of tests and other required examinations prior to the use of the materials.
(Ord. Nos. 8590; 22026)
SEC. 43-55.   ALL WORK TO COMPLY WITH ESTABLISHED LINES AND GRADES.
   The work authorized by construction permits issued pursuant to this article
must be aligned with the stakes and set to the grade as determined by the
director. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 22026)
SEC. 43-56.   PROTECTION OF GRADE AND LINE STAKES.
   Stakes set by the director must be protected by the contractor. Grade and
line stakes must be set by the director upon request. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 22026)
SEC. 43-57.   LIGHTS AND SAFEGUARDS.
   The contractor shall provide necessary red lanterns and flares and
safeguards so placed that pedestrians will not be injured and vehicular traffic
shall not be unnecessarily impeded and be protected from injury. Provisions
shall be made for the passage of water in the street gutter. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-58.   REMOVAL OF DEBRIS, ETC., UPON COMPLETION OF WORK.
   Immediately upon completion of the work the contractor shall remove from the
area all unused material, dirt, debris and loose concrete. He shall see that
the entire area is broom clean and usable. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-59.   CONSTRUCTION OF RETAINING WALLS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No buttresses, steps, projections, retaining walls or fences shall be
constructed on any public property unless such construction is approved by the
city council. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-60.   TRAFFIC BARRIERS FOR SERVICE STATIONS AND PARKING LOTS.
   Premises used as motor vehicle service stations or parking lots shall have a
six inch raised curb or other approved traffic barrier along the entire street
frontage except at the driveway approaches and access walks. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-61.   SAME - PLACEMENT OF CURBS.
   The curb for traffic barriers required by the preceding section shall be
placed so that automobile bumpers shall not extend over the sidewalk or public
property. (Ord. 8590)
SEC 43-62.   INDENTED PARKING.
   (a)   No indented parking is allowed in the city except as approved in
accordance with this section.
   (b)   The director may approve an application for indented parking if:
      (1)   the speed limit for the portion of the public roadway required for
maneuvering into or out of the proposed indented parking space or spaces is 35
miles per hour or less;
      (2)   the director determines that the proposed indented parking would
not constitute a traffic hazard; and
      (3)   the application is not required to be denied on the basis of
property owner objections under Subsection (e).
   (c)   An application for indented parking must be submitted to the director,
along with a nonrefundable application fee of $50, and include:
      (1)   a schematic drawing that:
         (A)   shows the proposed parking lay- out, the roadway pavement,
adjacent uses, nearby right-of-way, curbs, sidewalks, utility poles, street
lighting poles, and other above-ground objects;
         (B)   shows that all geometric, operational, and safety issues have
been addressed and mitigated;
         (C)   is prepared by a professional engineer who is registered in
Texas and certified as a professional traffic operations engineer by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers; and
         (D)   complies with all available standards and best practices for
angle parking or parallel parking; and
      (2)   any other information the director deems necessary.
   (d)   If, after reviewing the application, the director determines that the
proposed indented parking meets the requirements of Subsections (b)(1) and (b)
(2), but is located within 200 feet of a single family district, then the
director shall send written notice of the indented parking proposal to all
property owners located within 200 feet of the proposed indented parking. The
notice must be given by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage
paid in the United States mail to the property owners as evidenced by the last
approved city tax roll.
   (e)   After receiving a notice under Subsection (d), a property owner has 14
days from the date the notice is mailed to file an objection to the indented
parking proposal with the director. If any property owner notified under
Subsection (d) timely files an objection with the director, then the director
shall deny the application for indented parking.
   (f)   If the only basis for director’s denial is that an objection was
timely filed under Subsection (e), then the applicant may appeal the denial to
the city plan commission. A written request for an appeal must be signed by the
applicant or its legal representative and filed with the director within 15
days after the date the director’s decision is issued. The appeal request must
be accompanied by an appeal filing fee of $800.
   (g)   The city plan commission shall hold a public hearing to allow
interested parties to express their views regarding the appeal. The director
shall give notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city at least 10 days before the hearing. In addition, the director
shall send written notice of the hearing to all property owners located within
200 feet of the proposed indented parking. The notice must be given not less
than 10 days before the date set for the hearing by depositing the notice
properly addressed and postage paid in the United States mail to the property
owners as evidenced by the last approved city tax roll.
   (h)   At the public hearing, the city plan commission shall determine
whether the requested parking would detrimentally affect neighboring property.
The city plan commission may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify
the decision of the director based upon testimony presented at the public
hearing, technical information provided by city staff, and the standards
contained in this section. The decision of the commission is final.
   (i)   For purposes of this section, measurements must be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
point of any proposed indented parking space to the nearest point of the
boundary of a single-family district or other property required to receive
notice under Subsection (d) or (g).
   (j)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city traffic
engineer to approve parking under Chapter 28 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 8590;
11283; 27227)
SEC. 43-63.   REPAIR OF DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS OR DRIVEWAYS BY ABUTTING PROPERTY
OWNERS.
   (a)   When a sidewalk, driveway, or any appurtenance to a sidewalk or
driveway becomes defective, unsafe, or hazardous, the abutting property owner
shall reconstruct or repair the sidewalk, driveway, or appurtenance, and the
expense of such work must be borne by the abutting property owner.
   (b)   When a sidewalk, driveway, or appurtenance to a sidewalk or driveway
is found to be defective, unsafe or hazardous, the director of transportation
and public works or the director of code compliance shall notify the owner of
the abutting property to reconstruct or repair the sidewalk, driveway, or
appurtenance.
   (c)   Any owner who fails to reconstruct or repair a defective, unsafe, or
hazardous condition within 30 days after the date of the written notice from
the director of transportation and public works or the director of code
compliance to do so, or any owner who fails to begin such reconstruction or
repair within 15 days after the date of such notice, is guilty of an offense.
(Ord. Nos. 8590; 13898; 19963; 22026; 23694; 30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 43-64.   MIXING CONCRETE OR MORTAR ON EXISTING PAVEMENT; UNUSED MIXTURE TO
BE IMMEDIATELY REMOVED.
   No person shall mix concrete or mortar or any mixture or substance
containing cement on any existing pavement on public property nor leave or
cause to be left any excess concrete or mortar or any mixture or substance
containing cement on any existing pavement on public property, nor allow same
to leak or fall from any container or receptacle onto pavement on public
property. If any concrete, mortar or any mixture or substance containing cement
is accidentally dropped or placed upon any pavement on public property within
the city, the person responsible shall immediately remove same before such
substance hardens or sets on the pavement. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-65.   SIDEWALK DRAINAGE OPENINGS TO HAVE METAL COVERS.
   Wherever water from roofs of adjacent buildings is drained or conducted
under sidewalks from downspout drains to the street gutters through aqueducts
or concrete troughs, these openings in the sidewalk shall be fitted with strong
metal covers, which shall be securely held in place with screws or other
fasteners which will not rust or corrode. Such cover shall be set flush with
the surface of the sidewalk and securely bolted, fastened or so constructed
that it cannot slip, shift or become out of alignment with the surface of the
sidewalk. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-66.   ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION METHODS.
   (a)   The provisions of this article do not prevent the use of types of
construction or materials or methods of construction offered as an alternate
for the types of construction or materials or methods of construction
specifically required by this article, but such alternate types of construction
or materials or methods of construction to be given consideration must be
offered for approval as being sufficient, safe, and equal to the standards set
out in this article. When specifically authorized by the building official,
upon review of the access facilities and the types of construction or materials
or methods of construction by the director, materials and construction that
have been so approved must be used and installed in accordance with the terms
of the approval. Such approvals and the conditions upon which they are issued
must be specific, must be reasonable when considered in the light of
convenience and safety to the general public, must not create an injustice, and
must be made a matter of public record.
   (b)   In unusual circumstances, the terms and provisions of this chapter may
be varied by resolution of the city council. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 22026)
Subdivision II. Sidewalks.
SEC. 43-67.   MINIMUM DIMENSIONS; FINISHING.
   Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of four feet and shall be four inches
thick unless wider dimensions are required in the Street Design Manual of the
city of Dallas. The surface may have a monolithic finish by floating with a
wooden float until a slight excess of sand appears on the surfaces or may be
brushed after troweling in lieu of floating. The edges of the sidewalk,
markings and expansion joints shall be tooled to a smooth finish, not less than
two inches in width. Exposed edges of the sidewalk shall be rounded with an
edger to a radius of one-half inch. The surface of the sidewalk shall not be
left with a slick or glossy finish. (Ord. 8590; 31313)
SEC. 43-68.   CONCRETE SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   The minimum compressive strength of the concrete and requirements for
the quantity of mixing water and the concrete slump must conform to the city of
Dallas Addendum to the Public Works Construction Standards – North Central
Texas as Published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, current
edition.
   (b)   The director may inspect the foundation and forms before concrete is
poured.
   (c)   Concrete must be thoroughly compacted so that the minimum thickness is
four inches. Concrete must be free from honey-combing, rock pockets and
segregation of ingredients. The addition of neat cement to concrete in order to
absorb excess water or to accelerate hardening is prohibited. (Ord. Nos. 8590;
22026; 31313)
SEC. 43-69.   FORM, PLACEMENT AND SLOPE.
   Forms shall be set to provide for drainage from the property line to the
curb line; the slope in general will be one-fourth inch per foot of width of
sidewalk, and it shall not exceed one-fourth inch per foot of width of
sidewalk. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-70.   JOINTS.
   One-half inch expansion joints shall be spaced 25 to 30 foot intervals or as
otherwise specified and shall be placed where new work abuts old work, or where
new work is constructed adjacent to either concrete work, walls, foundations,
etc. The expansion joints shall be filled with premoulded bituminous expansion
joint filler or other approved type and shall extend the entire depth and width
of the concrete section. Sidewalk markings shall be grooved three-eights inch
deep on four to five foot centers. (Ord. 8590)
Division 2. Material Specifications and Construction Methods.
Subdivision I. Curbs and Gutters.
SEC. 43-71.   DESCRIPTION; COMPOSITION OF CONCRETE AND MORTAR USED IN
CONSTRUCTION.
   Curb, curb and gutter and separate gutter shall consist of a concrete core
and a mortar surface.
   The minimum compressive strength of the concrete and requirements for the
quantity of mixing water and the concrete slump must conform to the city of
Dallas Addendum to Public Works Construction Standards – North Central Texas as
published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, current edition.
Mortar shall be composed of one part Portland cement, one and one-half parts
fine aggregate and water. (Ord. 8590; 31313)
SEC. 43-72.   CONSTRUCTION OF JOINTS.
   Three-fourths inch expansion joints shall be spaced at 25 to 30 foot
intervals or as otherwise specified. The three-fourths inch expansion joints
shall be filled with a three-fourths inch premoulded bituminous expansion joint
filler or other approved type and shall extend the entire depth and width of
the concrete section. Curb and gutter shall be grooved three-eights inch deep
on five-foot centers. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-73.   FORMS.
   Wooden forms shall have a nominal thickness of two inches, surfaced one side
and one edge and shall be straight and devoid of warps, twists, knot holes and
other defects to prevent leakage of concrete or mortar. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-74.   PLACEMENT OF CONCRETE AND MORTAR.
   (a)   Foundation or subgrade for all work must be set at the grades
determined by the director. The director may inspect the foundation, subgrade,
and reinforcing before concrete is poured.
   (b)   Concrete must be thoroughly compacted so that the minimum thickness
conforms to the requirements of this article. Concrete must be free from
honeycombing, rock pockets, and separation and segregation of ingredients. Upon
completion of the concrete core, the one-half inch mortar surface must be
placed while the core is still green, the work being carried on uniformly so
that a perfect bond is obtained between the concrete core and mortar surface.
(Ord. Nos. 8590; 22026)
SEC. 43-75.   FINISHING.
   The mortar surface shall be thoroughly troweled, not less than twice, to a
uniformly smooth surface and brush finished. Exposed edges of the gutter and
back of curb shall be rounded to a one-half inch radius. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-76.   PROTECTION OF NEW WORK FROM TRAFFIC; BACKFILLING.
   Curb, curb and gutter and separate gutter shall be protected from vehicular
traffic for not less than six days.
   Earth or sand shall be used for backfill and shall be thoroughly compacted,
care being taken not to injure the completed work. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-77.   FINAL DIMENSIONS; GUTTER RATIO REQUIRED FOR CURB FACING; DWELLING
FOR DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION.
   Curb and gutter shall have the back 12 inches deep and vertical. Curb shall
be six inches thick at the top, face battered 1:3. The gutter shall be
uniformly six inches thick and a minimum of 24 inches in width, except where
gutter joins gutter of a greater width.
   Where driveways are to be constructed, the curb may be laid back, radius
begun and No. 3 (three-eights inch diameter) round bars, exposed 15 inches,
placed on 24 inches center to center for dowels. (Ord. 8590)
Subdivision II. Driveway Approaches.
SEC. 43-78.   SPECIFICATIONS FOR MATERIALS USED IN CONSTRUCTION.
   Driveway approaches shall conform to the following standards:
   CONCRETE. Driveway approaches shall be constructed of one-course concrete,
reinforced, with a six inch minimum thickness. The minimum compressive strength
of the concrete and requirements for the quantity of mixing water and the
concrete slump must conform to the city of Dallas Addendum to the Public Works
Construction Standards – North Central Texas as published by the North Texas
Council of Governments, current edition.
   REINFORCING STEEL. Reinforcement shall consist of No. 3 (three-eighths inch
diameter) round bars placed not more than 24 inches on centers, both
directions. Where steel is lapped, the lap shall be not less than 15 inches.
(Ord. Nos. 8590; 31313)
SEC. 43-79.   PLACEMENT AND COMPACTION OF CONCRETE.
   (a)   The director may inspect the foundation, forms, and reinforcing before
concrete is poured.
   (b)   Concrete must be thoroughly compacted with an open faced tamper and
struck off with a straight edge so that the minimum thickness is six inches.
Concrete must be free from honeycombing, rock pockets, and segregation of
ingredients. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 22026)
SEC. 43-80.   FINISHING.
   The surface may have a monolithic finish by floating with a wooden float
until a slight excess of sand appears on the surface or may be brushed after
troweling in lieu of floating. In no case shall the surface be left slick or
with a glossy finish. Exposed edges of driveway shall be rounded with an edger
to a radius of one-half inch. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-81.   PROTECTION FROM VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
   Driveway approaches shall be protected from vehicular traffic for not less
than six days. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-82.   REMOVAL OF CURB AND GUTTER WHERE REQUIRED.
   Where a driveway approach is to be constructed at a location where there
exists a curb and gutter, such curb and gutter shall be removed to the nearest
construction joint. The driveway approach shall extend to the back side of the
existing or future sidewalk. On concrete pavement with monolithic curb, the
breakout line will be nine inches from the back of curb line and shall be
parallel to it and form a right angle with the concrete surface. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-83.   MAXIMUM SPACE TO BE OCCUPIED.
   Driveway approaches shall not occupy more than 70 percent of the frontage
abutting the roadway of the tract of ground devoted to one use which abuts the
roadway. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-84.   NUMBER OF APPROACHES PERMITTED.
   Not more than two driveway approaches shall be permitted on any parcel of
property with a frontage of 150 feet or less. Additional openings, for parcels
of property having a frontage of 150 feet or less, may be permitted, after
proof to the traffic engineer of necessity and convenience to the public. (Ord.
8590)
SEC. 43-85.   SEPARATION OF DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
   When more than one driveway approach is required to serve a parcel of
property, a traffic island shall separate the driveway approaches. The width of
the traffic island at the property line shall be a minimum of 20 feet. Where
the grade at the property line is the same as the sidewalk, a six inch raised
curb shall be constructed at the back of the traffic island along the property
line, and on private property. The raised curb shall be constructed so as to
end 24 inches from the intersection of the driveway approach with the property
line. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-86.   LOCATION; PROVISION FOR JOINT APPROACHES.
   Driveway approaches shall be located entirely within the frontage of the
premises abutting the work and shall be located not less than five feet from
each side of the property line, except that joint driveway approaches with
adjoining property holders may be permitted provided joint application is made
by all interested parties, and the width set out in Section
43-94 is not exceeded. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-87.   MINIMUM ANGLE IN RELATION TO CURB LINE.
   The angle of the driveway approach with the curb line shall be not less than
45 degrees. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-88.   MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROACHES NEAR STREET INTERSECTIONS.
   Where existing right of way permits, driveway approaches nearest an
intersection of two streets shall meet the following minimum requirements. The
corner rounding shall have curbs constructed with a minimum radius of 20 feet
continuously between the points of tangency of the curb lines of both streets.
The first driveway may start from the point of tangency of the curb line and
corner radius and be cut in with a five foot minimum radius. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-89.   LOCATION OF APPROACHES NEAR TRAFFIC INTERCHANGES, ETC.
   Driveway approaches at or near streets and traffic interchanges, grade
separations and traffic circles shall be so located that traffic entering or
leaving the street will not impede, confuse, imperil or otherwise interfere
with vehicular traffic. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-90.   LOCATION OF APPROACHES AT PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS, ETC., PROHIBITED.
   Driveway approaches shall not be located at street intersections or at
established pedestrian crossings. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-91.   CONSTRUCTION IN EXISTING ANGLE PARKING AREAS PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   Driveway approaches shall not be constructed in existing angle parking areas
except when the curb is restored to its normal location along the roadway in
front of the premises. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-92.   STANDING OR PARKING OF VEHICLES, ETC., ON DRIVEWAY APPROACHES
PROHIBITED.
   Driveway approaches shall not be constructed or designed for use for the
standing or parking of vehicles or for use as angle parking. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-93.   ABANDONMENT; DUTY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER TO RESTORE CURB.
   Whenever the use of any driveway approach is abandoned and no longer used
for vehicular access to the abutting property, it shall be the duty of the
abutting property owner to restore the curb according to the standards provided
in this article. (Ord. 8590)
SEC. 43-94.   RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
   Residential driveway approaches shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (a)   Width. Residential driveway approaches shall not be less than 10 feet
nor more than 30 feet in width measured at the property line.
   (b)   Radius. A residential driveway approach shall be constructed with the
return curbs having a rolled face disappearing at the sidewalk and joining the
street curb with a five foot minimum radius, except that on an arterial the
minimum radius shall be 10 feet.
   (c)   Removal of existing sidewalk. Where the residential driveway approach
is designed to cross an existing sidewalk, the sidewalk included in the
driveway approach area shall be removed and reconstructed as a driveway
approach. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 21186; 31313)
SEC. 43-95.   COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
   Walks, drives, curbs, gutters, pavements, and appurtenances on public
property and other facilities to provide access to premises used for other than
residential purposes shall be constructed, provided, or repaired in accordance
with the following standards and requirements:
   (a)   Width. The width of any commercial driveway approach shall be not less
than 15 feet nor more than 35 feet measured along the property line, except
driveway approaches for motor vehicle docks within a building shall not exceed
60 feet in width at the property line. Where more dock space is required, the
driveway approaches shall be separated by a traffic island meeting the
standards set out in section
43-85.
   (b)   Radius. Commercial driveway approaches shall be constructed with the
return curbs having a roll face disappearing at the sidewalk and joining the
street curb with a 10 foot minimum radius.
   (c)   Removal of existing sidewalks. Where a commercial driveway approach is
to be built, the sidewalk shall be removed and the entire area replaced as a
driveway. The driveway approach shall extend to the back side of the existing
or future sidewalk. (Ord. Nos. 8590; 31313)
ARTICLE IV.
SNOW AND ICE.
SEC. 43-96.   REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE FROM SIDEWALKS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge of
any building or lot abutting upon any public way or public place shall remove
the snow and ice from the sidewalk in front of the building or lot.
   (b)   Snow and ice which falls or accumulates before 4:00 p.m. during any
day, except Sunday, shall be removed within three hours after the snow or ice
has fallen or accumulated. Snow and ice which falls or accumulates on a Sunday
or after 4:00 p.m. and during the night on any other day shall be removed
before 10:00 a.m. the following day. (Ord. Nos. 3314; 19398)
SEC. 43-97.   COVERING SNOW AND ICE WITH SAND, ASHES, ETC.
   If the snow and ice on the sidewalk is frozen so hard that it cannot be
removed without injury to the pavement, the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or
the person having charge of any building or lot shall, within the time
specified in this article, cause the sidewalk abutting on the premises to be
strewn with ashes, sand, sawdust or other similar suitable materials and shall,
as soon as the weather shall permit, thoroughly clean the sidewalk. (Ord. Nos.
3314; 19398)
SEC. 43-98.   WHERE REMOVED SNOW AND ICE TO BE PLACED.
   Removed snow and ice shall be uniformly distributed parallel to the curb and
in the gutters where there is no parkway. When a parkway exists between the
curb and sidewalk, the snow and ice may be uniformly distributed on the
parkway; provided that no snow or ice shall be so placed at crosswalks which
must be left open and free of removed snow and ice. (Ord. Nos. 3314; 19398)
SEC. 43-98.1.   CAUSING ICE TO FORM ON STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he uses water, or allows the use of
water under his control, in a manner that causes the water to collect on the
roadway of a public street or alley and form ice.
   (b)   A person violating Subsection (a) of this section shall pay the city
for all costs incurred by the city in removing or covering the ice on the
roadway of the public street or alley, including, but not limited to, the costs
of labor, equipment, and ashes, sand, sawdust or other material used to cover
the ice. (Ord. 19398)
SEC. 43-98.2.   ENFORCEMENT.
   This article shall be enforced by the director of the department designated
by the city manager to enforce and administer this article, or the director’s
authorized representative. (Ord. 19398)
ARTICLE V.
BUILDING NUMBERING.
SEC. 43-99.   OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO NUMBER BUILDINGS.
   (a)   The owner or occupant of each building in the city shall place and
maintain an official building number in a conspicuous place on the premises so
that it can be clearly seen from a public street. This requirement does not
apply to accessory buildings.
   (b)   The number must be placed within 10 days after a new building is
completed. (Code 1941, Art. 68- 2; Ord. Nos. 15072; 15225)
SEC. 43-100.   OFFICIAL NUMBERING PLAN MUST BE FOLLOWED.
   (a)   Buildings must be numbered in compliance with this article and in
accordance with the plan delineating and prescribing the method of numbering
buildings which is on file in the office of the building official.
   (b)   The building official shall designate the official number which is to
be placed on each building. A person may request an official number designation
by submitting a legal description of the property to the building official.
(Code 1941, Art. 68-2; Ord. 15072)
SEC. 43-101.   SPECIFICATIONS FOR NUMBERS.
   An official building number placed pursuant to this article must be at least
three inches high, composed of a durable material, and of a color which
provides a contrast to the background. (Code 1941, Art. 68-3; Ord. 15072)
SEC. 43-102.   ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS.
   Odd numbers shall be assigned to the north side, and even numbers assigned
to the south side, of streets and public accesses running east and west or
substantially in that direction. Odd numbers shall be assigned to the west
side, and even numbers assigned to the east side, of streets and public
accesses running north and south or substantially in that direction. (Code
1941, Art. 68-4; Ord. 15072)
SEC. 43-103.   BASIC UNITS OF SPACE FOR NUMBERING.
   The basic unit of space for numbering along public streets and public
accesses is 25 feet; however, in shopping centers, townhouse areas, apartment
areas, and other building complexes where the building official determines that
the 25 foot unit is not adequate, he may assign a basic unit of 10 feet. (Code
1041, Art. 68-5; Ord. 15072)
SEC. 43-104.   NUMBERING WITHIN BUILDING COMPLEXES.
   (a)   A building complex composed of multiple structures must have an
official number assigned to each building. Each unit within each building must
also be assigned an official number. If there is sufficient street frontage,
each unit or building may be assigned an official street address number. The
official number must be prominently posted on the building so that it is
visible, where possible, from the nearest vehicular access. The official number
for each unit must be conspicuously posted on the unit.
   (b)   If a building is situated within a complex in such a way that it is
not visible from a vehicular access the owner shall post and maintain
directional signs along the nearest vehicular access indicating the location of
the building by building number and unit numbers. (Code 1941, Art. 68-6; Ord.
15072)
SEC. 43-105.   DIRECTIONAL SIGNS WITHIN BUILDING COMPLEXES.
   (a)   In a building complex composed of multiple structures which contains
internal vehicular accesses, if each official building number is not
discernible from the public street, the owner of the building complex shall
post directional signs at each entrance to the complex and at each intersection
of vehicular accesses, other than public streets, within the complex.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, an “entrance” to a complex is a point
at which vehicular access to the complex, other than a public street,
intersects with a public street.
   (c)   The directional signs must indicate the direction to buildings and
units by number, must be legible from the vehicular access, and must be painted
with a color which is in contrast to the background. Directional signs required
by this section are not required to comply with Chapter 41 of this Code. (Code
1941, Art. 68-5; Ord. 15072)
SEC. 43-106.   DIAGRAM OF MALL AREAS.
   The owner of a building complex which contains a mall area shall submit to
the police and fire departments a diagram of the complex, indicating the
location of each business. When a change in a business location is made, the
owner shall advise the police and fire departments in writing of the change.
(Code 1941, Art. 68-9; Ord. 15072)
SECS. 43-107 THRU 43-110.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 15072)
ARTICLE VI.
LICENSE FOR THE USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
Division 1. Licenses for Other than Bicycle Parking Devices, Valet Parking
Services, and Newsracks.
(Division title created by Ord. 18838 and amended by Ord. Nos. 25539, 26809)
SEC. 43-111.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division,
      (1)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this division, or the director's
authorized representative.
      (2)   SIDEWALK CAFE has the meaning given that term in Chapter 316 of the
Texas Transportation Code, as amended. (Ord. 29906)
SEC. 43-112.   APPLICATION; FEE.
   (a)   If a person, or governmental entity operating a utility, desires to
make use of any portion of the public right-of-way for a private or
governmental utility use, the person, or governmental entity operating a
utility, must apply in writing to the director. The application must be
accompanied by plans or drawings showing the area to be used, a statement of
the purpose for which the right-of-way is to be used, and a nonrefundable
application fee in the amount required by Subsection (b) of this section, plus
recording fees; except that the application fee is not required for:
      (1)   existing encroachments previously licensed; or
      (2)   a license to place and maintain the facilities of a utility
operated by a governmental entity on public right-of-way, where the
governmental entity has previously contracted with the city to provide mutual
granting of rights-of-way for utility purposes.
   (b)   The application fee is:
      (1)   $100 for a sidewalk cafe;
      (2)   $100 for a use of a public right-of-way described in Section
43-115.1; and
      (3)   $750 for any other use of the public right-of-way. (Ord. Nos.
18119; 18962; 24051; 25539; 29906)
SEC. 43-113.   GRANT BY CITY COUNCIL.
   If, in the judgment of the city council, the requested use is not
inconsistent with and does not unreasonably impair the public use of the right-
of-way, the council may by ordinance grant the license. (Ord. Nos. 18119;
25539)
SEC. 43-114.   TERMS AND CONDITIONS; DURATION; RIGHT OF TERMINATION RESERVED BY
CITY.
   (a)   The ordinance shall contain the terms and conditions of the license
and shall state the time for which the license exists. Whether or not stated in
the ordinance the city council retains the right to terminate a license
whenever in its judgment the purpose or use of the license is inconsistent with
the public use of the right-of-way or whenever the purpose or use of the
license is likely to become a nuisance.
   (b)   If a private license does not state the time for expiration, it will
expire 10 years from the date of the passage of the ordinance granting the
license.
   (c)   If a license to place and maintain the facilities of a utility
operated by a governmental entity on public right-of-way does not state the
time for expiration, it will expire upon expiration of the governmental
entity’s contract with the city providing for mutual granting of rights-of-way.
(Ord. Nos. 18119; 18962; 25539)
SEC. 43-115.   ANNUAL FEE FOR USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (a)   The annual fee for a license to use a public right-of-way for the
following uses is:
      (1)   Fee for railroad crossing: not less than $50 per track crossing the
public right-of-way or an amount determined by the director and established in
the ordinance granting the license. The fee will not be assessed for a railroad
crossing where the railroad existed before the public right-of-way was
established.
      (2)   Fee for encroachment of historically significant structures into
public right-of-way: $1,000.
      (3)   Fee for placement and maintenance of facilities of a utility
operated by a governmental entity on public right-of-way pursuant to a contract
with the city providing for mutual grant of rights-of-way: None.
      (4)   Fee for a sidewalk cafe: $200.
   (b)   The annual fee for a license to use a public right-of-way for uses
other than those listed in Subsection (a) is $1,000 or is calculated in
accordance with one of the following formulas, whichever is greater:
      (1)   Fee for use of public right-of-way: area X market value X 85% X
12%.
      (2)   Fee for subsurface use only: area X market value X 30% X 12%.
      (3)   Fee for air rights use only (including awnings and canopies with a
premise sign as defined in Section
51A-7.102(28) of the Dallas City Code): area X market value X 85% X 85% X 12%.
      (4)   Fee for commercial parking operation use: 50% of gross receipts
(which include receipts for all parking and tips less sales and use taxes, if
applicable).
   (c)   Except for a sidewalk cafe license, the application fee required by
Section
43-112 will be applied to the first year's fee if a license is granted.
   (d)   Whether or not stated in the ordinance granting the license, the city
council retains the right to increase or decrease the annual fee.
   (e)   The market value of the area licensed is based on the per square foot
appraised value, as determined by the Dallas County Central Appraisal District,
of a fee simple interest in a useable tract of abutting property.
   (f)   The director shall annually review the market values of licensed areas
for which fees are based on market value. If it is determined that the market
value of a licensed area has decreased, the director shall notify the licensee
in writing that the annual fee has been decreased. If it is determined that the
market value of a licensed area has increased, the director shall notify the
licensee in writing that the annual fee has been increased. If a licensee is
unwilling to accept the increased fee, the licensee may terminate the license.
(Ord. Nos. 18119; 18962; 22216; 24051; 25539; 26809; 27775; 29906)
SEC. 43-115.1.   SPECIAL FEES FOR THE USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (a)   Instead of the annual fee charged under Section
43-115 of this division, the following one-time fees will be charged for a
license to use a public right-of-way for the following uses:
      (1)   Fee for landscaping and appurtenant irrigation systems: $100.
      (2)   Fee for awnings and canopies without a premise sign as defined in
Section
51A-7.102(28) of the Dallas City Code: $100 per awning or canopy.
      (3)   Fee for subdivision and monument signs: $100 per sign.
      (4)   Fee for other streetscape elements, including planters, crosswalk
texturing and coloring, artwork, lighting, benches, flag poles, bollards, and
trash receptacles: $100.
   (b)   An application fee paid pursuant to Section
43-112 will not be applied to license fees charged under this section. (Ord.
Nos. 25539; 27775; 29906)
SEC. 43-115.2.   LICENSES FOR SUBDIVISION SIGNS.
   (a)   In this division, SUBDIVISION SIGN has the meaning given that term in
Section
51A-7.102 of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
   (b)   An application for a license to place a subdivision sign in a
residential subdivision must be submitted by a duly-formed and existing
homeowners association with jurisdiction over the residential subdivision. If
the homeowners association is dissolved for any reason, the license will expire
and the subdivision sign must be promptly removed from the public right-of-way.
   (c)   An application for a license to place a subdivision sign in a business
park must be submitted by the owner of the business park.
   (d)   An application for a license to place a subdivision sign in a
residential subdivision or a business park must be supported by the owner of
property abutting the proposed subdivision sign, if any, and two-thirds of the
property owners located within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision sign.
   (e)   A subdivision sign licensed under this division, and its placement and
location, must comply with all applicable city ordinances, including the sign
regulations of the Dallas Development Code. (Ord. 25539)
SEC. 43-115.3.   SIDEWALK CAFE DESIGN STANDARDS MANUAL.
   All sidewalk cafes must comply with the Sidewalk Cafe Design Standards
Manual. The director shall keep an updated electronic copy of the Sidewalk Cafe
Design Standards Manual on the city's website and keep an updated paper copy on
file for public inspection and copying. (Ord. 29906)
SEC. 43-116.   TEMPORARY LICENSE.
   The director may grant a temporary license on a month-to-month basis if a
license or abandonment application is being processed for city council action
and if failure to grant a temporary license will subject the applicant to a
substantial hardship. (Ord. Nos. 18119; 18838; 22026; 25539; 29906)
SEC. 43-117.   PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person using or occupying a public right-of- way for a private use
in violation of this division or without a license or other permit granted by
the city is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, is subject to a fine not
to exceed $500 for each day that the violation exists.
   (b)   Any owner, occupant, tenant, or licensee who fails to keep the
sidewalks, curbs, and private structures constructed within or over the
licensed area in good repair is guilty of maintaining a nuisance and, upon
conviction, is subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each day the nuisance
is maintained.
   (c)   Subsection (b) does not apply to railroad crossings for which
maintenance and repair is required in the ordinance granting the license. (Ord.
Nos. 18119; 18838; 19963; 25539)
SEC. 43-118.   BREACH BY GRANTEE.
   The director is authorized to terminate a license granted pursuant to this
division if the grantee fails to fulfill any of the conditions stated in the
license. (Ord. Nos. 18119; 18838; 25539)
SEC. 43-119.   WAIVER.
   The provisions of this division that are not required by state law or the
city charter may be waived or modified by the city council in the ordinance
granting the license. (Ord. Nos. 18119; 18838; 25539)
Division 2. Bicycle Parking Devices.
SEC. 43-120.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   BICYCLE PARKING DEVICE means a device, approved as to size and
design by the director, to which a bicycle may be secured by a lock either
provided by the user or provided on the device.
      (2)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (3)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this division, or the director’s
designated representative. (Ord. Nos. 18838; 22026)
SEC. 43-121.   LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he installs or operates a bicycle
parking device on a public right-of- way within the city without a license
issued by the director.
   (b)   A person who desires to install or operate a bicycle parking device on
a public right-of-way abutting his property shall apply in writing to the
director for a bicycle parking device license. The application must contain the
following information:
      (1)   the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of:
         (A)   the applicant;
         (B)   if the applicant is a lessee, the property owner; and
         (C)   the manufacturer of each bicycle parking device to be installed
or operated;
      (2)   the number of bicycle parking devices to be installed or operated;
      (3)   the proposed location of each bicycle parking device;
      (4)   the dimensions of each bicycle parking device, measured with and
without bicycles parked in the device;
      (5)   the proposed method of securing each bicycle parking device to the
public right-of-way; and
      (6)   if the applicant is a lessee, written consent from the property
owner to install or operate any bicycle parking device on public right-of-way
abutting his property.
   (c)   The director shall forward a copy of any completed application to the
departments of transportation and public works, sanitation services, code
compliance, planning and urban design, and development services, and to any
utility company that might be affected by the proposed installation and
operation of a bicycle parking device. Each department, and any utility company
notified, shall review the application and return it, with any comments, to the
director within 30 days of receipt.
   (d)   After reviewing the application and departmental comments, the
director may issue a bicycle parking device license unless denial is required
by Section 43-122. (Ord. Nos. 18838; 22026; 23694; 25047; 27697; 28424; 29478;
29882; 30239; 30654; 32002; 32864)
SEC. 43-122.   DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The director shall deny a bicycle parking device license if:
      (1)   the applicant fails to comply with the requirements of this
division or other applicable law;
      (2)   the applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an
application for a bicycle parking device license; or
      (3)   the director determines that the bicycle parking device, with or
without bicycles parked in it, would:
         (A)   endanger the safety of persons or property or otherwise not be
in the public interest;
         (B)   unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
         (C)   unreasonably interfere with the use of a pole, traffic sign,
traffic signal, hydrant, mailbox, or other object permitted at or near the
proposed location of the bicycle parking device; or
         (D)   unreasonably interfere with an existing use permitted at or near
the proposed location of the bicycle parking device.
   (b)   The director shall revoke a bicycle parking device license if:
      (1)   the applicant fails to comply with the requirements of the bicycle
parking device license, this division, or other applicable law;
      (2)   the applicant made a false statement of material fact on an
application for a bicycle parking device license; or
      (3)   the director determines that the bicycle parking device, with or
without bicycles parked in it:
         (A)   endangers the safety of persons or property or is otherwise not
in the public interest;
         (B)   unreasonably interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
         (C)   unreasonably interferes with the use of a pole, traffic sign,
traffic signal, hydrant, mailbox, or other object permitted at or near the
location of the bicycle parking device; or
         (D)   unreasonably interferes with an existing use permitted at or
near the location of the bicycle parking device.
   (c)   The city council may, at any time, unconditionally revoke a bicycle
parking device license issued pursuant to this division. (Ord. 18838)
SEC. 43-123.   EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   A bicycle parking device license expires one year from the date of issuance,
unless sooner terminated by the director or by the city council. A bicycle
parking device license may be renewed by making application in accordance with
Section
43-121 of this division at least 30 days before expiration of the license.
(Ord. 18838)
SEC. 43-124.   STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION, OPERATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF A
BICYCLE PARKING DEVICE.
   A person issued a license to install or operate a bicycle parking device
which in whole or in part rests on any public right-of-way shall:
      (1)   mount the bicycle parking device on a paved surface;
      (2)   not chain, belt, or otherwise attach a bicycle parking device to a
fixture in the public right- of-way, without written approval from the
director;
      (3)   cut weeds and grass within five feet of a bicycle parking device
that rests in part on unpaved public right-of-way;
      (4)   attach to the bicycle parking device a plaque, to be approved by
the director, engraved with the bicycle parking device license number and the
licensee’s current telephone; and
      (5)   maintain the bicycle parking device:
         (A)   in good working order;
         (B)   in a manner that, with and without bicycles parked in the
device, does not obstruct a vehicle operator’s ability to see any part of an
intersecting road; and
         (C)   in a manner that, with and without bicycles parked in the
device, does not injure, damage, or create a hazard to persons or property.
(Ord. 18838)
SEC. 43-125.   LOCATION OF A BICYCLE PARKING DEVICE.
   (a)   A bicycle parking device may not:
      (1)   project into or rest upon any part of the public right-of-way open
to motor vehicle traffic; or
      (2)   be located in a manner such that a bicycle parked in the device
would project into or rest upon any part of the public right-of-way open to
motor vehicle traffic.
   (b)   A bicycle parking device may not be installed or operated on public
right-of-way not open to motor vehicle traffic if, measured with bicycles
parked in it, the device would:
      (1)   be within five feet of a marked crosswalk;
      (2)   be within 12 feet of the curb return of an unmarked crosswalk;
      (3)   be within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box
or other emergency facility;
      (4)   be within five feet of a driveway;
      (5)   be within three feet in front of or 15 feet behind a sign marking a
designated bus stop;
      (6)   be within three feet of a bus bench;
      (7)   reduce the unobstructed space for the passage of pedestrians to
less than:
         (A)   the minimum unobstructed sidewalk widths required by the Dallas
Development Code for core and secondary pedestrian precinct overlay districts
and fringe areas located within CA-1 and CA-1(A) zoning districts; or
         (B)   four feet in all other areas of the city;
      (8)   be within three feet of property improved with lawn, flowers,
shrubs, trees, or other landscaping; or
      (9)   be within 10 feet of an exit door of a building. (Ord. Nos. 18838;
19455)
SEC. 43-126.   RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF A BICYCLE PARKING DEVICE PROHIBITED.
   No person may:
      (1)   restrict the use of a bicycle parking device, located in whole or
in part on public right-of- way, to a particular group of people; or
      (2)   charge a fee for the use of a bicycle parking device located in
whole or in part on public right-of-way. (Ord. 18838)
SEC. 43-126.1.   INDEMNIFICATION.
   An applicant for a bicycle parking device license must execute a written
agreement to indemnify the city and its officers and employees against all
claims of injury or damage to persons or property arising out of the negligent
installation, maintenance, or operation of a bicycle parking device on public
right-of-way. (Ord. 18838)
SEC. 43-126.2.   RESTORATION OF THE RIGHT- OF-WAY.
   Upon termination of a license, the licensee shall remove the bicycle parking
device and restore the used portion of the public right-of-way to its previous
condition. If the licensee fails to comply with this section, the director
shall cause the bicycle parking device to be removed and the public right-of-
way restored with costs being assessed against the licensee. (Ord. 18838)
Division 3. Valet Parking Services.
SEC. 43-126.3.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT means the area bounded by Woodall Rogers
Freeway on the north, Central Expressway and Julius Schepps Freeway on the
east, Interstate Highway 30 on the south, and Interstate Highway 35E on the
west.
      (2)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (3)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this division, or the director’s
designated representative.
      (4)   LICENSEE means a person licensed under this division to operate a
valet parking service. The term includes any employee, agent, or independent
contractor of the person in whose name the license is issued.
      (5)   PERSON means an individual, assumed name entity, partnership,
joint-venture, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
      (6)   VALET PARKING SERVICE means a business, or any part of a business,
which provides a driver to operate a person’s vehicle to and from a parking
location so that the person and any passengers in the vehicle may unload and
load at their immediate destination. (Ord. Nos. 19190; 22026; 25539)
SEC. 43-126.4.   PURPOSE.
   This division is intended to only apply to valet parking service provided in
connection with a commercial establishment or commercial activity and does not
apply to occasional valet parking service provided at a private residence or in
connection with a social or fund-raising activity. (Ord. 19190)
SEC. 43-126.5.   LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, without a license issued by the
director, he operates a valet parking service within the city on public right-
of-way or on private property which requires the use of public right-of-way for
maneuvering vehicles.
   (b)   A licensee commits an offense if, at a time other than the hours and
days of operation authorized in his license, he or his employee, agent, or
independent contractor operates a valet parking service within the city on
public right-of-way or on private property which requires the use of public
right- of-way for maneuvering vehicles.
   (c)   A person who desires to operate a valet parking service on public
right-of-way, or on private property which requires the use of public right-of-
way for maneuvering vehicles, shall apply in writing to the director for a
valet parking service license. The application must be made by the owner or
lessee of the premises benefiting from the proposed valet parking service and
must contain the following information:
      (1)   the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of:
         (A)   the applicant;
         (B)   if the applicant is a lessee, the property owner; and
         (C)   any independent contractor the applicant will use to provide
valet parking service;
      (2)   the proposed location of the valet parking service and any valet
parking service stands;
      (3)   the number of spaces requested to be reserved for the valet parking
service, each space being 22 feet long, if parallel to the curb, or nine feet
wide, if head in to the curb; as a rule, three spaces must be reserved unless
the director determines that, because of special traffic conditions, a greater
or lesser number of spaces is needed to efficiently operate the valet parking
service;
      (4)   the proposed hours and days of operation of the valet parking
service;
      (5)   the location of off-street parking to be used in connection with
the valet parking service and a signed agreement or other documentation showing
that the applicant has a legal right to park vehicles at that location;
      (6)   proof of insurance required by Section
43-126.12; and
      (7)   a list of names and addresses of all property owners, or their
representatives, located within 50 feet of, on the same side of the street as,
and within the same block as the valet parking service location, either:
         (A)   with signatures showing consent to the operation of a valet
parking service by the applicant; or
         (B)   without signatures, in which case the director shall notify the
listed persons of the valet parking service application and obtain comments.
   (d)   The director shall forward a copy of any completed application to any
person required to be notified under Subsection (c)(7) and to the departments
of transportation and public works, sanitation services, code compliance,
development services, planning and urban design, and risk management, and to
any other department that might be affected by the proposed operation of a
valet parking service. Each department, and any other notified persons, shall
review the application and return it, with any comments, to the director within
30 days of receipt.
   (e)   After reviewing the application and comments of the departments and of
any person notified in accordance with Subsection (c)(7), and upon receiving
payment of all fees required by this division, the director may issue a valet
parking service license unless denial is required by Section
43-126.7.
   (f)   A licensee desiring to change the location or hours of operation of a
valet parking service must submit a new application to the director in
accordance with this section. (Ord. Nos. 19190; 22026; 23694; 25047; 27697;
28424; 29478; 29882; 30239; 30654; 32002; 32864)
SEC. 43-126.6.   FEES.
   (a)   A nonrefundable application fee of $1,700 must accompany each
application for a valet parking service license.
   (b)   The annual fee for a valet parking service license is:
      (1)   if the valet parking service is being conducted inside the central
business district, $250 per space for the first six spaces reserved by the
valet parking service, plus $1,000 for each space over six reserved by the
valet parking service; or
      (2)   if the valet parking service is being conducted outside the central
business district, $350 per space for the first two spaces reserved by the
valet parking service, plus $1,000 for each space over two reserved by the
valet parking service.
   (c)   No annual license fee is required if the valet parking service is
conducted completely on private property and the public right-of-way is only
used for maneuvering vehicles.
   (d)   In addition to other fees required by this section, an applicant must
pay $400 for each sign or curb marking placed by the city at the valet parking
service location in accordance with Section
43-126.14 of this division.
   (e)   In addition to other fees required by this section, an applicant must
pay an annual fee of $50 if a valet parking service stand is placed on public
right-of- way. (Ord. Nos. 19190; 19969; 25539; 31657; 32863)
SEC. 43-126.7.   DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; TEMPORARY SUSPENSION.
   (a)   The director shall deny a valet parking service license if:
      (1)   the applicant fails to comply with the requirements of this
division or other applicable law;
      (2)   the applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an
application for a valet parking service license; or
      (3)   the director determines that the operation of the valet parking
service would:
         (A)   endanger the safety of persons or property or otherwise not be
in the public interest;
         (B)   unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
         (C)   unreasonably interfere with the use of a pole, traffic sign,
traffic signal, hydrant, mailbox, or other object permitted at or near the
proposed location of the valet parking service; or
         (D)   unreasonably interfere with an existing use permitted at or near
the proposed location of the valet parking service.
   (b)   The director shall revoke a valet parking service license if:
      (1)   the licensee fails to comply with the requirements of the valet
parking service license, this division, or other applicable law;
      (2)   the licensee made a false statement of material fact on an
application for a valet parking service license; or
      (3)   the director determines that the operation of the valet parking
service:
         (A)   endangers the safety of persons or property or is otherwise not
in the public interest;
         (B)   unreasonably interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
         (C)   unreasonably interferes with the use of a pole, traffic sign,
traffic signal, hydrant, mailbox, or other object permitted at or near the
location of the valet parking service; or
         (D)   unreasonably interferes with an existing use permitted at or
near the location of the valet parking service.
   (c)   The city council may, at any time, unconditionally revoke a valet
parking service license issued pursuant to this division.
   (d)   The director may temporarily suspend the operations of a valet parking
service if the public right- of-way reserved by the valet parking service is
needed for an emergency or temporary use, including, but not limited to, the
construction, maintenance, or repair of a street or utility. The director may
refund a part of the annual license fee, prorated according to the duration of
the suspension, unless the conditions necessitating the suspension were caused
by the valet parking service. (Ord. 19190)
SEC. 43-126.8.   EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   A valet parking service license expires one year from the date of issuance,
unless sooner terminated by the director or by the city council. A valet
parking service license may be renewed by making application in accordance with
Section
43-126.5 of this division at least 30 days before expiration of the license.
(Ord. 19190)
SEC. 43-126.9.   STANDARDS FOR OPERATION OF A VALET PARKING SERVICE.
   (a)   A licensee shall:
      (1)   allow only employees and independent contractors who hold a valid
state driver’s license, and who are covered by the insurance required by
Section
43-126.12 of this division, to operate any vehicle in connection with the valet
parking service;
      (2)   operate the valet parking service in a manner that does not:
         (A)   use or occupy more of the public right-of-way than is allowed by
his valet parking service license;
         (B)   obstruct a pedestrian’s use of a sidewalk;
         (C)   obstruct a vehicle operator’s ability to see any part of an
intersecting road; or
         (D)   injure, damage, or create a hazard to persons or property;
      (3)   place no more than one valet parking service stand on public right-
of-way;
      (4)   not place or allow the placement of a sign advertising the valet
parking service in the public right-of-way;
      (5)   not park or allow the parking of a vehicle in a valet parking
service space, but shall only use the space for loading and unloading
passengers; in no event shall a vehicle be allowed to remain in a valet parking
service space for more than five minutes;
      (6)   continuously provide valet parking service during all hours of
operation authorized in his license;
      (7)   only use an off-street parking location to park a vehicle accepted
for valet parking service and shall not park the vehicle on public right-of-
way; and
      (8)   notify the director within 10 days of a change in the location of
off-street parking and provide the director with a signed agreement or other
documentation showing that the licensee has a legal right to park vehicles at
the new location.
   (b)   At all times other than the authorized hours of operation of a valet
parking service, spaces reserved by the valet parking service shall be
available for use by the general public on a first-come, first-served basis in
accordance with posted signs and other traffic control devices, except where
parking is restricted or prohibited. (Ord. 19190)
SEC. 43-126.10.   VALET PARKING SERVICE STANDS.
   (a)   A licensee may place one valet parking service stand on the public
right-of-way at a location approved by the director. The valet parking service
stand must be necessary to the general conduct of the valet parking service and
shall be used for such purposes, including, but not limited to, the dispatch of
valets and the storage of keys, umbrellas, and other items.
   (b)   A valet parking service stand shall:
      (1)   not occupy an area of the public right-of- way exceeding four feet
in width and four feet in depth;
      (2)   not be affixed to the public right-of-way in any manner;
      (3)   be easily moveable by one person; and
      (4)   be removed from the public right-of-way when the valet parking
service is not being operated;
   (c)   A name and logo may be placed on a valet parking service stand for the
sole purpose of identifying the valet parking service. The identification of
the valet parking service shall not:
      (1)   have dimensions greater than four feet high and four feet wide; or
      (2)   be placed on more than two sides of the valet parking service
stand. (Ord. 19190)
SEC. 43-126.11.   LOCATION OF A VALET PARKING SERVICE.
   (a)   Spaces and stands for a valet parking service may not:
      (1)   be within 10 feet of a crosswalk;
      (2)   be within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, fire call box, police or other
emergency facility;
      (3)   be within five feet of a driveway;
      (4)   be within three feet in front of or 15 feet behind a sign marking a
designated bus stop;
      (5)   be within three feet of a bus bench; or
      (6)   reduce the unobstructed space for the passage of pedestrians to
less than:
         (A)   the minimum unobstructed sidewalk widths required by the Dallas
Development Code for core and secondary pedestrian precinct overlay districts
located within CA-1 and CA-1(A) zoning districts; or
         (B)   four feet in all other areas of the city.
   (b)   The director may require greater distances than those prescribed in
Subsection (a) when warranted by special vehicular or pedestrian traffic
conditions. (Ord. Nos. 19190; 19455)
SEC. 43-126.12.   INSURANCE.
   (a)   A licensee shall procure, or cause to be procured, and keep in full
force and effect, and shall keep on file with the director, a policy of
comprehensive general liability insurance and garage insurance, or a
certificate of insurance, issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to
do business in this state and in the standard form approved by the board of
insurance commissioners of the state. The insured provisions of the policy must
include the city, and its officers and employees, as insureds and the coverage
provisions must insure the public from loss or damage that may arise to any
person or property by reason of the operation of a valet parking service by the
licensee.
   (b)   The comprehensive general liability insurance must be on a broad form
and provide limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not
less than $300,000 combined single limit, or the equivalent.
   (c)   The garage insurance must provide limits of liability for bodily
injury and property damage of not less than $300,000 combined single limit, or
the equivalent, and must provide the following coverages:
      (1)   Comprehensive and collision coverage for physical damage.
      (2)   Coverage for vehicle storage.
      (3)   Coverage for a vehicle driven by or at the direction of the
licensee.
   (d)   The insurance policy required by Subsection (a) of this section shall
contain an endorsement which provides for 10 days’ notice to the director in
the event of any material change or cancellation of the policy. (Ord. 19190)
SEC. 43-126.13.   INDEMNIFICATION.
   A licensee, and any independent contractor used by the licensee, must
execute a written agreement to indemnify the city and its officers and
employees against all claims of injury or damage to persons or property arising
out of the operation of the valet parking service by the licensee. (Ord. 19190)
SEC. 43-126.14.   SIGNS.
   Upon recommendation of the director, the city traffic engineer is authorized
to place city signs or curb markings at a location licensed for a valet parking
service pursuant to this division. The signs and markings shall:
      (1)   indicate that the location is restricted for use by a valet parking
service; and
      (2)   state the days and hours of operation of the valet parking service.
(Ord. 19190)
Division 4. Newsracks.
SEC. 43-126.15.   PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This division only applies to newsracks located on the public right-of-way
within the city of Dallas and provides administrative procedures for the grant
of annual licenses regarding newsracks to be located on the public right-of-
way. This division regulates the placement of newsracks on the public right-of-
way within the city. This division also ensures that newsracks do not create a
hazard to persons or property, do not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, and are kept neat, clean, and in good repair. (Ord. Nos. 26809; 27201)
SEC. 43-126.16.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division, unless the context requires a different definition:
      (1)   BLOCK means an area bounded by streets on all sides. If a street
deadends, the terminus of the dead-end street will be treated as an
intersecting street.
      (2)   BLOCKFACE means the linear distance of lots along one side of a
street between the two nearest intersecting streets. If a street deadends, the
terminus of the dead-end street will be treated as an intersecting street.
      (3)   CITY CONTRACTOR means a person who has a contract with the city for
the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, removal, and replacement of
multiple newsrack units in a multiple newsrack unit zone.
      (4)   CROSSWALK has the meaning given that term in Section 541.302 of the
Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
      (5)   DIRECTOR means the director of transportation and public works, or
a designee.
      (6)   FREESTANDING NEWSRACK means a newsrack that is not a multiple
newsrack unit or a part of a multiple newsrack unit.
      (7)   LICENSE means permission granted under this division to a person to
install, operate, or maintain a newsrack within the public right-of-way of the
city for a specified period of time.
      (8)   LICENSEE means the publisher, and any other person operating and
maintaining a newsrack on behalf of a publisher, who is issued a license under
this division to install, operate, or maintain a newsrack within the public
right-of-way of the city.
      (9)   MULTIPLE NEWSRACK UNIT means a single structure containing more
than one newsrack that is installed by the city or a city contractor in a
multiple newsrack unit zone.
      (10)   NEWSRACK means any self-service or coin-operated container, rack,
or structure used or maintained for the display, distribution, or sale of
newspapers, periodicals, or other publications.
      (11)   PERSON means an individual, assumed name entity, partnership,
joint venture, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
      (12)   PUBLISHER means any person who owns and/or distributes newspapers,
periodicals, or other publications.
      (13)   SPLIT-DOOR NEWSRACK means a freestanding newsrack or a newsrack
space in a multiple newsrack unit that has been split into two separate
distribution areas. (Ord. Nos. 26809; 27201; 27697; 32002; 32864)
SEC. 43-126.17.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if:
      (1)   he installs, operates, or maintains a newsrack on any portion of a
public right-of-way within the city that is open to vehicular traffic; or
      (2)   without a license issued under this division, he installs,
operates, or maintains a newsrack on a public right-of-way in the city that is
not open to vehicular traffic.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(2) of this section
that the person was installing, operating, or maintaining the newsrack pursuant
to a contract with the city for those services. (Ord. Nos. 26809; 27201; 33224)
SEC. 43-126.18.   LICENSE APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (a)   A person who desires to install, operate, or maintain a newsrack on a
public right-of- way that is not open to vehicular traffic shall submit an
application for a newsrack license to the director on a form provided for that
purpose. The applicant must be the person who will install, operate, or
maintain the newsrack. The application must be verified and contain all of the
following information:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number, and signature of the applicant. If
the applicant is a person other than the publisher, then the publisher must
also sign the application, agreeing to be bound by the terms contained in the
license.
      (2)   Name, address, and telephone number of the person the city may
contact concerning installation, placement, operation, and maintenance of the
applicant’s newsracks.
      (3)   Form of business of the applicant and, if the business is a
corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business.
      (4)   Number of newsracks the applicant wishes to install or operate in
the city and a list indicating the proposed location (by blockface) of each
newsrack, the name of the publication each newsrack will dispense, and whether
the publication will be dispensed free or for a charge.
      (5)   Dimensional measurements of each style of any freestanding
newsracks to be installed, with drawings or photographs.
      (6)   Proposed method of securing any freestanding newsracks.
   (b)   Following a review of the application, execution of the written
agreement required under Section
43-126.19(b), payment of a nonrefundable $100 application processing fee, and
payment of the annual fee for a newsrack license, the director shall, within 60
days following the date of receipt of an application for an initial license and
within 30 days following the date of receipt of an application for a license
renewal, issue a newsrack license to the applicant unless denial is required by
Section
43-126.20.
   (c)   Before any newsrack not authorized under a newsrack license may be
installed, operated, or maintained on the public right-of-way, the licensee
must make a written request to the director for the additional newsrack and pay
the required annual fee.
   (d)   The director may (in accordance with procedures established by this
division for the allocation of newsrack locations) approve changes to the
location of a validly licensed newsrack, upon written request by a licensee,
for no additional fee. An amendment that substantially changes the scope of a
license (such as displaying, distributing, or selling in a newsrack a
publication not specified in the license application for that newsrack) must be
applied for in the same manner as the original license.
   (e)   A licensee shall notify the director within 10 days of any change in
the address or telephone number of the publisher or of the person responsible
for the installation, operation, or maintenance of the newsracks permitted
under the license.
   (f)   A license issued to one person may not be transferred to another
person. A newsrack location assigned to one person or publication may not be
transferred to another person or publication without following the procedures
established by this division for the allocation of newsrack locations. (Ord.
Nos. 26809; 27201; 33224)
SEC. 43-126.19.   CONDITIONS OF A LICENSE AND ANNUAL FEES.
   (a)   It is a condition of a license that the installation, operation, and
maintenance of each newsrack be in accordance with this division.
   (b)   Prior to the issuance of a license, the licensee shall execute a
written agreement providing all of the following:
      (1)   The licensee will defend, indemnify, and hold whole and harmless
the city of Dallas and its officers, agents, representatives, or employees
against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, or expenses (including
attorney’s fees) for bodily injury, property damage, or other harm arising out
of, or in any way related to, the licensee’s occupancy, maintenance, or use of
the licensed area or the licensee’s placement, installation, operation, or
maintenance of any newsrack. The indemnity must include claims for damages that
any publicly or privately owned utility or communication company sustains
arising from the licensee’s occupancy, maintenance, or use of the licensed area
or the licensee’s placement, installation, operation, or maintenance of any
newsrack.
      (2)   If the city of Dallas is ever made a defendant in any cause of
action, directly or indirectly, based upon the licensee’s occupancy,
maintenance, or use of the licensed area, or the licensee’s placement,
installation, operation, or maintenance of any newsrack, the city shall have
the right, at its option, to implead the licensee and its successors and
assigns.
      (3)    The licensee will procure, prior to the issuance of a license, and
keep in full force and effect at all times during the license term, commercial
general liability insurance coverage (including, but not limited to, premises/
operations, independent contractors, and contractual liability) protecting the
city of Dallas against any and all claims for damages to persons or property as
a result of, or arising out of, the licensee’s occupancy, maintenance, or use
of the licensed area or the licensee’s placement, installation, operation, or
maintenance of any newsrack, with minimum combined bodily injury (including
death) and property damage limits of not less than $500,000 for each occurrence
and $500,000 annual aggregate. The insurance policy must be written by an
insurance company approved by the State of Texas and acceptable to the city and
issued in a standard form approved by the Texas Department of Insurance. All
provisions of the policy must be acceptable to the city and must name the city
and its officers and employees as additional insureds and provide for 30 days
written notice to the director of cancellation, non-renewal, or material change
to the insurance policy.
      (4)   The license is subject to the rights of the city, public utilities,
and franchisees in and to the public right-of-way and the rights of the city to
make changes to the grade of any street, sidewalk, or parkway, and the licensee
will never make a claim against the city for damages it might suffer by reason
of the installation, construction, reconstruction, operation, or maintenance of
any public improvement, utility, or communication facility on the licensed
area.
   (c)   The annual license fee for a newsrack license is:
      (1)   $15 for each freestanding newsrack located within a public right-
of-way of the city; and
      (2)   $60 for each newsrack space operated in a multiple newsrack unit,
which amount includes $45 for rental of the newsrack space from the city or the
city contractor.
   (d)   A licensee shall pay the annual license fee for a newsrack license to
the director. The payment must be made on or before the issuance of a license.
All sums due under this section must be deposited by the city controller and
are subject to a $25 fee for each dishonored check. Except as specifically
provided otherwise in this division, no license fees will be prorated upon
termination of any license. (Ord. Nos. 26809; 27201)
SEC. 43-126.20.   DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.
   (a)   The director shall deny a newsrack license if the director determines
that the applicant has:
      (1)   made a false statement of a material fact on an application for a
newsrack license;
      (2)   failed to provide the information requested on an application for a
newsrack license;
      (3)   failed to execute a written agreement in accordance with Section
43-126.19(b);
      (4)   failed to pay the nonrefundable application fee or annual license
fee at the time due; or
      (5)   failed to comply with the requirements of this division or other
applicable law.
   (b)   The director shall revoke a newsrack license if the director
determines that the licensee has:
      (1)   made a false statement of a material fact on an application for a
newsrack license;
      (2)   failed to comply with the requirements of the newsrack license, the
written agreement executed under Section
43-126.19(b), this division, or any other applicable law;
      (3)   failed to maintain in full force and effect the insurance as
required by this division; or
      (4)   failed to pay any fees required by this division at the time due.
   (c)   If the director determines that an applicant must be denied a newsrack
license under this section, the director shall notify the person in writing
that the application is denied and shall include in the notice the reason for
denial and a statement informing the applicant of the right to appeal.
   (d)   If the director determines that a newsrack license must be revoked
under this section, the director shall notify the licensee in writing that the
license is revoked and shall include in the notice the reason for revocation
and a statement informing the applicant of the right to appeal. (Ord. Nos.
26809; 27201)
SEC. 43-126.21.   APPEAL FROM LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   If the director denies the issuance or renewal of a license or revokes
a license, the director shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the reason for denial,
nonrenewal, or revocation and of the right to an appeal.
   (b)   Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, nonrenewal, or
revocation, the applicant or licensee whose application for a license or
license renewal has been denied or whose license has been revoked has the right
to appeal to either the permit and license appeal board or the state district
court.
   (c)   An appeal to a permit and license appeal board must be in accordance
with Section
2-96 of this code. The filing of an appeal under this subsection stays the
action of the director in revoking a license until a final decision is made by
the permit and license appeal board. A revocation upheld by the board takes
effect on the first midnight that is at least 24 hours after the board issues
its decision.
   (d)   An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days
after receipt of notice of the director’s decision. The applicant or licensee
shall bear the burden of proof in court. (Ord. Nos. 26809; 27201)
SEC. 43-126.22.   EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF A LICENSE.
   (a)   A newsrack license expires and becomes invalid on August 1 of each
year, unless sooner terminated by the director in accordance with this division
or by city council ordinance in accordance with the city charter. A licensee
shall apply for renewal of a newsrack license at least 30 days, but not more
than 90 days, before expiration of the license. An application for renewal must
be made in accordance with the procedures established in Section
43-126.18.
   (b)   An existing licensee will be able to renew a license for the same
newsrack locations until those newsrack locations are reallocated under a five-
year lottery conducted under Section
43-126.29(h)(3), except that failure to timely renew a license in accordance
with Subsection (a), or denial or revocation of a license, will result in the
location for that newsrack being made available to other publishers.
   (c)   A licensee who timely applies for renewal of a license in accordance
with Subsection (a) is not required to pay the $100 license application fee.
(Ord. Nos. 26809; 27201)
SEC. 43-126.23.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 43-126.24.   STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION, OPERATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF
NEWSRACKS.
   (a)   Any newsrack that, in whole or part, rests on any public right-of-way
within the city not open to vehicular traffic must:
      (1)   comply with all applicable city ordinances and state and federal
laws; and
      (2)   not remain continuously empty of publications authorized under the
newsrack license for more than 30 consecutive days.
   (b)   In addition to meeting the requirements of Subsection (a), any
freestanding newsrack or multiple newsrack unit that, in whole or part, rests
on any public right-of-way within the city not open to vehicular traffic must
meet all of the following standards:
      (1)   Not display advertising, except that a logo or other information
identifying the publication and coin operation information may appear on the
newsrack. This information must be contained in an area not to exceed six
inches high and 20 inches wide on the front, back, and/or sides of the
newsrack.
      (2)   If the newsrack will be located within any special district with an
overall design theme that specifies particular colors or materials, then the
newsrack material and color must conform to the special district design
requirements. If design standards for a special district require that
particular materials or colors be used for newsracks, the director shall notify
any licensee with a newsrack in that district of the requirements.
      (3)   Have a notice, not to exceed three inches high and five inches
wide, in a readily visible place on the newsrack with the name of the
distributor and a working telephone number of whom to call to report a
malfunction or to obtain a refund if any coin return mechanism malfunctions.
This separate notice is not required if the information required by this
paragraph is included with the logo and information allowed under Paragraph (1)
of this subsection.
      (4)   Be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair such
that:
         (A)   the newsrack is reasonably free of dirt and grease;
         (B)   the newsrack is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling, and
cracked paint in the visible painted areas;
         (C)   the newsrack is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the
visible unpainted metal areas;
         (D)   any clear plastic or glass parts through which the publications
are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes, and
discoloration;
         (E)   any paper or cardboard parts or inserts are reasonably free of
tears, peeling, or fading; and
         (F)   no structural parts are broken or excessively misshapen.
      (5)   Be of sufficient weight, or be anchored in a manner approved by the
director to a heavy metal plate of sufficient weight, to prevent tipping over
of the newsrack. A freestanding newsrack may not be anchored to the ground,
sidewalk, trees, posts, poles, or streetscape furniture. (Ord. Nos. 26809;
27201)
SEC. 43-126.25.   LOCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NEWSRACKS.
   (a)   No freestanding newsrack or multiple newsrack unit may be located in a
manner that:
      (1)   impairs or interferes with:
         (A)   pedestrian traffic;
         (B)   the ability to fully open a door to any building;
         (C)   the loading or unloading of passengers from a bus or light rail
vehicle; or
         (D)   emergency access to a building or property by the police
department, the fire department, or emergency medical services;
      (2)   reduces the clear, unimpeded sidewalk width to less than:
         (A)   nine feet for sidewalks 14 feet or wider; or
         (B)   three-fourths of the sidewalk width (but in no case less than
three feet) for sidewalks less than 14 feet wide;
      (3)   obstructs the visibility of a fire hydrant, fire department inlet
connection, fire protection system control valve, fire call box, police call
box, traffic control signal box, or other emergency facility so that the
emergency facility cannot be clearly seen from a public street or roadway open
to motor vehicular traffic; or
      (4)   is determined by the director to endanger the safety of persons or
property.
   (b)   On each blockface, freestanding newsracks must be placed together in
groups, with not more than eight newsracks in each group. A distance of at
least 50 feet must separate each group of freestanding newsracks located on the
same blockface.
   (c)   No more than eight newsracks (whether freestanding newsracks or
newsrack spaces in multiple newsrack units) on any block may dispense the same
publication, and no more than two newsracks (whether freestanding newsracks or
newsrack spaces in multiple newsrack units) on any blockface may dispense the
same publication. The same publication may not be dispensed in more than one
newsrack space in a multiple newsrack unit or in an attached grouping of
multiple newsrack units. Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection to
the contrary, the same publication may be dispensed in a multiple newsrack unit
in excess of the limits set forth in this subsection whenever the director:
      (1)   determines it is necessary to fill vacant newsrack spaces in a
multiple newsrack unit;
      (2)   determines that there is a lack of demand for the vacant newsrack
spaces by other publications; and
      (3)   conducts a lottery in accordance with Section
43-126.29(h)(2) to allocate the vacant newsrack spaces.
   (d)   A freestanding newsrack or a multiple newsrack unit may not be located
within:
      (1)   any median or traffic island;
      (2)   a visibility triangle as defined in Section
51A-4.602(d)(2) of this code;
      (3)   the area contained within the projection of the width of a midblock
crosswalk to the back of an adjacent sidewalk;
      (4)   the area contained within the projection of the width of a
building’s doorway to the curb face or pavement edge of any public street or
roadway open to motor vehicular traffic;
      (5)   two feet of a curb face or pavement edge of any public street or
roadway open to motor vehicular traffic if the newsrack opens away from the
curb face or pavement edge, except that if the curb face or pavement edge is
adjacent to a designated no parking zone or area, then the newsrack may not be
located within 1-1/2 feet of the curb face or pavement edge;
      (6)   three feet of:
         (A)   any mailbox, water feature, art, monument, planter, kiosk, trash
receptacle, drinking fountain, streetscape bench, or parking meter;
         (B)   a fire hydrant, fire department inlet connection, fire
protection system control valve, fire call box, police call box, traffic
control signal box, or other emergency facility; or
         (C)   a bench, shelter, informational sign, or ticketing equipment of
a light rail system;
      (7)   five feet of a curb face or pavement edge of any public street or
roadway open to motor vehicular traffic if the newsrack opens towards the curb
face or pavement edge;
      (8)   six feet of a bicycle rack;
      (9)   seven feet of a bus stop sign, bus stop bench, or bus stop shelter;
or
      (10)   15 feet of the centerline of rail of any light rail system track.
   (e)   A freestanding newsrack may not be located within a multiple newsrack
unit zone or within 50 feet of a multiple newsrack unit zone. (Ord. Nos. 26809;
27201)
SEC. 43-126.26.   DISPLAY AND DISTRIBUTION OF HARMFUL MATERIALS THROUGH
NEWSRACKS.
   A licensee shall not knowingly display, distribute, or sell any harmful
matter, as defined in Section 43.24(a)(2) of the Texas Penal Code, as amended,
through any newsrack licensed under this division. (Ord. Nos. 26809; 27201)
SEC. 43-126.27.   RESTORATION OF THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (a)   Upon termination of a license, the licensee (or the director’s
designee, who shall assess any costs to the licensee) shall remove a
freestanding newsrack and restore the right-of-way to its original condition in
a manner satisfactory to the director. A licensee shall remain liable for all
license fees from the time a license is issued until such time as all
freestanding newsracks are removed, the license area is restored to its
original condition, and the license is properly terminated.
   (b)   Whenever a city contractor removes a multiple newsrack unit from the
right-of-way for any reason, the city contractor shall restore the right-of-
way to its original condition in a manner satisfactory to the director. (Ord.
Nos. 26809; 27201)
SEC. 43-126.28.   REMOVAL OF NEWSRACKS AND PUBLICATIONS.
   (a)   If the director determines that a freestanding newsrack is not in
compliance with the requirements of this division or that a newsrack space in a
multiple newsrack unit is not being operated in compliance with the
requirements of this division, the director shall send a “Notice of Intent to
Remove” by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the licensee. The notice must state the violation or violations that constitute
the basis for the proposed removal of the licensee’s freestanding newsrack or
the proposed removal of publications from the licensee’s newsrack space in a
multiple newsrack unit, whichever is applicable, and suggest corrective action
if applicable. The notice must specify the date, time, and place for a hearing
to be held before removal.
   (b)   The hearing must be held not less than 10 days following service of
notice. Prior to the hearing, the licensee may correct the violation or may
file a written statement setting forth the reason or reasons why the newsrack
or publications, whichever applies, should not be removed. At the hearing, the
director or the director’s designee shall hear evidence and determine whether
the licensee’s freestanding newsrack complies with this division or whether the
licensee’s newsrack space in a multiple newsrack unit is being operated in
compliance with this division, whichever applies. If it is determined that a
freestanding newsrack is not in compliance with this division, the newsrack
must be removed by the licensee or otherwise brought into compliance. If it is
determined that a newsrack space in a multiple newsrack unit is not being
operated in compliance with this division, the licensee shall remove all
publications from the newsrack space or otherwise bring the operation of the
newsrack space into compliance. The decision of the director may be appealed to
the city manager in accordance with Subsection (e) of this section. If, within
10 days after the date of the hearing or, if an appeal is filed, within 10 days
after the date of the city manager renders a decision, the licensee has not
removed the freestanding newsrack or the publications, whichever applies, or
otherwise come into compliance with this division, the city may remove the
newsrack or the publications and recover the costs of removal and storage from
the licensee.
   (c)   The director may summarily remove or order any freestanding newsrack
removed if it creates an imminent danger of personal injury or property damage.
Promptly following the summary removal, the director shall notify the licensee
by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the
removal, the reason for the removal, and the right to appeal the action to the
city manager in accordance with Subsection (e). The licensee may recover any
newsracks summarily removed upon reimbursement to the city for the costs of
removal and storage. Any coins or publications contained in the newsrack will
be returned to the licensee when the newsrack is returned. The licensee may
return the freestanding newsrack to its original location upon correction of
the violation (unless the location constituted a violation).
   (d)   Any newsrack or publication not claimed within 10 days after removal
by the city may be disposed of by the city as unclaimed property.
   (e)   If the director orders removal of a freestanding newsrack or a
publication under Subsection (b) or summarily removes a freestanding newsrack
under Subsection (c), this action is final unless, within 10 days after the
receipt of notice of the director’s action, the affected licensee, publisher,
or owner of the newsrack or publication, whichever applies, files with the city
manager a written appeal. Within 15 days after the appeal is filed, the city
manager or the city manager’s designee shall consider all the evidence in
support of and against the action appealed and render a decision sustaining,
modifying, or reversing all or part of the director’s action. The formal rules
of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under this subsection, and the
city manager or the city manager’s designee shall make a ruling on the basis of
a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The decision of the
city manager is final as to administrative remedies. (Ord. Nos. 26809; 27201)
SEC. 43-126.29.   MULTIPLE NEWSRACK UNIT ZONES.
   (a)   The city council may, by ordinance, establish zones within the city
where the exclusive use of multiple newsrack units is required. A request for a
multiple newsrack unit zone may be initiated by a city council member or by the
signatures of at least 40 percent of the publishers lawfully operating
freestanding newsracks in the proposed zone.
   (b)   Criteria that may be considered in establishing a multiple newsrack
unit zone include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   whether there is extensive availability and use of public
transportation services and facilities in the proposed zone;
      (2)   whether there is a large amount of pedestrian traffic in the
proposed zone;
      (3)   whether there is a proliferation of freestanding newsracks in the
proposed zone;
      (4)   whether limited space is available for freestanding newsracks in
the proposed zone; and
      (5)   whether the proposed zone is located in a distinct area with an
established urban or neighborhood character.
   (c)   The following areas have been established by the city council as
multiple newsrack unit zones:
      (1)   Expanded Central Business District Zone, which is the area
contained within the following boundaries:
         Dallas North Tollway from Stemmons Freeway to Harry Hines Boulevard;
         Harry Hines Boulevard from the Dallas North Tollway to Field Street;
         Field Street from Harry Hines Boulevard to Woodall Rodgers Freeway;
         Woodall Rodgers Freeway from Field Street to Central Expressway;
         Central Expressway from Woodall Rodgers Freeway to Julius Schepps
Freeway;
         Julius Schepps Freeway from Central Expressway to Interstate 30;
         Interstate 30 from Julius Schepps Freeway to Stemmons Freeway; and
         Stemmons Freeway from Interstate 30 to the Dallas North Tollway.
      (2)   Reserved.
   (d)   Before multiple newsrack units are installed in the Expanded Central
Business District Zone and before an ordinance is adopted establishing any
additional multiple newsrack unit zone, the director shall prepare a plan that
includes:
      (1)   the number and proposed locations of the multiple newsrack units to
be installed in the zone;
      (2)   the design criteria for the multiple newsrack units to be installed
in the zone; and
      (3)   the number and location of existing freestanding newsracks in the
zone.
   (e)   After the plan is prepared, the director shall place on a city council
agenda an item for council consideration of the installation of multiple
newsrack units in the Expanded Central Business District Zone or the
establishment of an additional proposed multiple newsrack unit zone, whichever
applies. At least 10 days before the date of the council meeting at which the
city council will consider the item, notice of the meeting must be sent by
regular United States mail to:
      (1)   all publishers having current licenses with the city to operate
newsracks in the public right- of-way; and
      (2)   all owners of property located within 200 feet of the Expanded
Central Business District Zone or the proposed multiple newsrack unit zone,
whichever applies, except that if more than 10 property owners are located
within that distance, the director may, in lieu of mailing notices to the
property owners, publish the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city at least 10 days before the date of the council meeting.
   (f)   The notice required in Subsection (e) must include the date, time, and
location of the council meeting and a brief summary of the proposed plan for
the multiple newsrack unit zone.
   (g)   After the installation of multiple newsrack units in the Expanded
Central Business District Zone is approved by the city council or after a
multiple newsrack unit zone is established by the city council, the city will
install and maintain multiple newsrack units in the zone. A publisher shall
only use a multiple newsrack unit provided by the city or a city contractor to
dispense publications in a multiple newsrack unit zone, except that any
freestanding newsrack lawfully operating on a blockface at the time the
blockface is included in a multiple newsrack unit zone may continue to operate
on the blockface until multiple newsrack units are actually installed on the
blockface.
   (h)   The director shall allocate newsrack spaces in multiple newsrack units
in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Initial allocation.
         (A)   The director shall determine how many newsrack spaces are
available in multiple newsrack units placed on a blockface in compliance with
this section.
         (B)   The director shall determine how many freestanding newsracks are
being lawfully operated on the blockface. A freestanding newsrack will be
considered as being lawfully operated on a particular blockface if it is
designated as being located on that blockface in the most recent list of
newsrack locations provided to the director by a publisher holding a valid
newsrack license issued by the city council or a valid temporary newsrack
license issued by the director. The list must be received by the director
before the date the city council adopts the particular multiple newsrack unit
zone.
         (C)   If the number of lawfully-operated freestanding newsracks on the
blockface exceeds the number of newsrack spaces available in multiple newsrack
units on the blockface, the director shall conduct a lottery to determine the
allocation of the newsrack spaces.
         (D)   The director shall place in a pool the names of all publications
dispensed in the freestanding newsracks that are being lawfully operated on the
blockface. If the same publication is being dispensed by more than one newsrack
on the blockface, its name will be placed in the pool twice. The director shall
draw from the pool a number of publication names equal to the number of
newsrack spaces available in multiple newsrack units on that blockface. The
director shall assign numbers to the names, beginning with the Number 1 for the
first-drawn name and continuing in a sequential manner. The publications whose
names are drawn will be allocated a newsrack space in a multiple newsrack unit
on the blockface as long as compliance with this division is maintained. The
publishers of the publications allocated a newsrack space through the lottery
process will select locations in the multiple newsrack units on the blockface
in the order in which their publication names were drawn, with Number 1 having
first choice. The director shall draw the remaining publication names from the
pool and assign them a number, beginning with the number following the one
assigned to the last publication allocated a newsrack space in a multiple
newsrack unit on the blockface. These remaining publications will be allocated
a newsrack space in a multiple newsrack unit on the blockface (in the order
drawn) only if any of the other publications originally allocated a newsrack
space do not want the space or do not qualify for the space. The publisher of
any publication that is not allocated a newsrack space in a multiple newsrack
unit on the blockface shall remove the newsrack containing that publication
within 10 days after the date the lottery is conducted.
         (E)   If the number of lawfully-operated freestanding newsracks on the
blockface equals the number of newsrack spaces available in multiple newsrack
units on the blockface, the publications dispensed in those lawfully-operated
newsracks will each be allocated a newsrack space in a multiple newsrack unit
on the blockface as long as compliance with this division is maintained. The
publishers of the publications allocated newsrack spaces under this paragraph
shall select locations in the multiple newsrack units on the blockface in the
order in which their completed license applications are received by the
director in compliance with this division, with the first received having first
choice.
         (F)   If the number of lawfully-operated freestanding newsracks on the
blockface is less than the number of newsrack spaces available in multiple
newsrack units on the blockface, the publications dispensed in those lawfully-
operated newsracks will each be allocated a newsrack space in a multiple
newsrack unit on the blockface as long as compliance with this division is
maintained. The publishers of the existing publications allocated newsrack
spaces under this paragraph shall select locations in a multiple newsrack unit
on the blockface in the order in which their completed license applications are
received by the director in compliance with this division, with the first
received having first choice. The remaining newsrack spaces will be allocated
through the lottery process described in Paragraph (2) of this subsection.
      (2)   Future allocation.
         (A)   Whenever one or more newsrack spaces become available in a
multiple newsrack unit on a blockface, the director shall, by personal service
or by regular United States mail, notify all publishers that a lottery will be
held to allocate the available newsrack spaces. The notice must:
            (i)   identify the number and location (by blockface) of the
available newsrack spaces;
            (ii)   state the date, time, and location of the lottery;
            (iii)   state the date and time by which the director must receive
all requests to have publications entered in the lottery and the address at
which the requests must be received; and
            (iv)   state any other information the director determines
necessary to conduct the lottery.
         (B)   The director shall place in a pool the names of all publications
for which requests to participate in the lottery were timely received. If the
same publication was requested more than once, its name will be placed in the
pool twice. The director shall draw from the pool a number of publication names
equal to the number of newsrack spaces available in multiple newsrack units on
that blockface. The director shall assign numbers to the names, beginning with
the Number 1 for the first-drawn name and continuing in a sequential manner.
The publications whose names are drawn will be allocated a newsrack space in a
multiple newsrack unit on the blockface as long as compliance with this
division is maintained. The publishers of the publications allocated a newsrack
space through the lottery process will select locations in a multiple newsrack
unit on the blockface in the order in which their publication names were drawn,
with Number 1 having first choice. The director shall draw the remaining
publication names from the pool and assign them a number, beginning with the
number following the one assigned to the last publication allocated a newsrack
space in a multiple newsrack unit on the blockface. These remaining
publications will be allocated a newsrack space in a multiple newsrack unit on
the blockface (in the order drawn) only if any of the other publications
originally allocated a newsrack space do not want the space or do not qualify
for the space.
      (3)   Random five-year lottery. Five years after the initial allocation
of newsrack spaces in a multiple newsrack unit on a blockface and every five
years thereafter, the director shall reallocate the newsrack spaces in
accordance with the lottery procedures established in Paragraph (2) of this
subsection. The publisher of any publication that is not allocated a newsrack
space in a multiple newsrack unit on a blockface shall remove any publications
from any newsrack space on that blockface within 10 days after the date the
lottery is conducted.
   (i)   A publisher allocated a newsrack space in a multiple newsrack unit in
a zone shall install and maintain any coin-operated lock it requires to be on
its assigned newsrack. The locking device must be approved by the director (or
a city contractor, if applicable) and must not interfere with the use of the
other newsracks in the multiple newsrack unit.
   (j)   The city may contract with another person for the installation,
operation, maintenance, repair, removal, and replacement of multiple newsrack
units in a multiple newsrack unit zone established under this section. (Ord.
Nos. 26809; 27201)
SEC. 43-126.30.   SPLIT-DOOR NEWSRACKS.
   (a)   A freestanding newsrack or a newsrack space in a multiple newsrack
unit may be split into two separate distribution areas.
   (b)   A separate license and license fee is required for each distribution
area of a split-door newsrack. (Ord. Nos. 26809; 27201; 27659)
SEC. 43-126.31.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who installs, operates, or maintains a newsrack on a public
right-of-way within the city in violation of this division or without a license
issued under this division is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, is
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each day that the violation exists.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person was
installing, operating, or maintaining the newsrack pursuant to a contract with
the city for those services.
   (c)   The penalties provided for in Subsection (a) are in addition to any
other enforcement remedies that the city may have under this division, other
city ordinances, and state law. (Ord. Nos. 26809; 27201)
ARTICLE VII.
SALE OF MERCHANDISE AND PRODUCE ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
SEC. 43-127.   UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION AT THE CONVENTION CENTER AND REUNION
ARENA.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he solicits money on the premises of:
      (1)   the convention center; or
      (2)   reunion arena.
   (b)   If a person engages in conduct that violates Subsection (a), the
person must be ordered to stop the solicitation before being arrested. The
order to stop the solicitation may be given by a police officer, security
officer, or person with authority to control the use of the premises.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   no order was given to stop the solicitation;
      (2)   an order, if given, was promptly obeyed; or
      (3)   the person had the written consent of the lessee of the premises to
conduct a solicitation.
   (d)   For the purposes of this section, “convention center” means the area
contained within the following boundaries:
      BEGINNING at the intersection of the west line of Akard Street with the
south line of Young Street;
      THENCE along the south line of Young Street, in a westerly and
northwesterly direction to its intersection with the east line of S. Griffin
Street;
      THENCE along the east line of S. Griffin Street, in a southerly direction
to its intersection with the prolongation of the northerly line of a tract of
land conveyed to the City of Dallas, by deed as recorded in Volume 83134, Page
5559, Deed Records of Dallas County, Texas;
      THENCE along the prolongation of the northerly line and continuing along
the northerly line of the abovementioned tract of land, in a westerly
direction, passing the east line of S. Lamar Street and continuing to its
intersection with the west line of S. Lamar Street;
      THENCE along the west line of S. Lamar Street, in a southerly direction
to its intersection with the most northerly line of the Final Plat Dallas
Convention Center Expansion (City Plan File #S901-066R);
      THENCE along the northerly line of the abovementioned Dallas Convention
Center Expansion Plat, in a westerly direction to its intersection with the
easterly line of Jefferson Boulevard Viaduct;
      THENCE along the easterly line of Jefferson Boulevard Viaduct, in a
southerly and southwesterly direction to its intersection with the
southwesterly line of Hotel Street;
      THENCE along the southwesterly line of Hotel Street, in a southeasterly
direction to its intersection with the northwesterly R.O.W. line of E. R.L.
Thornton Freeway (I.H. 30);
      THENCE along the northwesterly line of E. R.L. Thornton Freeway (I.H.
30), in a northeasterly direction to its intersection with the northwesterly
line of Canton Street;
      THENCE along the northwesterly line of Canton Street, in a northeasterly
direction to its intersection with the southwesterly line of Akard Street,
excluding a tract of land bounded by Lamar Street, Canton Street, Griffin
Street, and Memorial Drive;
      THENCE along the southwesterly line of Akard Street, in a northwesterly
and northerly direction to its intersection with the south line of Young
Street, and the point of beginning.
   (e)   For the purposes of this section, “reunion arena” means:
      (1)   inside the reunion arena building and that area within 50 feet of
any entrance to or exit from the reunion arena building; and
      (2)   parking area A - being the area bounded by Hotel Street, North
Drive, Sports Street and “South Park” designated as “Parking Area A”, and being
more particularly described as follows:
         BEGINNING at a point on the west edge of the west sidewalk along Hotel
Street, at a distance of 6 feet north of the north curb line of “Parking Area
A”;
         THENCE in a southerly, westerly and northerly direction along the back
edge of the sidewalk which is 10 feet from the curb line along Hotel Street,
North Drive and Sports Street, 413 feet, more or less, to a point 6 feet north
of the north curb line of “Parking Area A”;
         THENCE eastward along the south line of “South Park” and along a line
which is 6 feet perpendicular distance north from and parallel with the north
curb line of “Parking Area A”, 246 feet to the place of beginning; and
      (3)   parking area B - being the area bounded by Stemmons Freeway,
Reunion Boulevard, Sports Street and Sports Place, which is designated as
“Parking Area B”, and being more particularly described as follows:
         BEGINNING at the intersection of the southeast right-of- way line of
Houston Street Viaduct with the northeasterly right-of-way line of Stemmons
Freeway;
         THENCE in a northwesterly and northerly direction along the northeast
and easterly right-of-way line of Stemmons Freeway, and along a line which is
15 feet eastward from the east curb line of the frontage road, 1632 feet, more
or less, to the north curb line of “Parking Area B”;
         THENCE eastward along the north curb line, 213.24 feet to the
southwesterly right-of-way line of Reunion Boulevard;
         THENCE southeastward along the southwest right-of- way line of Reunion
Boulevard and along a line which is 10 feet southwest from the southwest curb
line, 100 feet, more or less, to the easterly right-of-way line of Sports
Street;
         THENCE southerly and southeasterly along the westerly and
northwesterly right-of-way line of Sports Street and along a line which is 10
feet westerly and southwesterly from the westerly curb line of Sports Street,
1367 feet, more or less, to the southeast right-of-way line of Houston Street
Viaduct;
         THENCE southwesterly along the southeast right-of- way of Houston
Street Viaduct and along a line which is 40 feet southeastward from the center
line of the Viaduct, 230 feet, more or less, to the place of beginning.
      (4)   parking area C - being the area bounded by Memorial Drive, Sports
Street, Sports Place and Hotel Street, designated as “Parking Area C”, and
being more particularly described as follows:
         BEGINNING at the intersection of the northwest edge of the sidewalk
along the northwest side of Memorial Drive with the northeast edge of the
sidewalk along the northeast side of Sports Street;
         THENCE northwestward along the northeast edge of the sidewalk along
the northeast side of Sports Street, 280 feet, more or less, to a point on the
southeast edge of the sidewalk along the southeast side of Sports Place;
         THENCE northeastward along the southeast edge of the sidewalk along
the southeast side of Sports Place, 445 feet, more or less, to the northeast
curb line of “Parking Area C”;
         THENCE southeastward along the curb line of the parking area and along
the southwest line of Hotel Street, 275 feet, more or less, to a point on the
northwest edge of the sidewalk along the northwest side of Memorial Drive;
         THENCE southwestward along the northwest edge of the sidewalk along
the northwest side of Memorial Drive, 410 feet, more or less, to the place of
beginning.
      (5)   parking area D - being the area bounded by Stemmons Freeway, Sports
Place, Sports Street, and Memorial Drive, designated as “Parking Area D”, and
being more particularly described as follows:
         BEGINNING at the intersection of the southwestward prolongation of the
northwest line of the sidewalk along the northwest side of Memorial Drive with
the southeastward prolongation of the line of the post with chain, which is
approximately 7 feet from and parallel with the northeast curb line of the east
frontage road along Stemmons Freeway;
         THENCE northwestward along the line of the post with chain, along the
northeast side of Stemmons Freeway, 265 feet, more or less, to an angle point
in the curb line of “Parking Area D”;
         THENCE angle right 35° 00’ and northward along the curb line of the
parking area, 28 feet, more or less, to a corner in the curb;
         THENCE angle right 70° 00’ and northeastward along the curb line of
the parking area, 19 feet to an inside corner;
         THENCE angle left 90° 00’ and northeastward along the curb line of the
parking area, 9 feet to the southeast edge of the 10-foot wide sidewalk along
the southeast side of Sports Place;
         THENCE northeastward along the southeast edge of the sidewalk along
Sports Place, 184 feet to a point for corner in the curb line of the parking
area;
         THENCE angle right 90° 00’ and southeastward along the curb line of
the parking area, 9 feet to an inside corner;
         THENCE angle left 110° 00’ and northward along the curb line of the
parking area, 19 feet, more or less, to a point on the southwest edge of the
sidewalk along the southwest side of Sports Street;
         THENCE southeastward along the line of the southwest edge of said
sidewalk, 282 feet, more or less to a corner in the curb line of the parking
area, said corner being approximately 13 feet southeast from the southeast line
of columns for Jefferson Street Viaduct;
         THENCE angle right 90° 00’ and southwestward along the curb line of
the parking area, 19 feet, more or less, to an inside corner in the curb line;
         THENCE angle left 90° 00’ and southeastward along the curb line of the
parking area, 18 feet, more or less, to a point on the northwest edge of a 10-
foot wide sidewalk along the northwest side of Memorial Drive;
         THENCE southwestward along the line of the northwest edge of the
sidewalk along the northwest side of Memorial Drive, 218 feet, more or less, to
the place of beginning.
      (6)   parking area E - being the area bounded by Memorial Drive, Hotel
Street, R. L. Thornton Freeway and Stemmons Freeway, designated as “Parking
Area E”, and being more particularly described as follows:
         BEGINNING at the southeast corner of “Parking Area E”, which is the
intersection of the southwest edge of the sidewalk along the southwest side of
Hotel Street with the post with chain line along the north line of R. L.
Thornton Freeway;
         THENCE in a westerly and northwesterly direction along the line of
post with chain, along the northerly line of R. L. Thornton Freeway and the
northeasterly line of Stemmons Freeway, 1380 feet, more or less, to a curb line
at the northwest corner of “Parking Area E”, at a distance of approximately 30
feet south of the prolongation of the southeast curb line of Memorial Drive;
         THENCE angle right 90° 00’ and northeastward along the curb line of
said parking area, 22 feet, more or less, to an inside corner in said curb
line;
         THENCE angle left 80° 00’ and northwestward along the curb line of
said parking area, 19 feet to the southeast edge of a 10-foot wide sidewalk
along the southeast side of Memorial Drive;
         THENCE northeastward along the southeast edge of the sidewalk along
the southeast side of Memorial Drive, 189 feet to a corner in said parking
area;
         THENCE angle right 90° 00’ and southeastward along the curb line in
said parking area, 19 feet to an inside corner of said curb;
         THENCE angle left 100° 00’ and northeastward along a curb line in said
parking area, 20 feet to the southwest edge of the sidewalk along the southwest
side of a drive designated as “Driveway E”;
         THENCE angle right 90° 00’ and southeastward along the southwest edge
of the sidewalk along the southwest side of said drive, 15 feet, more or less,
to its intersection with the southwestward prolongation of the southeast edge
of a 10-foot wide sidewalk along the southeast side of Memorial Drive;
         THENCE northeastward along the line of the southeast edge of the 10-
foot wide sidewalk along the southeast side of Memorial Drive, 450 feet, more
or less, to a corner in the most northerly portion of “Parking Area E”;
         THENCE angle right 90° 00’ and southeastward along a curb line in said
parking area, 19 feet to an inside corner in the curb line of said parking
area;
         THENCE angle left 90° 00’ and northeastward parallel with Memorial
Drive and along a curb line of said parking area, 18 feet, more or less, to the
southwest edge of the sidewalk along the southwest side of Hotel Street;
         THENCE southeastward along the southwest edge of the sidewalk along
the southwest side of Hotel Street, 1078 feet, more or less, to the place of
beginning.
      (7)   parking area F - being a fenced area lying within the right-of-way
of Stemmons Freeway at R. L. Thornton Freeway, designated as “Parking Area F”,
and being more particularly described as follows:
         BEGINNING at the intersection of the chain link fence along the
southwest side of the east frontage road along Stemmons Freeway with the
northeastward prolongation of the chain link fence along the northwest side of
“Parking Area F”, said point being approximately 12 feet south of the south end
of the headwall of the culvert for Mill Creek Channel;
         THENCE southeastward along the line of the chain link fence along the
southwest side of the east frontage road, 450 feet, more or less, to a fence
corner;
         THENCE angle right 90° 00’ and southward along the chain link fence,
25 feet, more or less, to an inside corner of the chain link fence;
         THENCE angle left 65° 30’ and southeastward along the chain link
fence, 25 feet, more or less, to a fence corner;
         THENCE southwestward along a chain link fence line along the northwest
line of an access road from the east frontage road to R. L. Thornton Freeway,
known as “Connection G”, 253 feet, more or less, to a fence corner being the
most southerly corner of said “Parking Area F”;
         THENCE northwestward along the chain link fence line, along the
southwest side of the parking area, 467 feet, more or less, to a fence corner
on the northwest line of said parking area;
         THENCE northeastward along the chain link fence along the northwest
side of said parking area, 135 feet, more or less, to the place of beginning.
      (8)   parking area G - being the area bounded by Houston Street Viaduct,
Stemmons Freeway and Industrial Boulevard, and being the area enclosed by chain
link fence and post with chain, designated as “Parking Area G” and being more
particularly described as follows:
         BEGINNING at a fence corner at the intersection of the northwest
right-of-way line of Houston Street Viaduct with the westerly right-of-way line
of Stemmons Freeway;
         THENCE in a southeasterly and southerly direction along a chain link
fence along the westerly right-of- way line of Stemmons Freeway, 1022 feet,
more or less, to a point on the northeast right-of-way line of Industrial
Boulevard;
         THENCE in a northwesterly direction along a line of post, with chain,
along the northeast right-of-way line of Industrial Boulevard, 822 feet, more
or less, to a fence corner which is 3 feet southeast from the northwest right-
of-way line of Houston Street Viaduct;
         THENCE in a northeasterly direction along a chain link fence which is
3 feet southeast from the northwest right- of-way line of Houston Street
Viaduct, 121 feet, more or less, to a fence corner;
         THENCE angle left 90° 00’ in a northwesterly direction along a chain
link fence, 3 feet to a fence corner;
         THENCE angle right 90° 00’ in a northeasterly direction along a chain
link fence along the northwest right-of- way line of Houston Street Viaduct,
336 feet, more or less, to the place of beginning.
      (9)   the Houston Loop Parking Area - being the area bounded by Houston
Street, Houston Street Viaduct, AMTRAK right-of-way and Reunion Boulevard,
designated as “Houston Loop Parking Area” and being more particularly described
as follows:
         BEGINNING at a point on the back of the east curb line of “Houston
Loop Parking Area”, which is along the west line of Houston Street said point
being approximately 12 feet north of the north end of Houston Street Viaduct;
         THENCE southward along the back edge of the east curb line of said
parking area and parallel with Houston Street Viaduct, 607 feet, more or less,
to a guard rail with post;
         THENCE southwestward along the guard rail and post, 40 feet, more or
less, to a chain link fence; which is on the northeast right-of-way line of
AMTRAK;
         THENCE northwestward along the northeast line of the AMTRAK right-of-
way and along a chain link fence, 575 feet, more or less, to the northwest curb
line of said parking area;
         THENCE northeastward along the curb line which is approximately 50
feet southeast from and parallel with the southeast curb line of Reunion
Boulevard, 260 feet, more or less, to the beginning of the concrete pavement
for the exit drive to Reunion Boulevard, which is also the northeast corner of
a concrete pad for a revenue control system;
         THENCE angle right 90° and southeastward, 19 feet;
         THENCE angle left 45° 00’ and eastward 122 feet, more or less, to the
place of beginning. (Ord. Nos. 15167; 16834; 24554)
SEC. 43-128.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 16309)
SEC. 43-129.   CAUSING CROWD TO CONGREGATE ON SIDEWALK.
   No person shall occupy any space on the sidewalk or any space near the
sidewalk where the same attracts any crowd or causes any crowd to congregate on
the sidewalk or where the patrons or customers must remain on the sidewalk, for
the purpose of carrying on any kind of business whether for amusement or
profit. (Code 1941, Art. 143-8)
SECS. 43-130 THRU 43-132. RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 16309)
SEC. 43-133.   USE OF SIDEWALK FOR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE.
   No merchant or owner of a building, fronting on any street, shall be allowed
the use of any portion of any sidewalk for the display of goods, wares or
merchandise. (Code 1941, Art. 143-12; Ord. 3707)
SEC. 43-134.   USE OF SIDEWALK TO FORWARD OR RECEIVE MERCHANDISE.
   Nothing in this article shall be so construed as to prevent any merchant
from occupying not more than one-half of any sidewalk in receiving and
forwarding goods, wares and merchandise; provided, that such goods, wares and
merchandise shall not remain on such sidewalk for a longer period than one and
one-half hours. (Code 1941, Art. 143-12; Ord. 3707)
ARTICLE VIII.
CERTAIN USES OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
SEC. 43-135.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   ABOVE GROUND UTILITY STRUCTURE or AGUS means any utility structure
that extends higher than the surrounding grade.
      (2)   AGUS PLACEMENT GUIDELINES means a manual published by the city of
Dallas that contains engineering, technical, and other special criteria and
standards established by the director for the placement of above ground utility
structures.
      (3)   BACKFILL means:
         (A)   the placement of new dirt, fill, or other material to refill an
excavation; or
         (B)   the return of excavated dirt, fill, or other material to an
excavation.
      (4)   CITY means the city of Dallas and the city's officers and
employees.
      (5)   CLOSURE means a complete or partial closing of a sidewalk or one or
more lanes of traffic of a thoroughfare for any period of time.
      (6)   CONSTRUCTION means any of the following activities performed by any
person within a public right-of-way:
         (A)   Installation, excavation, laying, placement, repair, upgrade,
maintenance, or relocation of facilities or other improvements, whether
temporary or permanent.
         (B)   Modification or alteration to any surface, subsurface, or aerial
space within the public right-of-way.
         (C)   Performance, restoration, or repair of pavement cuts or
excavations.
         (D)   Reconstruction of any of the work described in Paragraphs (6)(A)
through (6)(C) of this subsection.
         (E)   Other similar construction work.
      (7)   DESIGN DISTRICT means an area the city council has designated as a:
         (A)   public improvement district pursuant to Chapter 372 of the Texas
Local Government Code, as amended;
         (B)   reinvestment zone pursuant to Chapter 311 of the Texas Tax Code,
as amended;
         (C)   planned development zoning district;
         (D)   form zoning district subject to Chapter 51A of this code, as
amended; or
         (E)   conservation district.
      (8)   DESIGN MANUAL means a manual published by the city that contains
engineering, technical, and other special criteria and standards established by
the director for the placement, installation, collocation, replacement, and
repair of network nodes, as that term is defined in Chapter 284 of the Texas
Local Government Code, as amended, and any related infrastructure, including
poles, in the public right-of-way.
      (9)   DIRECTOR means the director of transportation and public works or
any designated representative.
      (10)   EMERGENCY ACTIVITY means circumstances requiring immediate
construction or operations by a public service provider to:
         (A)   prevent imminent damage or injury to the health or safety of any
person or to the public right-of-way;
         (B)   restore service; or
         (C)   prevent the loss of service.
      (11)   EXCAVATION means the removal of dirt, fill, or other material in
the public right-of-way, including but not limited to the methods of open
trenching, boring, tunneling, or jacking.
      (12)   FACILITIES means the plant, equipment, buildings, structures,
poles, wires, cables, lines, conduit, mains, pipes, vaults, above ground
utility structures, and appurtenances of a public service provider and includes
property owned, operated, leased, licensed, used, controlled, or supplied for,
by, or in connection with the business of the public service provider.
      (13)   MAJOR PROJECT means any construction that requires a pavement cut
of a length of 300 linear feet or greater within any single street or alley or
any construction in an area that the director determines occurs in an area of
high vehicular traffic.
      (14)   PAVEMENT CUT means a cut made into the paved surface of the public
right-of-way.
      (15)   PAVEMENT CUT AND REPAIR STANDARDS MANUAL means a manual published
by the city of Dallas that contains engineering, technical, and other special
criteria and standards established by the director for pavement cut,
excavation, backfill, restoration, and repair activities in the public right-
of-way.
      (16)   PERMITTEE means the person applying for or receiving a permit to
perform construction within the city's right-of-way under the terms and
conditions of this article. The term includes:
         (A)   any officer, director, partner, manager, superintendent, or
other authorized person exercising control over or on behalf of the permittee;
and
         (B)   any contractor or subcontractor of the permittee, for purposes
of compliance with the City of Dallas Pavement Cut and Repair Standards Manual
and the traffic control, construction, and maintenance requirements of this
article.
      (17)   PERSON means a natural person, a corporation, a public service
provider, a governmental entity or agency (including the city), a limited
liability company, a joint venture, a business trust, an estate, a trust, a
partnership, an association, or any other legal entity.
      (18)   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY means any area of land within the city that is
acquired by, dedicated to, or claimed by the city in fee simple, by easement,
or by prescriptive right and that is expressly or impliedly accepted or used in
fact or by operation of law as a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk,
alley, or utility access easement. The term includes the area on, below, and
above the surface of the public right-of-way. The term applies regardless of
whether the public right-of-way is paved or unpaved. The term does not include
airwaves above the public right-of- way that fall under the exclusive
jurisdiction of the United States government.
      (19)   PUBLIC SERVICE PROVIDER means any wholesale or retail electric
utility, gas utility, telecommunications company, cable company, water utility,
storm water utility, or wastewater utility, regardless of whether the public
service provider is publicly or privately owned or required to operate within
the city pursuant to a franchise, including a network provider as that term is
defined in Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
      (20)   SPOILS or EXCAVATED MATERIAL means construction waste,
construction supplies, or excavated dirt, fill, or other similar material that
is stored or placed upon the surface of a public right-of-way.
      (21)   SUBDIVISION means "subdivision" as defined in Article VIII, "Plat
Regulations," of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (22)   THOROUGHFARE means:
         (A)   a public traffic arterial, as designated in the city's
thoroughfare plan;
         (B)   a nonresidential collector street, as defined in the Street
Design Manual of the city of Dallas; and
         (C)   all streets within the central business district.
      (23)   UTILITY STRUCTURE:
         (A)   means any structure, cabinet, or other appurtenance (other than
a pole or a device attached to a pole) that is owned or used by a public
service provider to provide service; and
         (B)   does not include:
            (i)   a device or structure used to control or direct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on an adjacent roadway; or
            (ii)   any infrastructure that provides water used for fire
suppression. (Ord. Nos. 24495; 26263; 28424; 30239; 30620; 30654; 31313; 32864)
SEC. 43-136.   DIRECTOR’S AUTHORITY; ENFORCEMENT; OFFENSES.
   (a)   The director is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
this article, and to promulgate regulations, including but not limited to
engineering, technical, and other special criteria and standards, to aid in the
administration and enforcement of this article that are not in conflict with
this article, this code, or state or federal law. To further aid in the
administration and enforcement of this article, the director is also authorized
to promulgate regulations and operational standards governing the shared use of
the public right-of-way by transportation uses (including but not limited to
streetcars) and public service providers, so long as those regulations and
standards are not in conflict with this article, this code, or state or federal
law.
   (b)   The director is authorized to enter upon a construction site for which
a permit is granted under this article or, where necessary, upon private
property adjacent to the construction site, for purposes of inspection to
determine compliance with the permit or this article.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   performs, authorizes, directs, or supervises construction without a
valid permit issued under this article;
      (2)   violates any other provision of this article;
      (3)   fails to comply with restrictions or requirements of a permit
issued under this article; or
      (4)   fails to comply with an order or regulation of the director issued
pursuant to this article.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if, in connection with the performance of
construction in the public right-of-way, he:
      (1)   damages the public right-of-way beyond what is incidental or
necessary to the performance of the construction;
      (2)   damages public or private facilities within the public right-of-
way; or
      (3)   knowingly fails to clear debris associated with the construction
from a public right-of- way after construction is completed.
   (e)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (d)(2) if the person
complied with all of the requirements of this article and state law and caused
the damage because the facilities in question:
      (1)   were not shown or indicated in a plan document, plan of record,
record construction drawing, or field survey, staking, or marking; and
      (2)   could not otherwise be discovered in the public right-of-way
through the use of due diligence.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if, while performing any construction or
other activity along a public right-of-way (whether or not a building or other
permit is required for the activity), the person:
      (1)   damages the public right-of-way or public or private facilities
located within the public right-of- way; or
      (2)   fails to clear debris associated with the construction or other
activity from a public right-of-way.
   (g)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (f)(1) and (f)(2)
that the person was performing all of the construction or other activity along
the public right-of-way in compliance with any permit issued for the
construction or activity.
   (h)   A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, authorized, directed, or permitted. An offense under
Subsection (d)(3) or (f)(2) is punishable by a fine of not less than $500 or
more than $2,000. Any other offense under this article is punishable by a fine
of $500. The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this article is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (i)   This article may be enforced by civil court action in accordance with
state or federal law, in addition to any other remedies, civil or criminal, the
city has for a violation of this article.
   (j)   Prior to initiation of civil enforcement litigation, the permittee or
any other person who has violated a provision of this article must be given the
opportunity to correct the violation within the time frame specified by the
director. This subsection does not prohibit the director or the city from
taking enforcement action as to past or present violations of this article,
notwithstanding their correction. (Ord. Nos. 24495; 26263; 28066)
SEC. 43-137.   REGISTRATION; OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Nothing in this section relieves any person from obtaining a permit
under this article to perform work in the public right-of-way.
   (b)   In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, a public
service provider maintaining or operating existing facilities in the public
right-of-way, and any other person working in the public right-of-way, must
register with the director in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   The registration must be on a form furnished by the director and
made in the name of the public service provider that owns the facilities or the
person working in the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Registration expires March 1 of every year after the calendar year
in which the first registration occurs. If a registration is not renewed by the
expiration date, the director shall furnish written notice to the public
service provider or person that the registration has expired. If a public
service provider or person fails to renew registration within 30 calendar days
after the director gives notice of the expiration, the facilities of the public
service provider or person will be deemed to have been legally abandoned.
      (3)   If information provided as part of the registration changes, the
public service provider or person must inform the director in writing not more
than 30 days after the date the change occurs.
      (4)   The public service provider or person shall also include the
following with the registration:
         (A)   The name of the public service provider or person using the
public right-of-way, including any business name, assumed name, or trade name
the public service provider operates under or has operated under within the
past five years.
         (B)   If the public service provider is a certificated
telecommunications provider, the certificate number issued by the Texas Public
Utility Commission.
         (C)   The ordinance number of any franchise or license issued by the
city of Dallas that authorizes the public service provider or person to use the
public right-of-way.
         (D)   The names, mailing addresses, e-mail addresses, and telephone
numbers of at least two persons who will be general, day-to-day contacts for
the public service provider or person. At least one of the addresses must be
within the Dallas/Fort Worth metropolitan area.
         (E)   The name, mailing address, and e-mail address of the officer or
agent designated as the person authorized to receive service of process on
behalf of the public service provider or person.
         (F)   The name, mailing address, e-mail addresses, and telephone
number of any contractor or subcontractor, if known, who will be working in the
public right-of-way on behalf of the public service provider or person.
         (G)   The names, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of at least
two persons serving as emergency contacts who can be reached by telephone 24
hours a day, seven days a week. The telephone numbers should be accessible
without the city having to pay a long distance telephone or toll charge.
         (H)   Proof of existing insurance that complies with the following
requirements:
            (i)   The minimum insurance coverage for a public service provider
must be commercial general liability insurance, or any combination of general
liability and umbrella/excess insurance, (including, but not limited to,
premises operations, personal and advertising injury, products/completed
operations, and independent contractors and contractual liability) with a
minimum combined bodily injury (including death) and property damage limit of
$25,000,000 per occurrence, $25,000,000 products/completed operations
aggregate, and $25,000,000 general aggregate, except that public service
providers or persons conducting pavement cuts or excavations not more than 18
inches in depth from the top of the pavement must provide a minimum combined
bodily injury (including death) and property damage limit of $500,000 per
occurrence $500,000 products/completed operations aggregate, and $500,000
general aggregate. The liability insurance policy must also include coverage
for explosion, collapse, and underground hazards. The insurance coverage must
be written by a company or companies approved to conduct business in the State
of Texas. The city must be named as an additional insured on the policy by
using endorsement CG 20 26 or broader.
            (ii)   The insurance filed by a public service provider or person
working in the public right-of-way must also meet the same requirements as
insurance filed by a permittee under Section
43-140(a)(3) through (a)(7). A public service provider or person registered
under this section has the same duties, obligations, and liabilities as a
permittee under Section
43-140(a)(3) through (a)(7), except that a public service provider or person
registered under this section does not have to file separate proof of insurance
every time it obtains a permit to perform work in the public right-of-way.
            (iii)   If the public service provider or person is an entity that
has a tangible net worth ratio of 3 to 1 (assets to liabilities) with a minimum
tangible net worth of at least $100,000,000, proof of self-insurance sufficient
to meet the coverage required in this subparagraph is sufficient to satisfy the
insurance requirements of this subparagraph.
      (5)   The insurance requirements of Subsection (b)(4)(H) of this section
do not apply to:
         (A)   construction or other activity performed by the city's own
departments or by contractors hired by the city and working on city-owned
facilities within the public right-of-way; or
         (B)   a public service provider or person operating facilities or
performing construction pursuant to a valid existing franchise or license
approved by the city council. (Ord. Nos. 24495; 26263; 29993)
SEC. 43-138.   PLANS OF RECORD.
   (a)   Any public service provider with facilities in the public right-of-way
shall submit plans of record in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   On or before April 1, 2001, a public service provider shall submit
to the director a schedule to provide complete plans of record that show all of
its facilities existing in the public right-of-way as of the date the plans of
record are submitted to the director in compliance with this section. The
schedule must provide for all plans of record for existing facilities inside
the central business district to be furnished to the director on or before
March 1, 2002 and for all plans of record for existing facilities outside the
central business district to be furnished to the director on or before March 1,
2003.
      (2)   On or before March 1 of each calendar year following the initial
submittal of its plans of record, a public service provider shall provide to
the director plans of record that show all installations of new facilities, and
all changes, additions, abandonments, and relocations relating to existing
facilities, completed in the previous calendar year, both inside and outside of
the central business district.
      (3)   The plans of record must be provided in a format specified by the
director and must contain such detail and accuracy as are required by the
director. Plans of record must be submitted in computerized or digital format.
   (b)   If plans of record submitted under this section include information
expressly designated by the public service provider as a trade secret or other
confidential information protected from disclosure by state law, the director
may not disclose that information to the public without the consent of the
public service provider, unless otherwise compelled by an opinion of the
attorney general pursuant to the Texas Open Records Act, as amended, or by a
court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This
subsection may not be construed to authorize a public service provider to
designate all matters in its plans of record as confidential or as trade
secrets. (Ord. Nos. 24495; 26263)
SEC. 43-139.   PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS; CONDITIONS; DENIAL AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   A person shall not perform any construction, except for an emergency
activity, within a public right- of-way without first obtaining a permit from
the director prior to the start of construction. A person who undertakes any
work outside of the public right- of-way that will cut, break, or otherwise
damage the public right-of-way shall also obtain a permit under this section.
Except as provided in Subsection (b), a permit is required in accordance with
this section for the following types of construction, regardless of whether the
construction is in or outside of a public right-of-way:
      (1)   Installation of an above ground utility structure that does not
replace an existing facility.
      (2)   Replacement or upgrade of an existing above ground utility
structure with another above ground utility structure.
      (3)   Replacement of an existing below ground utility structure with an
above ground utility structure.
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   A permit is not required under Subsection (a) if the activity in or
outside of the public right-of-way consists exclusively of:
         (A)   the placement of an above ground utility structure on property
that is not:
            (i)   zoned as residential; or
            (ii)   adjacent to property zoned as residential;
         (B)   the replacement or upgrade of an existing above ground utility
structure on or adjacent to property that is zoned as residential when:
            (i)   the existing structure is less than 39 inches tall; and
            (ii)   the replacement or upgrade will not increase the size or
change the location of the structure; or
            
         (C)   maintenance or service to an existing above ground utility
structure.
      (2)   A permit is not required under Subsection (a) if the activity in
the public right-of-way consists exclusively of:
         (A)   a connection of real property to a retail utility service on the
same side of the public right- of-way, if the connection does not require a
pavement cut; or
         (B)   the replacement of a single damaged pole.
   (c)   The following procedures and requirements govern the application for
and issuance of a permit required under Subsection (a) of this section:
      (1)   A permit application must be made in writing on a form approved by
the director. The application must be signed and submitted by the owner of the
facility for which the permit is requested or, if the work does not involve a
facility, by the owner of the improvement for which the permit is requested.
      (2)   Except in the case of a major project, a permit application must be
submitted to the director not less than three business days before commencement
of the proposed construction unless emergency activity is required, in which
case immediate notice, including the reasons for the emergency activity, must
be given to the director. The proposed construction on the project may commence
upon issuance of the permit by the director.
      (3)   A permit application for a major project must be submitted enough
time in advance of the commencement of the proposed construction to allow the
director at least 30 business days for review. During this project submission
review period, schedules, alternatives to cutting the street, utility
assignments, special repair requirements, and all other questions will be
resolved. Adjustments to time limits specified in the Pavement Cut and Repair
Standards Manual may be granted by the director for major project work. The
proposed construction on the project may commence upon issuance of the permit
by the director.
      (4)   A permit application must include a statement by the applicant that
the applicant has collected all available plans for existing city of Dallas
underground facilities and other public and private utilities and has included
those facilities and utilities in the applicant's design, showing no apparent
conflict. The statement must also affirm that the applicant will perform field
verifications as necessary during construction to locate all city and other
existing underground facilities.
      (5)   A permit application for an above ground utility structure in or
outside of a public right-of-way must include identification of appropriate
locations for the structure that are consistent with the placement criteria set
forth in the AGUS Placement Guidelines.
      (6)   The permit application on any project must include submittal of
plans to the director. When required by the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as
amended, the plans must be sealed by a professional engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Texas. The plans must include the horizontal and
vertical alignments of all proposed facilities in relation to all existing
public and private facilities in plan view. The plans must clearly show the
proposed locations of all above ground utility structures and include a detail
view showing the height, width, and depth dimensions of each type of above
ground utility structure (including any supporting pad) to be installed. If the
project is a major project that is located within the central business
district, crosses street intersections, or involves crossing proposed
facilities over or under existing facilities, the plans must also include a
representation of the vertical alignment of the facilities in profile view.
Each sheet of the plans must have a note instructing the contractor to verify
the location of underground utilities at least 100 feet in advance of all
proposed utility crossings, and also at locations where the proposed facilities
are shown to be running parallel to existing facilities within five feet. The
plans must be half size (11" X 17") at a scale no smaller than 1" = 40' in plan
view and 1" = 6' in profile view. Each project must be assigned a project
number, which must appear on each sheet. Plans must be readable with a minimum
lettering size of 1/8".
      (7)   A permit is required even if other authority has been granted by
the director to make a pavement cut or excavation in a public right-of-way as
part of a city construction project.
      (8)   The director shall state on the permit the activity for which the
permit is issued and include any additional restrictions or requirements
determined necessary by the director.
      (9)   The permittee has the exclusive responsibility to coordinate with
other public service providers to protect all existing facilities in the public
right-of-way in which the construction occurs.
      (10)   The permittee shall, as an express condition of the permit, comply
in all respects with the requirements prescribed for the permitted activity in
the Pavement Cut and Repair Standards Manual, the AGUS Placement Guidelines,
and the Design Manual, as applicable; and with all other city ordinances and
state or federal laws or regulations affecting the permitted activity.
      (11)   The director shall notify persons who registered under Section
43-137 during the previous calendar year of pavement surfaces to be
reconstructed or resurfaced by the city during the next calendar year.
      (12)   A person or public service provider planning construction within
the public right-of-way shall notify the director by March 1 of each year of
all then-known facility expansion or replacement projects planned for the next
fiscal year that may require pavement cuts or excavations.
      (13)   The director may require any permittee to use trenchless
technology or boring, instead of disturbing a public right-of-way surface, if
it is:
         (A)   in the best interest of the city;
         (B)   technically, commercially, and economically feasible; and
         (C)   not in violation of federal or state regulations or industry
safety standards.
      (14)   Directional drilling or boring may not be used in the central
business district, unless otherwise approved by the director as being in the
best interest of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience.
      (15)   In using trenchless technology or boring, whether or not required
under Paragraph (13) of this subsection, the permittee must:
         (A)   obtain and have at the construction site recent plans from the
city's water utilities department, and, where available, plans from owners of
all other underground facilities, showing the horizontal and vertical placement
of the underground facilities, if the permittee's proposed facilities will:
            (i)   cross other existing facilities; or
            (ii)   be located within five feet of existing facilities at any
point;
         (B)   locate all water main lines by potholing, if the permittee's
proposed facilities will:
            (i)   cross other existing facilities; or
            (ii)   be located within five feet of existing facilities at any
point; and
         (C)   be able to locate the bore head at all times in accordance with
the latest technologies and provide the location of the bore to the director
upon request.
      (16)   The permittee shall maintain the construction area in a public
right-of-way in a manner that avoids dust, other health hazards, and hazards to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic until the public right-of-way is permanently
repaired.
      (17)   When making a pavement cut or excavation, or placing spoils or
excavated material in or along a public right-of-way, the permittee shall place
barricades, warning signs, and warning lights at the location sufficient to
warn the public of the hazard of the cut, excavation, spoils, or excavated
material in compliance with the latest Edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, as amended, published by the Texas Department of
Transportation and City of Dallas requirements. Excavated material and debris
must be removed from the right-of-way on a daily basis.
      (18)   The director may require the permittee to share trench space to
minimize the disruption of vehicular and pedestrian traffic or to provide space
for needed city facility installations if such sharing is:
         (A)   technically, commercially, and economically feasible; and
         (B)   not in violation of state or federal regulations or industry
safety standards.
      (19)   A traffic control plan must be submitted with the permit
application and must include detailed drawings showing the proposed traffic
controls for vehicular and pedestrian traffic for each phase of the proposed
work in the public right-of-way. Traffic control plans must show necessary
pedestrian sidewalk detours, crosswalk closures, temporary covered walkways, or
scaffolding for the safety of pedestrians that comply with the requirements of
the latest edition of the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as
amended, published by the Texas Department of Transportation and City of Dallas
requirements. Traffic control plans must be approved by the City of Dallas
before commencing work.
      (20)   The permittee must affirm on the permit application that the
permittee has complied with the pre-construction notice requirements in this
article.
      (21)   The director may prohibit street excavation when a permittee seeks
to install facilities in a design district or in an area that is part of a
major project, unless the permittee can show that existing facilities are
unavailable to serve the current needs of the permittee or the permittee's
existing customers, whether through facilities owned by the permittee or are
otherwise available.
   (d)   The following additional procedures apply if it is necessary to close,
in whole or in part, a public right- of-way for purposes of making a pavement
cut or an excavation:
      (1)   For any closure of a traffic lane or blocking of a sidewalk or
alley lasting one day or less, the permittee shall conspicuously mark its
vehicles with the permittee’s name and telephone number.
      (2)   Any closure of a traffic lane or blocking of a sidewalk or alley
lasting longer than one day must be identified by a sign that is clearly
legible to the traveling public. The sign must be posted at or in close
proximity to the worksite and must contain:
         (A)   the name of the permittee;
         (B)   the name of the person performing the construction on behalf of
the permittee, if any; and
         (C)   a local 24-hour contact number that can be used in case of
emergency or to answer any questions.
      (3)   The requirements of Paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection are
in addition to any other signage, barricades, or warning devices required by
law or ordinance. The sign information required by Paragraph (2) of this
subsection may be included on barricades or warning devices.
      (4)   When permitted construction will last longer than two weeks, the
permittee shall give written notification to all adjacent property occupants by
conspicuously posting the notification on each adjacent property at least 72
hours before commencement of construction, unless the director determines that
an emergency exists.
      (5)   If a street or alley must be totally closed for any duration, the
permittee shall provide for reasonable alternative access to the adjacent
property by the property’s occupants and invitees, which access must include
but is not limited to deliveries to the property.
      (6)   If construction on a partially closed thoroughfare stops for the
day, all thoroughfare lanes must be reopened to traffic, unless an extended
time of closure is expressly granted by the permit.
      (7)   If a pavement cut is to be covered, the permittee shall use steel
plates, or equivalent plates, of sufficient strength and thickness to support
all traffic.
      (8)   Plates must be sufficiently secured in place so as not to become
dislodged or in any way cause a hazard to any traffic or cause any loud and
disturbing noises and vibrations through the use of materials such as asphalt,
flexible plastic gaskets, wedges, or other non-asphaltic devices. Transitions
must be placed as required with a minimum 2:1 slope to provide a reasonably
smooth riding surface.
      (9)   Plates must be marked with the name of the person performing the
construction and with a local 24-hour contact number that can be used in case
of an emergency, unless a sign complying with Paragraph (2) of this subsection
is posted at or in close proximity to the worksite.
   (e)   Unless it becomes necessary to conduct emergency activity, a permittee
shall not cause or allow interference with traffic flow on a thoroughfare,
arterial, or a community collector during the hours of 6:30 a.m. through 9:30
a.m. and 3:30 p.m. through 6:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.
   (f)   A temporary repair may not remain on public right-of-way for more than
14 calendar days after the completion of the repair or installation of the
underground structure or facility, unless a time extension has been granted by
the director. The city may, at the expense of the permittee or other
responsible person, remove any temporary repair remaining in the public right-
of-way beyond the 14-day time limit and make permanent repairs. Any exception
to the 14-day time limit, other than a relocation of a facility in advance of a
city construction project in the public right-of-way, must be approved by the
director prior to expiration of the time limit.
   (g)   If no construction has commenced under a permit within 60 calendar
days after issuance of the permit, the permit becomes null and void, and a new
permit is required before construction may be performed in the public right-of-
way or, for an above ground utility structure, in or outside of the public
right-of-way. An extension to a permit may be granted by the director only
before the permit expires.
   (h)   The director may refuse to issue a permit if:
      (1)   the proposed construction will substantially interfere with
vehicles or pedestrians and no procedures, or procedures inconsistent with this
article, have been implemented to minimize the interference;
      (2)   the proposed construction will substantially interfere with another
activity for which a permit has been issued, or will conflict or interfere with
existing facilities already in the public right-of- way;
      (3)   the proposed barricading, channelizing, signing, warning, or other
traffic control procedures or equipment do not comply with the requirements of
the 1980 edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as
amended;
      (4)   the proposed construction, incidental traffic control, or other
permitted activity, or the manner in which it is to be performed, will violate
a city ordinance or regulation or a state or federal statute or regulation;
      (5)   the permittee:
         (A)   failed to furnish all the information required by this article;
         (B)   knowingly or intentionally furnished materially false or
incorrect information to the director;
         (C)   failed, except for good cause shown, to file the application on
the approved form within the time limits prescribed by this section;
         (D)   failed or refused to submit plans of record as required under
Section
43-138;
         (E)   was convicted of violating a provision of this article twice
within the two-year period immediately preceding the date of application;
         (F)   failed to furnish or have on file with the director the
insurance required under this article;
         (G)   is not in compliance with applicable requirements of an existing
permit issued under this article;
         (H)   has not obtained a current copy of the Pavement Cut and Repair
Standards Manual from the director; or
         (I)   failed to comply with the AGUS Placement Guidelines without
having received a waiver by the director under Section
43-141.
   (i)   The director may suspend construction or revoke an issued permit on
the same grounds on which a permit may be denied under Subsection (h), or if
the permittee:
      (1)   commences or performs construction in violation of an applicable
requirement of this article or the permit;
      (2)   creates or is likely to create a public health or safety hazard by
performance of the construction in question;
      (3)   fails to comply with an order or regulation of the director;
      (4)   fails to comply with restrictions or requirements of other city
ordinances or state or federal laws or regulations applicable to the
construction; or
      (5)   commences or performs work without having prior knowledge and
understanding of the applicable repair standards or without having obtained a
current copy of the Pavement Cut and Repair Standards Manual from the director.
   (j)   The director shall provide written notice of a suspension or
revocation to the permittee or the person hired by the permittee to perform the
construction. Construction that is suspended may not resume until the director
determines that the permittee has corrected the violation, noncompliance, or
hazard that caused the suspension. A permit that has been revoked may be
reinstated by the director if the director determines that:
      (1)   the permittee has corrected the violation, noncompliance, or hazard
that caused the revocation; and
      (2)   the health or safety of the public is not jeopardized by
reinstating the permit.
   (k)   Any variance from the requirements of this article must be approved in
advance by the director. The director may grant a variance only if an extreme
hardship exists and the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience is not
adversely affected by granting the variance. The director may not approve any
variance that would give a competitive advantage to one person over another
person providing the same or similar service. The director may not grant a
variance from the indemnity requirements of Section
43-140(d). (Ord. Nos. 24495; 26263; 29993; 30620; 31209)
SEC. 43-139.1.   NETWORK NODES AND RELATED INFRASTRUCTURE.
   (a)   The terms used in this section have the meanings ascribed to them in
Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
   (b)   A person shall not construct, place, install, replace, upgrade,
repair, or collocate a network node or related infrastructure, including poles,
within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the
director.
   (c)   Permit applications must be accepted and processed as provided in the
Design Manual and in accordance with Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government
Code, as amended. A permit application for a network node must be accompanied
by a fully executed pole attachment agreement for the proposed location or an
approved permit for a node support pole at the proposed location in order for
the application to be deemed complete. The director shall deny applications
that do not include required materials and information in accordance with state
law and the Design Manual.
   (d)   A person shall not file, or have pending, more than 30 permit
applications for the installation or collocation of network nodes at any time.
   (e)   Permit fees and compensation for use of the right-of-way and any city
infrastructure pursuant to Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, shall be as provided by state law and the Design Manual.
   (f)   The placement, installation, or collocation of a network node or
related infrastructure, including poles, in a design district with decorative
poles or in a district the city has designated as historic, is subject to
additional design, concealment, and aesthetic standards, as set out in the
Design Manual.
   (g)   A network provider shall not install a new node support pole in a
public right-of-way if the public right-of-way is:
      (1)   adjacent to property under the control and jurisdiction of the park
board; or
      (2)   adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is not more than 50 feet
wide and adjacent to property zoned for residential uses, as that term is
defined by the Dallas Development Code, or deed restriction.
   (h)   Designations.
      (1)   Any area that meets the definition of a design district under this
article is hereby designated a design district for purposes of Chapter 284 of
the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
      (2)   Any area within the city without utility poles is hereby designated
as an underground district pursuant to Chapter 284 of the Local Government
Code, as amended, and is subject to additional design, concealment, and
aesthetic standards as set out in the Design Manual.
   (i)   A person acting under this section shall do so in accordance with the
terms of the permit, the Design Manual, and all applicable city ordinances,
state, and federal laws. (Ord. 30620)
SEC. 43-140.   INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   As an express precondition to being granted a permit to perform
construction within a public right- of-way, the permittee shall furnish the
director proof of existing insurance in accordance with the following
requirements:
      (1)   If the construction will require a pavement cut or excavation not
more than 18 inches in depth and 300 feet in length, the permittee must provide
proof of commercial general liability insurance (including, but not limited to,
premises operations, personal and advertising injury, products/completed
operations, and independent contractors and contractual liability) with a
minimum combined bodily injury (including death) and property damage limit of
$500,000 per occurrence, $500,000 products/completed operations aggregate, and
$500,000 general aggregate. The insurance coverage must be written by a company
or companies approved to conduct business in the State of Texas. The city must
be named as an additional insured on the policy by using endorsement CG 20 26
or broader.
      (2)   If the construction will require a pavement cut or excavation
exceeding either 18 inches in depth or 300 feet in length, the permittee must
provide proof of commercial general liability insurance, or any combination of
general liability and umbrella/excess insurance, (including, but not limited
to, premises operations, personal and advertising injury, products/completed
operations, and independent contractors and contractual liability) with a
minimum combined bodily injury (including death) and property damage limit of
$25,000,000 per occurrence, $25,000,000 products/completed operations
aggregate, and $25,000,000 general aggregate. The liability insurance policy
must also include coverage for explosion, collapse, and underground hazards.
The insurance coverage must be written by a company or companies approved to
conduct business in the State of Texas. The city must be named as an additional
insured on the policy by using endorsement CG 20 26 or broader.
      (3)   Each policy must include a provision that requires the insurance
company to notify the city in writing at least 30 days before canceling or
failing to renew the policy or before reducing policy limits or coverages.
      (4)   The permittee agrees, with respect to the insurance coverage
required by this subsection, to waive subrogation against the city and its
officers and employees for bodily injury (including death), property damage, or
any other loss.
      (5)   The insurance coverage required by this subsection is considered
primary insurance in regard to the city and its officers, employees, and
elected representatives.
      (6)   Proof of insurance in the form of an original industry standard
certificate of insurance showing the city as an additional insured must be
provided to the director prior to any commencement of work by the permittee.
The certificate of insurance must be executed by the insurer or its authorized
agent and must state specific coverage, limits, and expiration dates in
accordance with the requirements of this subsection.
      (7)   The permittee shall make available to the director, upon request, a
copy of the insurance policy, including any endorsements, riders, and
amendments to the policy and any statements respecting coverage under the
policy.
   (b)   A permittee who is a public service provider who has registered and
filed proof of insurance under Section
43-137 of this article is not required to furnish separate proof of insurance
under this section when obtaining a permit, but must comply with all other
requirements of this section.
   (c)   If the permittee is an entity that has a tangible net worth ratio of 3
to 1 (assets to liabilities) with a minimum tangible net worth of at least
$100,000,000, proof of self-insurance sufficient to meet the coverage required
in Subsection (a) is sufficient to satisfy the requirements of that subsection.
   (d)   The following indemnity provisions apply to a public service provider
registered under Section
43-137 and are also included by reference as express terms of a permit issued
under this article:
      (1)   A permittee who is a certificated telecommunications provider as
defined in Chapter 283, Texas Local Government Code, as amended, or a network
provider as defined by Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, agrees to give to the city the indemnity provided in Section 283.057,
Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
      (2)   A permittee, other than a certificated telecommunications provider
described in Paragraph (1) of this subsection, expressly agrees to fully and
completely defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officers,
agents, and employees, against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs,
and expenses for personal injury (including death), property damage or other
harm for which recovery of damages is sought, suffered by any person or
persons, that may arise out of or be occasioned by any negligent, grossly
negligent, wrongful, or strictly liable act or omission of the permittee or its
agents, employees, or contractors, in the performance of work or activity
pursuant to the permit issued under this article, regardless of whether or not
the negligence, gross negligence, wrongful act, or fault of the city or its
officers, agents, or employees, contributes in any way to the damage, injury,
or other harm. The requirement of the permittee to defend the city also
unconditionally applies regardless of whether or not the negligence, gross
negligence, or fault of the city or its officers, agents, or employees
contributes in any way to the damage, injury, or other harm. Nothing in this
paragraph may be construed as waiving any governmental immunity available to
the city under state law. This provision is solely for the benefit of the
permittee and the city and is not intended to create or grant any rights,
contractual or otherwise, in or to any other person.
   (e)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   construction or other activity performed by the city’s own forces
or by contractors hired by the city and working on city-owned facilities within
the public right-of-way;
      (2)   a person operating facilities or performing construction pursuant
to a valid existing franchise or license approved by the city council; or
      (3)   construction or repair of a sidewalk or driveway approach for an
abutting single-family or duplex residential property owner. (Ord. Nos. 24495;
26263; 30620)
SEC. 43-140.1.   PERFORMANCE BOND; LETTER OF CREDIT; CASH DEPOSIT.
   (a)   General. As an express precondition to being granted a permit to
perform construction within a public right-of-way, the permittee shall furnish
the director a performance bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit, complying
with this section, for any project that involves pavement excavation or boring
for the installation of a new facility or for a significant facility relocation
other than an excavation or boring for a localized new service line
installation or facility repair. Without exception, the city’s forms must be
used, and exclusive venue for any lawsuit is specified as Dallas County. A
performance bond will automatically be increased by the amount of any change
order, which increases the contract price with or without notice to the surety,
but in no event may a change, which reduced the contract amount, reduce the
penal sum of the bond.
   (b)   Amount. A good and sufficient bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit
must be in an amount not less than 100 percent of the total cost, as determined
by the director, of those items of work associated with the temporary and
permanent repair of the city’s infrastructure, including, but not limited to
backfill, pavement base, street pavement, curb and gutter, drive approaches,
sidewalk, sod, irrigation, landscape, traffic control devices, signs, and
pavement markings, thereby guaranteeing the full and faithful execution of the
work and performance of the contract in accordance with the plans,
specifications, and contract documents, including any extensions thereof, for
the protection of the city. The bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit
agreement must provide for the repair and/or replacement of all defects due to
faulty materials and workmanship that appear within a period of one year from
the date of completion and acceptance of the work by the city. The permittee
may choose to have the amount determined on a per project basis or an aggregate
basis. If on an aggregate basis, the amount of a single bond, letter of credit,
or cash deposit must be sufficient to cover all of permittee’s projects
outstanding at any one time. If the amount of the permittee’s outstanding
projects exceeds an existing bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit, the
permittee shall immediately increase it or post a new bond, letter of credit,
or cash deposit to cover the project that has caused the deficiency.
   (c)   Sureties. No surety may be accepted by the city who is in default or
delinquent on any bonds or who is interested in any litigation against the
city. All bonds must be made on the forms furnished by the city and must be
executed by not less than one corporate surety authorized to do business in the
State of Texas and acceptable to the city. Each surety must be listed in the
most current Federal Register Treasury List. The permittee and the surety shall
execute each bond. The surety shall designate a resident agent in the city of
Dallas acceptable to the city to whom any requisite notices may be delivered
and on whom service of process may be had in matters arising out of such
suretyship. The city reserves the right to reject any and all sureties.
   (d)   Additional or substitute bonds. If at any time the city is or becomes
dissatisfied with any surety on a performance bond, the permittee shall, within
five days after notice from the city to do so, substitute an acceptable bond,
or provide an additional bond, in such form and sum signed by such other surety
as may be satisfactory to the city. The premiums on the bonds must be paid by
the permittee without recourse to the city.
   (e)   Letter of credit. In lieu of a performance bond, a permittee may
provide an irrevocable letter of credit. Each letter of credit must be made on
a form furnished by the city.
   (f)   Cash deposit. In lieu of a performance bond, a permittee may make a
cash deposit, for the benefit of the city, pursuant to an agreement in a form
acceptable to the city attorney. (Ord. Nos. 25409; 25693; 26263)
SEC. 43-140.2.   WAIVER OF BONDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   A person registered under Section
43-137 may annually submit to the director a written request for a waiver from
the requirement that it provide a performance bond, letter of credit, or cash
deposit pursuant to Section
43-140.1.
   (b)   The waiver request must set forth in detail the basis for the request,
including but not limited to:
      (1)   the person's history of performance in completing its projects and
complying with restoration obligations in the city's rights-of-way; and
      (2)   documentation, in a form acceptable to the city, demonstrating that
the person has unencumbered assets or reserves sufficient to cover the amount
of the performance bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit that would otherwise
be required under Section
43-140.1.
   (c)   Within 30 calendar days after receiving a written request for a
waiver, the director may, for good cause shown, grant a waiver from the
requirement that the person provide a performance bond, letter of credit, or
cash deposit pursuant to Section
43-140.1. In making this decision, the director shall consider all of the
following:
      (1)   The person's record of performance in the city's rights-of-way.
      (2)   The person's record of compliance with this article.
      (3)   A showing of financial responsibility by the person sufficient to
guarantee the full and faithful execution of the estimated work to be performed
during the year in which the waiver is in effect.
      (4)   Any other factor relevant to a determination of the financial
responsibility of the person and its ability to safely and fully perform
permitted work.
   (d)   A waiver expires one year after being granted by the director, and the
person must reapply for a waiver each year during which it will perform work in
the city's rights-of-way.
   (e)   Upon determining that a person is in violation of this article, the
director may deny any request for a waiver and may terminate any existing
waiver that had been granted under this section. A person whose waiver is
terminated may not reapply for another waiver until two years have elapsed
since the date of termination.
   (f)   If a waiver is denied or terminated by the director, the person shall
immediately take all necessary steps to temporarily restore the right-of-way
and then cease all work in the right-of-way until the person has provided a
bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit that has been approved by the director.
(Ord. Nos. 25693; 26263; 29993)
SEC. 43-141.   MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS FOR STREET EXCAVATION AND
INSTALLATIONS, TRENCH SAFETY, AND ABOVE GROUND UTILITY STRUCTURES.
   (a)   In addition to the other requirements of this article, a pavement cut,
excavation, or repair, or the placement of an above ground utility structure,
necessitated by or as a result of construction inside or outside of the public
right-of-way must comply with all of the requirements contained in this
section.
   (b)   General.
      (1)   A pavement cut in the public right-of-way, or the placement of an
above ground utility structure either in or outside of a public right-of-way,
may be made prior to obtaining a permit only if a valid need to perform
emergency activity exists. Immediate notice, including reasons for the
emergency activity, must be given to the director. An application for a permit
must be made not later than the second business day following commencement of
the emergency activity.
      (2)   A pavement cut that is made in a concrete street that has a paving
condition index of 70 or higher as shown on the City of Dallas Paving
Management Database will require that, in addition to repairs made in
compliance with the Pavement Cut and Repair Standards Manual, replacement of
the entire concrete panel from joint to joint.
      (3)   A pavement cut that is made in an asphalt street that has a paving
condition index of 70 or higher as shown on the City of Dallas Paving
Management Database will require that, in addition to repairs made in
compliance with the Pavement Cut and Repair Standards Manual, a surface
treatment must be applied that consists of slurry seal or micro-surfacing, or
an equivalent method approved by the director, for the purposes of sealing the
repair edges of the cut and maintaining uniformity in appearance with the
surrounding street surfaces. No surface treatment is required if the repairs
are made to match pavement color and are approved by the director. The
application of slurry seal or micro-surfacing must be made to the entire block
of the street in which a cut is made. For an undivided street, the application
must be made from curb to curb, and for a divided street, from median curb to
outside curb. The City of Dallas Slurry Seal and Micro-surfacing
Specifications, as amended, will govern design, material, testing, and
construction of surface treatments.
      (4)   The permittee and any person responsible for construction shall
protect the public right-of-way surface, drainage facilities, and all other
existing facilities and improvements from excavated materials, equipment
operations, and other construction activities. Particular attention must be
paid to ensure that no excavated material or contamination of any type is
allowed to enter or remain in a water or wastewater main or access structure,
drainage facility, or natural drainage feature. Adequate provisions must be
made to ensure that traffic and adjacent property owners experience a minimum
of inconvenience.
   (c)   Five-year maintenance period.
      (1)   All construction must be done in a good and workmanlike manner and
in faithful and strict compliance with the permit, this article, other city
ordinances, and regulations promulgated by the director relating to
construction within the public right-of-way.
      (2)   All construction performed under any permit granted to a permittee
by the city under this article must be maintained to the satisfaction of the
director for five years after the date of completion of the construction or
repair.
      (3)   Any damage to, or any defect or other problem in, the permitted
construction occurring at any time within five years after the completion of
work under the permit must be corrected to the satisfaction of the director
within 10 days after the director gives notice to the permittee to correct the
damage, defect, or other problem.
      (4)   The opinion of the director as to the necessity of correcting any
damage, defect, or other problem is binding on all parties.
   (d)   Repairs.
      (1)   All damage caused directly or indirectly to the public right-of-way
surface or subsurface outside the pavement cut or excavation area will be
regarded as a part of the pavement cut or excavation and must be included in
the total area repaired. If repaired by the city, the permittee shall reimburse
the city for the actual direct and indirect costs of the repair.
      (2)   The director shall notify the permittee if the backfill on a
permitted construction settles at any time during the five- year maintenance
period required in Subsection (c) of this section, causing subsidence in the
pavement of one-half inch or more, vertically measured in any three-foot
horizontal direction. Upon notification, the permittee shall schedule
appropriate repair work and promptly notify the director of the anticipated
dates of commencement and completion of the repair work. If the repair work is
not commenced or completed within the agreed-upon time schedule, or if no
response is received by the director within 24 hours after notification to the
permittee, the repair work may be performed by the city. The permittee shall
reimburse the city for the actual direct and indirect costs of any repair work
performed by the city.
      (3)   The permittee shall notify the director at least 24 hours before
commencing any repair operations under Paragraph (2) of this subsection.
   (e)   Trench safety.
      (1)   Trench safety systems that meet U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration standards are required for construction in which trench
excavation will exceed a depth of five feet.
      (2)   Paragraph (1) of this subsection does not apply to a construction
contract entered into by a permittee that is subject to the safety standards
adopted under Chapter 121, Texas Utilities Code, as amended.
   (f)   Tests.
      (1)   The permittee will be required to provide a certified construction
materials testing lab, or use a testing method approved by the director, to
perform the appropriate tests, at the permittee's expense, to ensure quality
control for the backfill and pavement construction phases. Concrete strength
test results must be submitted to the director for any placement greater than
five cubic yards.
      (2)   Unless another method is approved by the director, tests must be
made in accordance with the latest methods of the American Society of Testing
and Materials. The certified results from tests for backfill compaction must be
supplied to the city within three days of the backfill work completion and
before pavement construction begins. The results from tests for pavement
construction must be submitted within one week of completion of the project.
Retesting after failure to pass the required tests will be at the expense of
the permittee.
      (3)   Compaction testing is not required when a flowable backfill
material that complies with the Pavement Cut and Repair Standards Manual, as
amended, is used.
      (4)   If the materials used for the street repairs do not meet the
minimum requirements of the Pavement Cut and Repair Standards Manual, they may
be considered unacceptable and may be ordered to be removed and replaced at the
permittee's expense. In cases where the repairs are unacceptable and the
permittee refuses to make them acceptable, the work may be accomplished by the
city, and all of the direct and indirect costs will be charged back to the
permittee responsible for the work.
      (5)   The city at its expense may perform, or have performed, any
material tests it deems necessary to verify conformance with the specifications
set forth in Paragraph (6) of this subsection. If tests performed at the city's
expense show cause for additional work or rework by the permittee, then further
testing required to show conformance with the specifications will be at the
expense of the permittee, including the cost of the original testing that
showed the need for additional work or rework.
      (6)   Specifications for backfill compaction must meet the requirements
contained in the Pavement Cut and Repair Standards Manual. Specifications for
pavement testing must meet the requirements in the applicable provisions of the
Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction – North Central Texas and
the city's addendum thereto, as amended.
   (g)   Additional requirements for above ground utility structures.
      (1)   Written notification required.
         (A)   An owner of an above ground utility structure shall provide
written notice to:
            (i)   the occupant of each single family residence, town home,
duplex, tri-plex, or four-plex property adjacent to the proposed location of
the above ground utility structure; and
            (ii)   the management of each multi-family dwelling property
adjacent to the proposed location of the above ground utility structure.
         (B)   The written notice must be provided at least two business days
before construction of the above ground utility structure begins.
         (C)   The notice must be provided on forms approved by the director
and must clearly identify:
            (i)   the proposed location of the above ground utility structure;
            (ii)   the dimensions and appearance of the above ground utility
structure; and
            (iii)   the names and telephone numbers of the utility company
representatives and the city of Dallas representatives authorized to discuss
the proposed structure with the property owner.
         (D)   Written notice is not required for an above ground utility
structure that:
            (i)   is placed in an alley; or
            (ii)   does not require a permit under Section 43-139.
         (E)   Upon request, proof of notification must be provided to the
director at the time the permit application for the above ground utility
structure is submitted to the city.
         (F)   An owner of an above ground utility structure shall make every
reasonable effort to recognize and address the concerns of each property owner,
subject to the service demands of the structure’s owner. Requests of property
owners that exceed the requirements of the AGUS Placement Guidelines are not a
basis to deny a permit.
      (2)   An above ground utility structure must comply with all requirements
of other city ordinances and other state and federal laws and regulations. The
owner of the above ground utility structure is responsible for obtaining all
other required permits.
      (3)   The owner of an above ground utility structure shall maintain the
structure free of graffiti and other defacements such as posters, stickers,
decals, and signs, except those placed on the structure by its owner. The
exterior finish of an above ground utility structure must be maintained free of
rust, peeling or faded paint, and other visible deterioration. An above ground
utility structure and its supporting foundation or pad must be maintained in
such a way as to prevent or eliminate leaning and soil erosion underneath. An
above ground utility structure that leans beyond five degrees from the
perpendicular must be corrected to be as close as possible to perpendicular.
Any open space between the bottom of a foundation or pad and the ground
underneath must be filled with either additional soil or concrete to maintain
continuous contact with the ground. The permit application for installation of
an above ground utility structure must include the name, mailing address, and
telephone number of a single contact who will be responsible for resolving
graffiti and other appearance issues involving the structure.
      (4)   An above ground utility structure must be clearly marked with the
owner’s name and telephone number.
      (5)   Waiver of AGUS Placement Guidelines.
         (A)   A request for a waiver from placing an above ground utility
structure in accordance with one or more of the AGUS Placement Guidelines may
be made to the director with respect to a particular site for a proposed
structure.
         (B)   The request for a waiver must include:
            (i)    identification of the guideline or guidelines for which a
waiver is requested;
            (ii)   proof that compliance with the guideline or guidelines is
impracticable;
            (iii)   detailed justification for the waiver, including
alternative sites sought and reviewed; and
            (iv)   an explanation of why the proposed above ground utility
structure and its size are necessary at the proposed site to provide service to
a property or area.
         (C)   Within 10 business days after receiving a written request for a
waiver, the director shall grant or deny the waiver.
         (D)   The waiver may be granted for good cause shown. In determining
whether to grant the waiver, the director shall consider:
            (i)   the feasibility of other sites located in or outside of the
public right-of-way and the efforts of the owner of the proposed above ground
utility structure to secure those sites;
            (ii)   the size and location of the above ground utility structure
and its impact at the proposed site and on surrounding properties;
            (iii)   the need of the structure’s owner to provide services to a
property or area to be served by the proposed site;
            (iv)   the need of the structure’s owner to provide services to a
property or area to be served by the proposed site with an above ground utility
structure of the size proposed;
            (v)   the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience; and
            (vi)   the size and location of other nearby above ground utility
structures.
      (6)   Denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit for an above ground
utility structure on private property; denial of a waiver from AGUS Placement
Guidelines; appeals to the city manager.
         (A)   If the director denies, suspends, or revokes a permit for an
above ground utility structure on private property, or denies waiver of an AGUS
placement guideline, the director shall, in writing, notify the owner of the
above ground utility structure of the action and include in the notice the
reason for the action and a statement informing the structure’s owner of the
right of appeal.
         (B)   The owner of an above ground utility structure may appeal a
denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit for an above ground utility
structure on private property, or a denial of a waiver of an AGUS placement
guideline, if the structure’s owner requests an appeal in writing, delivered to
the city manager not more than 10 business days after notice of the director’s
action is received.
         (C)   The city manager or a designated representative shall act as the
appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this subsection. The hearing
officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and
make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing
under this subsection, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling on the basis
of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.
         (D)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part
of the action of the director being appealed. The decision of the hearing
officer is final as to available administrative remedies.
   (h)   Signage and other display materials.
      (1)   A copy of the approved permit with verification that all public and
private utilities/facilities were properly located must be displayed by the
permittee at the worksite at all times during construction in the public right-
of-way.
      (2)   The permittee must display at least two signs in the permitted area
of construction in the right-of-way no smaller than 30" x 24", one facing each
direction of traffic. The sign must provide the business name and primary
contact information of the permittee and contractor. The sign letters and
numbers must be a minimum 2" in height.
      (3)   Each vehicle and piece of equipment located in the permitted area
of construction in the right-of-way must display a sign identifying the
business name and primary contact information of the permittee or contractor.
The sign letters and numbers must be legible and at least one inch in height.
      (4)   A copy of the approved traffic control plan required in Section 43-
139 must be available at the permitted area of construction at all times when
barriers are erected to divert or alter the flow of traffic.
      (5)   At least one sign labeled "Temporary Paving Repairs" must be
displayed in accordance with
the Dallas Pavement Cut and Repair Standards Manual, as amended, in any
location that has temporary paving repairs. If temporary paving repairs exceed
50 feet in length, one "Temporary Paving Repairs" sign must be provided every
50 feet on the perimeter of the permitted area of public right-of-way under
construction. Alternatively, a "Temporary Paving Repairs" sign may be stenciled
on the temporary paving repairs in accordance with this paragraph. The
lettering of the written sign on the temporary paving repairs must be a minimum
of three inches using only white paint. If temporary paving repairs exceed 40
feet in length, one painted "Temporary Paving Repairs" sign must be painted on
the temporary paving repairs every 30 feet on the perimeter on the perimeter of
the permitted area of public right-of-way under construction.
   (i)   Notice requirements.
      (1)   Notice to the director. After issuance of a permit under this
article, the permittee shall provide written notice to the director:
         (A)   at least one business day before any material or equipment is
placed in the permitted area or the commencement of any temporary construction;
         (B)   within one business day after completing the temporary
construction; and
         (C)   at least one business day before any permanent construction
begins.
      (2)   Notice to the public.
         (A)   If construction in the public right-of-way without excavation or
a lane closure will last less than 24 hours, individual notice to property
within 500 feet of the construction area is not required.
         (B)   If construction in the public right-of-way without excavation or
a lane closure will last more than 24 hours, the permittee must provide
individual notice to each property within 500 feet of the construction area at
least 24 hours before commencing construction by placing a door hanger or other
similar notice. Notification of multi-family properties may be given to the
property management teams of those properties.
         (C)   If construction in the public right-of-way with excavation or a
lane closure will last less than 24 hours, the permittee must provide
individual notice to each property within 500 feet of the construction area at
least 24 hours before commencing construction by placing a door hanger or other
similar notice. Notification to multi-family properties may be given to the
property management teams of those properties.
         (D)   If construction in the public right-of-way with excavation or a
lane closure will last more than 24 hours, the permittee must provide
individual notice to each property within 500 feet of the construction area
with two separate notifications by placing a door hanger or other similar
notice. The first notification must be placed at least 10 days before
commencing construction and the second notification must be placed 72 hours
before commencing construction. Notification to multi-family properties may be
given to the property management teams of those properties.
         (E)   If construction on a thoroughfare, arterial, or a community
collector in the public right-of-way will involve complete street closures or
extended traffic delays, at least two portable changeable message signs (CMS)
that comply with the requirements of the latest edition of the Texas Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as amended, published by the Texas Department
of Transportation and the City of Dallas requirements, are required to be
installed facing each direction of traffic at least one week prior to
commencing construction.
         (F)   The individual notice must include the following:
            (i)   permittee name and contractor name, if different;
            (ii)   primary contact information for the permittee and
contractor, if different;
            (iii)   location of the construction area; and
            (iv)   estimated time of construction as authorized by the permit.
(Ord. Nos. 24495; 25409; 26263; 29993; 31209)
SEC. 43-142.   RESTORATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The Pavement Cut and Repair Standards Manual and the requirements of
this section govern the restoration of public right-of-way surfaces within the
city. For those restoration activities not covered by the Pavement Cut and
Repair Standards Manual or this section, the applicable provisions of the
Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction - North Central Texas
will govern.
   (b)   A permittee performing construction in the public right-of-way shall
restore the public right-of- way to a condition that is equal to or better than
the condition prescribed by the most recent version of the Pavement Cut and
Repair Standards Manual or other applicable city design and construction
standards.
   (c)   Restoration work must be performed to the satisfaction of the
director. Restoration work must include, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Replacement of all sod or ground cover with sod or ground cover
equal to or better than the type damaged during the work, either by sodding or
seeding as required by the director.
      (2)   Installation or reinstallation of all manholes and handholes, as
required by the director.
      (3)   Backfilling and compaction of all completed bore pits, potholes,
trenches, or other holes, which must be performed on a daily basis unless other
safety requirements are approved by the director.
      (4)   Street, sidewalk, and alley repair that conforms with the standards
for construction established in this article and by the director.
      (5)   Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines.
      (6)   Restoration of the excavation site to the specifications and
requirements established in this article and by the director.
      (7)   Restoration of all landscaping, ground cover, and sprinkler
systems.
      (8)   Restoration of any damaged traffic control devices, including but
not limited to imbedded loop detectors, pavement markings, underground
conduits, and signs.
   (d)   All location flags must be removed during the cleanup process by the
permittee or the permittee’s contractor at the completion of the work.
   (e)   Restoration of special street, sidewalk, or drive approach surfaces
designed to present unique visual images, color, or designs (regardless of the
type, color, pattern, or texture of special material or process used) must be
done so that the restoration matches the color, texture, and pattern of the
surrounding special surfaces.
   (f)   Restoration must be made in a timely manner. If restoration is
unsatisfactory or not performed in a timely manner, then all of the permittee’s
work in progress on the project in question (except for that work related to
the problem of unsatisfactory restoration) will be halted, and no other permit
will be approved until all restoration is complete. Any hold on the permittee’s
work will include work previously permitted but not completed. (Ord. Nos.
24495; 26263)
SEC. 43-143.   CLEARANCE FOR STREET PAVING AND STORM DRAINAGE PROJECTS.
   (a)   A person making a pavement cut or excavation for the purpose of
adjusting facilities at the request of the city in advance preparation for a
city street paving or storm drainage project shall obtain a permit under this
article, except that the time limits prescribed in Section
43-139(c) and (g) do not apply.
   (b)   The permittee shall maintain the pavement cut or excavation until the
work order authorizing the construction of the street paving or storm drainage
project is issued by the city. Upon notification by the director of any problem
with the maintenance of the cut or excavation, the permittee shall promptly
correct the problem. The permittee shall notify the director of the anticipated
date of correction. If the correction is not made by the anticipated date, or
if no response is received by the director within 24 hours after the director
gives notice to the permittee, the correction may be made by the city, and the
permittee shall reimburse the city for the actual direct and indirect costs of
the correction. (Ord. Nos. 24495; 26263)
SEC. 43-144.   CONFORMANCE WITH PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Whenever the city or the director deems it necessary to remove, alter,
change, relocate, or adapt the underground or overhead facilities of a public
service provider in the public right-of-way due to the city’s reconstruction,
widening, or straightening of streets; replacement of water or wastewater
facilities; installation of traffic signals, traffic signs, and markings; or
construction of any other city public improvement project, the public service
provider that owns the facilities shall conform its facilities with the project
as prescribed by the director.
   (b)   The facilities must be conformed, at the public service provider’s
expense, within 90 days after the director issues notice to the public service
provider, unless a different schedule for the work is approved by the director.
   (c)   Facilities of a public service provider that are not conformed within
the 90-day notice period or within the approved schedule will be deemed
abandoned, and the city will not be liable for any damage to or destruction or
removal of the facilities, or for any interruption or termination of service
through the facilities, caused by the activity of the city described in this
section. (Ord. Nos. 24495; 26263)
SEC. 43-145.   IMPROPERLY CONSTRUCTED FACILITIES.
   (a)   A permittee shall:
      (1)   properly construct, install, operate, repair, relocate, upgrade,
and maintain its facilities existing within the public right-of-way or, for an
above ground utility structure, in or outside of the public right-of-way; and
      (2)   repair or restore any damage to other facilities, the public right-
of-way, or private property that occurs as a result of improper construction,
installation, operation, repair, relocation, upgrade, or maintenance of the
permittee’s facilities.
   (b)   Facilities will be considered to be improperly constructed, installed,
operated, repaired, relocated, upgraded, or maintained if:
      (1)   the construction, installation, operation, repair, relocation,
upgrade, or maintenance endangers public health or safety or creates a public
inconvenience;
      (2)   the facilities were required to be located within the right-of-way
and they encroach upon private property or extend outside the right-of-way
location designated in the permit;
      (3)   above-ground facilities located within the right-of-way are less
than one and one-half feet from the face of the curb or less than six inches
from a sidewalk;
      (4)   the construction, design, or configuration of the facilities does
not comply with applicable local, state, or federal laws or regulations;
      (5)   the construction, installation, operation, repair, relocation,
upgrade or maintenance is conducted in a manner that damages private property
or another public service provider’s facilities;
      (6)   the facilities are not capable of being located or maintained using
standard practices;
      (7)   the facilities are placed in an area that interferes with another
public service provider’s facilities; or
      (8)   the facilities consist of an above ground utility structure that
fails to comply with the AGUS Placement Guidelines without having received a
waiver by the director under Section
43-141.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4) of
this section that the facilities were constructed or installed in the public
right-of-way before March 1, 2001.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(8) of this section
that the facilities were lawfully constructed or installed before March 1,
2006.
   (e)   Nothing in this section may be construed to diminish the authority of
the director to require specific placement of specific facilities. (Ord. Nos.
24495; 26263)
SEC. 43-146.   EMERGENCY REPAIRS.
   (a)   If the director determines during construction that an emergency
repair to a public right- of-way is necessary to correct a situation that is
hazardous to the public, the director shall immediately notify the permittee.
If the permittee does not commence the emergency repair promptly, the director
may, in his sole discretion, cause performance of such emergency repair work as
is necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The permittee shall reimburse
the city for the actual direct and indirect costs of the work necessary to
correct the hazardous situation, including cleanup. The permittee shall
maintain the emergency repair until the permittee completes final repairs.
   (b)   If the director determines that a problem with a public service
provider’s existing facility in a public right-of-way requires an emergency
repair to correct a situation that is hazardous to the public, the director
shall immediately notify the public service provider. If the public service
provider does not commence the emergency repair promptly, the director may, in
his sole discretion, cause performance of such emergency repair work as is
necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The public service provider shall
reimburse the city for the actual direct and indirect costs of the work
necessary to correct the hazardous situation, including cleanup. The public
service provider shall maintain the emergency repair until the public service
provider completes final repairs. (Ord. Nos. 24495; 26263)
SEC. 43-147.   EFFECT OF ARTICLE ON PERSONS ENGAGED IN CONSTRUCTION.
   Any permit issued prior to March 1, 2001 will remain subject to the terms
and conditions of city ordinances and requirements in effect at the time of
issuance of the permit and is not affected by this article, except that, upon
expiration or conclusion of the permit, a new or renewal permit must be
obtained in accordance with this article. (Ord. Nos. 24495; 26263)
SEC. 43-148.   MARKING EXISTING UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.
   A person shall not use, or cause the use of, any nonwashable substance in
the public right-of-way to mark the location of existing underground utilities.
A person commits an offense if a marking he makes, or causes to be made, in the
public right-of-way to mark the location of existing underground utilities
remains visible longer than 30 days after being applied. (Ord. Nos. 25438;
26263)
ARTICLE IX.
DRIVEWAYS GENERALLY.
SEC. 43-149.   DIRECTOR DEFINED.
   In this article, DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by
the city manager to enforce and administer this article, or the director’s
designated representative. (Ord. 22026; 24495)
SEC. 43-150.   DRIVEWAYS NOT TO BE WITHIN THREE FEET OF POLES, ETC.
   No person shall open up or construct any driveway or other way for the use
of any character of vehicle on or across any sidewalk, parkway, or other space
between any public improved roadway and any private property so as to include
or to be within less than three feet of any telephone, telegraph, electric
light, or other pole, anchor, or guy wire, or any water plug, mailbox, or other
structure located in such portion of any public street in the city where such
structure is so located by virtue of any franchise, license, permit, or other
right. (Code 1941, Art. 145-2; Ord. 24495)
SEC. 43-151.   REMOVAL OF POLES, ETC., TO PERMIT CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAYS -
REQUIRED.
   Wherever any person desires to locate any driveway and there is any
structure that, under Section
43-150, would prevent the location of such driveway as desired, the person
owning such structure or having the right to so maintain it shall move it as
far as may be necessary to permit the desired location of such driveway, if the
person desiring to locate the driveway first complies with all of the terms of
this article. (Code 1941, Art. 145-3; Ord. 24495)
SEC. 43-152.   SAME - PLANS TO BE APPROVED BY DIRECTOR.
   In the event any poles, structures, or improvements are to be located and
installed in or upon any public street in the city or relocated for the
convenience or necessity of the person maintaining them, the person desiring to
construct, erect, install, or relocate such poles, structures, or improvements
shall first submit to the director a sketch or blueprint of the plan of such
construction or relocation for approval. The director shall immediately inspect
the sketch or blueprint of the plan and, if satisfactory, the director shall
approve the plan. Until such approval is given, no work may be done in that
connection. If the plan of construction or relocation does not meet with the
director’s approval, the director shall return the plan to the person
submitting it with any objections. The construction or relocation of all
structures, improvements, and poles must be subject to the supervision of the
director. (Code 1941, Art. 145-4; Ord. Nos. 22026; 24495)
SEC. 43-153.   SAME - ALLOCATION OF COSTS FOR RELOCATION.
   (a)   Any person desiring to locate or open a driveway, the location of
which is prevented by reason of any structure described in Section
43-150, and who desires to secure the shifting of the structure so as to permit
such location shall, at the time of filing an application for a permit with the
building official to construct, locate, or open such drive and prior to
locating, constructing, or opening the drive, file a sketch, drawing, or map
with the director that shows the location of the proposed drive or other way,
the relative location of the structure or structures in the way of the proposed
driveway, and the name of the person maintaining the structure obstructing the
proposed driveway or preventing its location. The director shall immediately
notify the person maintaining the structure on the street, giving the name of
the persons desiring the structure or structures moved.
   (b)   Immediately upon the filing of the drawing, sketch, or map under
Subsection (a), the director shall prepare or obtain a statement of the expense
or cost of the removal of the structure. The person requesting the relocation
of the structure shall pay the cost of relocation. Upon the ascertainment of
the estimated cost or expense as found by the director, such person shall
deposit the sum of money required with the director, and then the person
maintaining the structure shall promptly remove the structure so as not to
interfere with the proposed driveway. Upon completing movement of the
structure, with all attachments, to the satisfaction of the director, the
person moving or relocating the structure is entitled to receive the deposit.
(Code 1941, Art. 145-5; Ord. Nos. 22026; 24495)
SEC. 43-154.   PERMIT FOR DRIVEWAY TO BE ISSUED AFTER POLES, ETC., REMOVED.
   As soon as the structure interfering with the construction, location, or
opening of the proposed driveway has been moved out of the way, the building
inspector shall issue a permit authorizing the location, construction, or
opening of such way as may be desired upon compliance with all other applicable
city ordinances. (Code 1941, Art. 145-6; Ord. 24495)
SEC. 43-155.   APPEALS.
   If either the person maintaining any pole or structure described in Section
43-150 or the person desiring the structure or pole to be moved is dissatisfied
with the estimate of the expense made or obtained by the director under this
division or as to the location of the pole or structure, either or both of them
may appeal from the decision by filing with the city controller a statement of
their objections within five days from the date of the director’s findings of
the estimated expense or location. (Code 1941, Art. 145-8; Ord. Nos. 22026;
24495)
SEC. 43-156.   FEE WHERE POLES, ETC., TO BE RELOCATED.
   At the time the person files the sketch seeking the removal of any
obstructing structure described in Section
43-150, he shall also pay the building inspector a fee of one dollar, which
must be used in defraying the expense of carrying out the provisions of this
article and for no other purpose. (Code 1941, Art. 145-9; Ord. 24495)
ARTICLE X.
SHARED DOCKLESS VEHICLE OPERATING PERMIT.
SEC. 43-157.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   (1)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the city
manager to enforce and administer this article and includes representatives,
agents, or department employees designated by the director.
   (2)   OPERATOR means an individual or company that has been issued an
operating authority permit under this article.
   (3)   REBALANCE means moving shared dockless vehicles from an area of low
demand to an area of high demand.
   (4)   SHARED DOCKLESS VEHICLE means a bicycle, an electric bicycle pursuant
to the definition set forth in Texas Transportation Code Section 664.001, as
amended, or a motor-assisted scooter, pursuant to the definition set forth in
Texas Transportation Code, Section 551.351, that is intended to be rented or
leased to different users.
   (5)   SHARED DOCKLESS VEHICLE SERVICE means a service to rent, lease, or
sell shared dockless vehicles in the public right-of-way for the purpose of
transportation or conveyance. (Ord. Nos. 30936; 32236)
SEC. 43-158.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The director may issue an operating authority permit to a shared
dockless vehicle service for use of the public right-of-way to sell, rent,
lease, or exchange, offer to sell, rent, lease, or exchange, or take order for
the use of shared dockless vehicles.
   (b)   The director shall implement and enforce this article and may by
written order establish rules or regulations, consistent with this article and
state or federal law, as the director determines are necessary to discharge his
or her duty under, or to affect the policy of, this article, to achieve a safe,
orderly, equitable, and multi-modal transportation system. The director's rules
and regulations may include but are not limited to, rules or regulations on
hours of operation, the appropriate number of operators to be permitted, the
number of shared dockless vehicles that may be placed in the public right-of-
way, rebalancing requirements, and data-sharing requirements. The director may
contract with vendors to assist with data collection and analysis and to
collect and store shared dockless vehicles deployed or parked in violation of
this chapter.  (Ord. Nos. 30936; 31479; 32236)
SEC. 43-159.   ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Before adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule, the director shall
hold a public hearing on the proposal.
   (b)   The director shall fix the time and place of the hearing and, in
addition to notice required under the Open Meetings Act (Chapter 551, Texas
Government Code), as amended, shall notify each operator and such other persons
as the director determines are interested in the subject matter of the hearing.
   (c)   After the public hearing, the director shall notify all operators and
other interested persons of the director's action and shall post an order
adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule on the official bulletin board in city
hall for a period of not fewer than 10 days. The order becomes effective
immediately upon expiration of the posting period. (Ord. Nos. 30936; 32236)
SEC. 43-160.   OPERATING AUTHORITY PERMIT.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, within the city, the person operates,
or causes or permits the operation of, a shared dockless vehicle service
without a valid operating authority permit issued under this article.
   (b)   An operator shall abide by the requirements of this article and any
rules or regulations adopted by the director. (Ord. Nos. 30936; 32236)
SEC. 43-161.   APPLICATION FOR OPERATING AUTHORITY PERMIT.
   (a)   To obtain an operating authority permit, an applicant shall submit an
application on the form and in the manner prescribed by the director. The
applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed
shared dockless vehicle service.
   (b)   An applicant shall file with the director a verified application
statement, to be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee, containing
the following, in addition to the information needed under Subsection (c):
      (1)   the form of business of the applicant and, if the business is a
corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business
and the name and address of each person with a 20 percent or greater ownership
interest in the business;
      (2)   the verified signature of the applicant;
      (3)   the address of the fixed facilities to be used in the operation, if
any, and the address of the applicant's corporate headquarters, if different
from the address of the fixed facilities;
      (4)   the name of the person designated by the applicant to receive on
behalf of the applicant any future notices sent by the city to the operator,
and that person's contact information, including a mailing address, telephone
number, and email or other electronic address;
      (5)   documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating that such
insurance company has bound itself to provide the applicant with the liability
insurance required by this article;
      (6)   documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on property
within the city, if any, to be used in connection with the operation of the
proposed shared dockless vehicle service;
      (7)   documentary evidence from a bonding or insurance company or a bank
indicating that the bonding or insurance company or bank has bound itself to
provide the applicant with the performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit
required by this article;
      (8)   the number and types of shared dockless vehicles to be operated;
      (9)   an agreement to indemnify the city; and
      (10)   three references from municipal bodies located in North America
where the applicant is currently operating.
   (c)   The director shall review the application for an operating authority
permit and determine if the following criteria have been met, in addition to
other criteria that the director may establish by rule or regulation:
      (1)   the operator's effort to educate users and ensure compliance by its
users with applicable laws;
      (2)   the operator's capacity to comply with this article, rules and
regulations issued by the director, and all other state or federal laws or
regulations;
      (3)   the operator's experience operating shared dockless vehicle
services, including the operator's compliance with applicable laws; and
      (4)   the operator's efforts to increase access to shared dockless
vehicle service to low-income and non-English speaking users.
   (d)   An operating authority permit may be renewed following the process in
this section.
   (e)   The initial application for an operating authority permit must be
accompanied by an application fee of $2,650 and the appropriate vehicle fee as
specified in Section
43-172. Applications to renew an operating authority permit must be accompanied
by an application fee of $1,000 and the appropriate vehicle fee as specified in
Section
43-172. (Ord. Nos. 30936; 31479; 32236; 32863)
SEC. 43-162.   CHANGES TO INFORMATION IN OPERATING AUTHORITY APPLICATION.
   (a)   Any changes to the information provided in the operating authority
permit application must be reported to the director, in the manner prescribed
by the director, within 10 days of the change.
   (b)   If the information reported to the director under this section
includes an increase in the number of shared dockless vehicles, the director
may approve the additional shared dockless vehicles. If the director approves
the additional shared dockless vehicles, the operator shall pay any additional
vehicle fees due under Section
43-172 before the additional vehicles are allowed to operate. (Ord. Nos. 30936;
32236)
SEC. 43-163.   EXPIRATION OF OPERATING AUTHORITY PERMIT.
   An operating authority permit expires one year from the date it is issued.
(Ord. Nos. 30936; 32236)
SEC. 43-164.   REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW OPERATING AUTHORITY PERMIT.
   (a)   The director shall refuse to issue or renew an operating authority
permit if:
      (1)   the applicant intentionally or knowingly makes a false statement as
to a material matter in an application for a permit or permit renewal;
      (2)   the applicant has had an operating authority permit revoked within
two years of the date of application;
      (3)   the applicant is providing shared dockless vehicles services
without an operating authority permit;
      (4)   issuance of the permit would result in activity that is expected to
cause significant sidewalk congestion or make accessing abutting property
hazardous; or
      (5)   issuance of the permit would result in activity that is expected to
impede the flow of pedestrian traffic or make the use of sidewalks hazardous.
   (b)   If the director determines that a permit should be denied, the
director shall notify the applicant or operator in writing that the application
is denied and include in the notice the specific reason or reasons for denial
and a statement informing the applicant or operator of the right to, and the
process for, appeal of the decision.
   (c)   The director is authorized to develop an objective scoring matrix used
to determine if issuance of a permit would cause significant sidewalk
congestion, make accessing abutting property hazardous, impede the flow of
pedestrian traffic, or make the use of sidewalks hazardous, in accordance with
Paragraphs (a)(4) and (a)(5) of this section. (Ord. Nos. 30936; 32236)
SEC. 43-165.   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF OPERATING AUTHORITY PERMIT.
   (a)   Suspension. The following regulations apply to the suspension of an
operating authority permit:
      (1)   The director may suspend an operating authority permit if the
director determines that the operator violated the rules and regulations
established by the director or for any of the reason for revocation in
Subsection (b).
      (2)   Suspension of an operating authority permit does not affect the
expiration date of the permit.
   (b)   Revocation. The director may revoke an operating authority permit if:
      (1)   the operator has made a false statement as to a material matter in
the application concerning the operating authority permit;
      (2)   the operator failed to maintain the insurance, performance bond, or
irrevocable letter of credit required by this article;
      (3)   the operator is operating more shared dockless vehicles than is
authorized by the operating authority permit;
      (4)   the operator failed to pay a fee required by this article;
      (5)   the operator violated this article, any other ordinance, or any
state or federal law or regulation;
      (6)   after consultation with the chief of police, the director
determines that the operator's shared dockless vehicle service constitutes an
imminent threat to public safety;
      (7)   the operator failed to maintain or correct current information with
the director concerning the operating authority permit;
      (8)   the operator shows a pattern of not responding to inquiries by the
director;
      (9)   the operator has filed bankruptcy, is insolvent, or failed to meet
financial obligations on a timely basis or is unable to obtain or maintain the
financial resources needed to properly maintain facilities or provide adequate
service; or
      (10)   the operator operates a shared dockless vehicle service with a
suspended operating authority permit.
   (c)   Ceasing operations upon notice of suspension or revocation. Upon
receiving an emailed notice by the director that its operating authority permit
has been suspended or revoked, an operator must stop providing shared dockless
vehicle services within 12 hours and must remove its shared dockless vehicles
from the public right-of-way within 24 hours. If the operator fails to retrieve
all its shared dockless vehicles within 24 hours of receipt of notice the
director may remove the shared dockless vehicles from the public right-of-way
without notice or consent of the operator. The operator is responsible for the
cost of removal and storage of its shared dockless vehicles, and the operator
will be assessed a fee to retrieve any of its shared dockless vehicles that are
removed and stored. Any shared dockless vehicle that remains unclaimed with the
city for 30 days is subject to sale or disposal in accordance with Division 2,
"Sale of Unclaimed and Surplus Property," of Article IV, "Procurement," of
Chapter 2 , "Administration," of the Dallas City Code, as amended. The director
shall provide notice via email and certified mail to the addresses provided
under Section
43-161 . (Ord. Nos. 30936; 32236)
SEC. 43-166.   APPEALS.
   Any person whose application for an operating authority permit, or renewal
of an operating authority permit, is denied by the director, or an operator
whose operating authority permit has been revoked or suspended by the director,
may file an appeal with the permit and license appeal board in accordance with
Section
2-96, "Appeals From Actions of Department Directors," of this code. (Ord. Nos.
30936; 32236)
SEC. 43-167.    NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   An operating authority permit is not transferable. This regulation should
not be construed to impede the continuing use of trade names. (Ord. Nos. 30936;
32236)
SEC. 43-168.   [RESERVED.]
SEC. 43-169.   [RESERVED.]
SEC. 43-170.   INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   An operator shall procure and keep in full force and effect no less
than the insurance coverage required by this section through a policy or
policies written by an insurance company that:
      (1)   is authorized to do business in the State of Texas;
      (2)   acceptable to the city; and
      (3)   does not violate the ownership or operational control prohibition
described in Subsection (e) of this section.
   (b)   The insured provisions of the policy must name the city and its
officers and employees as additional insureds, and the coverage provisions must
provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or
property by reason of the operation of a shared dockless vehicle.
   (c)   An operator shall maintain the following insurance coverages:
      (1)   The commercial general liability insurance must provide single
limits of liability for bodily injury (including death) and property damage of
$1 million for each occurrence, with a $2 million annual aggregate.
      (2)   If an operator will utilize motor vehicles in its operations, the
business automotive liability insurance must cover owned, hired, and non-owned
vehicles, with a combined single limit for bodily injury (including death) and
property damage of $500,000 per occurrence.
      (3)   Worker's compensation insurance with statutory limits.
      (4)   Employer's liability insurance with the following minimum limits
for bodily injury by:
         (A)   accident, $500,000 per each accident; and
         (B)   disease, $500,000 per employee with a per policy aggregate of
$500,000.
      (5)   Cyber/technology network liability and risk insurance, inclusive of
information security and privacy with minimum limits of $1 million per claim.
   (d)   Insurance required under this article must:
      (1)   include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is
required to notify the director in writing not fewer than 30 days before
cancelling the insurance policy (for a reason other than non-payment) or before
making a reduction in coverage;
      (2)   include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is
required to notify the director in writing not fewer than 10 days before
cancelling for non-payment;
      (3)   include an endorsement to waive subrogation in favor of the city
and its officers and employees for bodily injury (including death), property
damage, or any other loss.
      (4)   cover all shared dockless vehicles during the times that the
vehicles are deployed or operating in furtherance of the operator's business;
      (5)   include a provision requiring the insurance company to pay every
covered claim on a first-dollar basis;
      (6)   require notice to the director if the policy is cancelled or if
there is a reduction in coverage; and
      (7)   comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.
   (e)   No person who has a 20 percent or greater ownership interest in the
operator may have an interest in the insurance company.
   (f)   An operator may not be self-insured.
   (g)   Any insurance policy required by this article must be on file with the
city within 45 days of the issuance of the initial operating authority permit,
and thereafter within 45 days of the expiration or termination of a previously
issued policy.  (Ord. Nos. 30936; 31479; 32236)
SEC. 43-171.   [RESERVED.]
SEC. 43-172.   VEHICLE FEE AND RIDE FEE.
   (a)   An operator shall pay an annual vehicle fee of $35 for each permitted
shared dockless vehicle with $5 from the annual vehicle fee dedicated to equity
programs.
   (b)   An operator shall pay a right-of-way rental fee of $0.20 for each ride
a customer takes on a shared dockless vehicle.
   (c)   The director may establish a program, subject to city council
approval, to rebate or waive fees under this section in order to encourage
equity in the distribution of shared dockless vehicles throughout the city.
   (d)   City council must review the fees in this article by June 22, 2024.
(Ord. Nos. 30936; 31479; 32236)
SEC. 43-173.   PERFORMANCE BOND OR IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT.
   Before issuance of an operating authority permit, the operator shall give
the director a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit approved as
to form by the city attorney.
      (1)   A bonding or insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of Texas and acceptable to the city must issue the performance bond. A
bank authorized to do business in the State of Texas and acceptable to the city
must issue the irrevocable letter of credit.
      (2)   The performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit must list the
operator as principal and be payable to the city.
      (3)   The performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit must remain in
effect for the duration of the operating authority permit.
      (4)   The amount of the performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit
must be at least $10,000.
      (5)   Cancellation of the performance bond or irrevocable letter of
credit does not release the operator from the obligation to meet all
requirements of this article and the operating authority permit. If the
performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit is cancelled, the operating
authority permit shall be suspended on the date of cancellation and the
operator shall immediately cease operations until the operator provides the
director with a replacement performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit
that meets the requirements of this article.
      (6)   The city may draw against the performance bond or irrevocable
letter of credit or pursue any other available remedy to recover damages, fees,
fines, or penalties due from the operator for violation of any provision of
this article or the operating authority permit. (Ord. Nos. 30936; 32236)
SEC. 43-174.   ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The director may, with or without notice, inspect any shared dockless
vehicle operating under this article to determine whether the shared dockless
vehicle complies with this article, rules and regulations established under
this article, or other applicable laws.
   (b)   The director shall enforce this article. Upon observing a violation of
this article or the rules or regulations established by the director, the
director shall take necessary action to ensure effective regulation of shared
dockless vehicles. The director has authority to issue citations for violations
of this division including moving violations. (Ord. Nos. 30936; 31479; 32236)
SEC. 43-175.   CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he violates or attempts to violate a
provision of this article, or a rule or regulation established by the director
under this article, that is applicable to a person. A culpable mental state is
not required for the commission of an offense under this article unless the
provision defining the conduct expressly requires a culpable mental state. A
separate offense is committed each day in which an offense occurs.
   (b)   Prosecution for an offense under Subsection (a) does not prevent the
use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person
charged with or the conduct involved in the offense. (Ord. Nos. 30936; 32236)
CHAPTER 43A
SWIMMING POOLS
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
43A-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
43A-2.   Permit required; application; issuance.
Sec.
43A-3.   Inspections and reinspections.
Sec.
43A-3.1.   Incorporation of Health and Safety Code Regulations for multiunit
pool enclosures.
ARTICLE II.
POOL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
Sec.
43A-4.   Materials.
Sec.
43A-5.   Shape.
Sec.
43A-6.   Depth and slope; depth markings.
Sec.
43A-7.   Projections.
Sec.
43A-8.   Diving area.
Sec.
43A-9.   Steps, ladders and towers.
Sec.
43A-10.   Overflow gutters and skimming devices.
Sec.
43A-11.   Deck area; pool enclosure; spectator separation.
Sec.
43A-12.   Recirculation system.
Sec.
43A-13.   Inlets and outlets; water disposal.
Sec.
43A-14.   Heating units.
Sec.
43A-15.   Lighting.
Sec.
43A-16.   Toilet facilities.
ARTICLE III.
MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION OF SWIMMING POOLS.
Sec.
43A-17.   Permit and manager of operations required.
Sec.
43A-18.   Certification of manager of operations.
Sec.
43A-19.   Operation of a pool.
Sec.
43A-20.   Quality of water; public and semi- public pools.
Sec.
43A-20.1.   Pools not maintained.
Sec.
43A-21.   Safety equipment.
Sec.
43A-22.   Regulations in pool area.
Sec.
43A-23.   Pool drainage.
Sec.
43A-24.   Suspension.
Sec.
43A-25.   Appeal.
ARTICLE IV.
SPAS.
Sec.
43A-26.   Spa safety standards.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 43A-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   The terms used in this chapter have the meanings ascribed to them in
the Texas Administrative Code Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 265, Subchapter L,
Section 182, as amended.
   (b)   In addition to the terms defined in Subsection (a), the terms in this
chapter have the following meaning:
      (1)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter or the director's
designated representative.
      (2)   PERSON means an individual, partnership, company, corporation,
association, firm, organization, institution, or similar entity.
      (3)   PRIVATE POOL means a swimming pool appurtenant to a single-family
or duplex residence (including condominiums and townhouses) and used only by
the occupants of the residence and their guests.
      (4)   PUBLIC POOL means a swimming pool to which the general public has
access.
      (5)   SEMI-PUBLIC POOL means a swimming pool that is privately owned and
open only to an identifiable class of persons, including, but not limited to,
motel guests, apartment residents, and club members. (Ord. Nos. 15256; 30090)
SEC. 43A-2.   PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   No person may construct, modify, or repair a pool in the city without
obtaining a permit. The application for a permit must be on a form provided by
the building official and must be accompanied by the required fee and a
specified number of copies of the plans of which the applicant seeks approval.
If the building official and the director are satisfied that the proposed pool
will conform in all respects to the requirements of the law, a permit shall be
issued by the building official to the applicant. (Ord. Nos. 15256; 30090)
SEC. 43A-3.   INSPECTIONS AND REINSPECTIONS.
   (a)   The director shall have all of the authority granted to the city under
Texas Administrative Code Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, Section
207, as amended, to inspect a pool at any reasonable time and to enter upon the
premises where a pool is located to the extent necessary to make a full
examination for compliance with this chapter and state law. Advanced notice or
permission for inspections or investigations by the director is not required.
   (b)   Public pools and semi-public pools, excluding multiunit, shall be
inspected at least annually, and multiunit pools shall be inspected with the
graded inspections for multitenant properties in accordance with
Chapter 27 of the Dallas City Code. For purposes of this subsection,
"multiunit" has the meaning ascribed to it in Texas Health and Safety Code
Section 757.001, as amended.
   (c)   Water samples from a pool may be taken.
   (d)   If a reinspection is required, the fee for the reinspection is $20.
(Ord. Nos. 15256; 29879; 30090; 31332, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 43A-3.1.   INCORPORATION OF HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE REGULATIONS FOR
MULTIUNIT POOL ENCLOSURES.
   The provisions of Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 757, as amended,
apply and supersede any regulations in this chapter for pools owned,
controlled, or maintained by the owner or manager of a multiunit rental complex
or by a property owner's association and for doors and windows of rental
dwellings opening into the pool yard of a multiunit rental complex or
condominium, cooperative, or town home project. (Ord. 30090)
ARTICLE II.
POOL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
SEC. 43A-4.   MATERIALS.
   A swimming pool must be constructed of materials that are sanitary,
enduring, and non-toxic to humans. Materials used on walls and bottom surfaces
must provide a watertight structure with a smooth and easily cleaned finish,
free from cracks or open joints other than structural expansion joints. (Ord.
15256)
SEC. 43A-5.   SHAPE.
   The shape of a pool must be designed so that the water is uniformly
circulated and so that all interior areas of a pool are visible from the edge
of the pool. (Ord. 15256)
SEC. 43A-6.   DEPTH AND SLOPE; DEPTH MARKINGS.
   (a)   The depth and slope of a pool must comply with the specifications
indicated in Plate I.
   (b)   A pool without a diving area must have no sudden increase in slope and
must not exceed five feet in depth.
   (c)   All surfaces on the bottom of a pool must slope toward the main drain.
A main drain is not required in vinyl pools with a depth of less than five
feet. In areas of a pool that are less than five feet in depth, the following
slope requirements apply:
      (1)   The slope of the floor in a pool 42 feet or more in length must not
exceed one foot in 12 feet.
      (2)   The slope of the floor in a pool less than 42 feet in length must
not exceed one foot in eight feet.
   (d)   Walls in the deep portion of a pool must be vertical from the water
line for a minimum depth of two feet six inches.
   (e)   Depth of water must be marked at or above the water surface on the
vertical pool wall or on the edge of the deck next to the pool, at maximum and
minimum depth points, at points of break between deep and shallow areas, and at
intermediate increments of depth, spaced at not more than 25 foot intervals
around the entire perimeter of the pool. Depth markings and additional signage
for pools must be consistent with the requirements in Texas Administrative Code
Title 25, Chapter 265, Subsections 265.199(c)-(f), as amended. Depth markers
are not required for private pools.
   (f)   The depth of the water must be measured from the midpoint of the
skimmer opening or the top of the overflow gutter. (Ord. Nos. 15256; 16271;
30090)
SEC. 43A-7.   PROJECTIONS.
   Pool structures, protrusions, or extensions must not project more than six
inches within the pool area, as delineated by the profiles illustrated in Plate
I. (Ord. 15256)
SEC. 43A-8.   DIVING AREA.
   (a)   The minimum depth of water below a diving board or platform and other
minimum dimensions in the diving area of a pool must comply with the minimum
standards indicated in Table I and Plate I.
   (b)   A diving board or platform must not be placed more than three meters
above the water level without approval of the director. The base of a diving
board or tower must not extend into the pool water, and the tower must be
anchored with sufficient bracing to insure stability under the heaviest load.
Both sides of steps, ladders, and platforms of diving towers one meter or
higher must be provided with suitable handrails designed to prevent persons
from falling.
   (c)   A minimum clearance of 16 feet must be provided above each diving
board or platform, measured from the center of the front end of the board or
platform and extending at least eight feet behind and to each side and 16 feet
ahead of the measuring point.
   (d)   The height of a diving board must be measured from the midpoint of the
skimmer opening or the top of the overflow gutter. (Ord. Nos. 15256; 16271)
SEC. 43A-9.   STEPS, LADDERS AND TOWERS.
   (a)   Materials used in steps, ladders, and diving towers must be of
sufficient structural strength to safely support anticipated loads and must be
corrosion resistant, easily cleaned, and of a nonskid design.
   (b)   A minimum of one ladder must be provided for each 100 feet of public
or semi-public pool perimeter; except that a diving area which is wider than 30
feet at any point must be provided with two ladders at opposite sides.
   (c)   If recessed steps are used, they must be designed to drain into the
pool and to be easily cleaned.
   (d)   Ladders and recessed steps must be provided with a handrail on both
sides. Handrails must be constructed out over the coping and return to the pool
deck.
   (e)   Handrails, ladders, steps, seat ledges, and coping must also comply
with the standards for pool safety in Texas Administrative Code Title 25, Part
1, Subchapter L, Chapter 265, Subsection 199(a), as amended. (Ord. Nos. 15256;
30090)
SEC. 43A-10.   OVERFLOW GUTTERS AND SKIMMING DEVICES.
   (a)   All pools must be equipped with either an overflow gutter or surface
skimming device.
   (b)   If surface skimming devices are used:
      (1)   handholds must be provided around the entire perimeter of the pool
except above steps and:
         (A)   if coping is used, the outer two inches must be not more than 2
1/2 inches thick; and
         (B)   must be not more than 12 inches above the normal water line;
      (2)   each skimming device must be individually controlled;
      (3)   each skimming device must be automatically adjustable to variations
in water level over a range of at least three inches;
      (4)   the rate of flow through the total number of skimming devices must
be automatically adjustable from 50 percent to 75 percent of the capacity of
the pool filter system;
      (5)   each skimming device must have an easily removable and cleanable
basket or screen to trap material which might clog the circulation pump; and
      (6)   one skimmer must be provided for each 500 square feet of water
surface area plus an additional skimmer for any remaining increment of water
surface area less than 500 square feet.
   (c)   If an overflow gutter is used, it must:
      (1)   extend around the entire perimeter of the pool except above steps;
      (2)   be constructed so that the gutter is not completely recessed into
the wall and water entering the gutter cannot flow back into the pool;
      (3)   be capable of continuously removing 50 percent or more of the
recirculated water through the filter system;
      (4)   be connected to a recirculation system with a surge capacity of not
less than 1/2 gallon for each square foot of pool surface area, and in pools
subject to heavy swimming use, a surge capacity of not less than one gallon for
each square foot of surface area;
      (5)   be designed so that the edge of the gutter can be used as a
handhold for bathers;
      (6)   be designed so that the overflow edge is level within 3/10 inch;
      (7)   be designed so that the bottom slopes not less than 1/8 inch to the
foot, to outlets spaced at 10 foot intervals;
      (8)   discharge waste into the recirculating system, the drain pipe being
not less than 1-1/2 inches in diameter. (Ord. 15256)
SEC. 43A-11.   DECK AREA; POOL ENCLOSURE; SPECTATOR SEPARATION.
   (a)   Each public or semi-public pool must be provided with a deck area
which:
      (1)   is continuous around the entire pool;
      (2)   is not less than 3 1/2 feet in width, including coping and curbing;
      (3)   is constructed of sanitary material with a skid resistant surface;
      (4)   has a minimum slope of 1/8 inch per foot for the first eight feet
to points of disposal other than the pool;
      (5)   is equipped with gratings for drain pipe openings that are two
times the diameter of the drain pipe if deck drains are used; and
      (6)   is equipped around the entire edge of the pool with coping designed
to prevent deck water from entering the pool.
   (b)   Hose bibbs of not less than 3/4 inch must be provided around the
perimeter of the deck area at intervals which will allow all parts of a pool to
be reached with a 75 foot hose for cleaning. Each bibb must be equipped with an
approved back-flow preventer.
   (c)   The pool enclosure must comply with requirements of the Dallas
Building Code and Texas Administrative Code Title 25, Part 1, Subchapter L,
Chapter 265, Section 200, as amended.
   (d)   If spectator galleries are installed:
      (1)   there must be a separation between the areas used by bathers and
the areas used as galleries by spectators;
      (2)   galleries must not extend over any part of a pool; and
      (3)   separate entrances and toilet facilities must be provided for
bathers and spectators. (Ord. Nos. 15256; 30090)
SEC. 43A-12.   RECIRCULATION SYSTEM.
   (a)   Each pool with a water capacity of 800 gallons or more or a depth
greater than two feet must be equipped with a recirculation system consisting
of pumps, hair and lint catchers, filters, and pipe connections necessary to
connect to the inlets and outlets of the pool.
   (b)   Filters. Filters must meet National Sanitation Foundation standards,
or be approved by the director. The director shall disapprove a filter if it
does not backwash thoroughly or does not filter at a sufficient rate.
   (c)   Pumps. The pumps must be of an adequate size to turn over the pool
water capacity within six hours for a public pool and eight hours for a private
or semipublic pool.
   (d)   Hair and lint catcher. A catcher must be installed on the suction side
of the pumps to prevent hair, lint, and other extraneous matter from reaching
the pumps and filters.
      (1)   Catchers must be designed so that they are easily dismantled for
cleaning.
      (2)   If the catcher has circular openings, the diameter of each opening
must not exceed 1/8 inch. If the catcher has square punched or square mesh
openings, the openings must not exceed 1/10 inch on a side.
      (3)   The total area of catcher openings must be at least four times the
cross-sectional area of the inlet pipe to the catcher.
   (e)   Cross connections. Cross connections between the pool water or the
recirculation system and the water supply are prohibited. The pool must be
designed so that fresh water added to the pool will not create a cross
connection. Other cross connections must comply with applicable city
ordinances. (Ord. 15256)
SEC. 43A-13.   INLETS AND OUTLETS; WATER DISPOSAL.
   (a)   Inlets. Pool inlets must be arranged to produce a uniform chlorine or
equivalent disinfectant residual throughout the pool.
      (1)   Each inlet must be equipped with an adjustable orifice or valve so
that the flow of water to various portions of the pool may be adjusted.
      (2)   The minimum number of pool inlets required is determined by pool
volume as indicated in Table II below.
      (3)   The fill pipe to a pool must have an air gap of six inches above
the pool coping or be protected by a double check backflow preventer assembly.
   (b)   Outlets. Pool outlets must be arranged to produce a uniform
circulation of water throughout a pool.
      (1)   At least one outlet must be provided at the lowest point of the
floor to permit complete drainage of the floor area, except in vinyl pools of
less than five feet in depth.
      (2)   If the width of a pool is more than 40 feet, multiple outlets must
be provided. In this case outlets must be not more than 10 feet from each
sidewall.
      (3)   If the exit velocity exceeds two feet per second, a National
Sanitation Foundation approved, or equal, anti-vortex outlet must be used.
      (4)   Outlet gratings in the bottom of a pool must be securely fastened
and must have a cross- sectional area of at least four times the cross-
sectional area of the discharge pipe.
      (5)   A pool must be equipped with pipe connections which permit the pool
to be emptied as well as recirculated, except vinyl pools of less than five
feet in depth.
   (c)   Water disposal.
      (1)   Backwash from a filter must go to the sanitary sewer or a
separation tank. Filter backwash may go to an approved septic tank system if a
sanitary sewer or separation tank is not available.
      (2)   Pools drained for repairs or cleaning must drain to the sanitary
sewer in compliance with the Dallas Plumbing Code, or to a natural drainage
course if no sanitary sewer is available or sanitary sewer drainage would be
too slow.
      (3)   A deck drain may go to a lawn, leaching field, dry well, or, if
necessary, to a natural drainage course. (Ord. 15256)
SEC. 43A-14.   HEATING UNITS.
   Heating units for pools, dressing rooms, shower rooms, toilet rooms, and
rooms in which pools are contained must be installed in a manner that will
protect swimmers from injury and protect the units from damage. (Ord. 15256)
SEC. 43A-15.   LIGHTING.
   (a)   A system of artificial lighting must be provided for pools, dressing
rooms, shower rooms, toilet rooms, and rooms in which pools are contained. The
system must be installed in conformance with the Dallas Electrical Code, and
the design and arrangement of the lights must insure clear vision in all areas
of a pool and surrounding pool area. Private pools of less than four feet
maximum depth are not required to have a lighting system.
   (b)   Underwater lighting must provide 5/10 watts per square foot of pool
area for private pools, and one watt per square foot of pool area for public or
semi-public pools, and must be installed and maintained in a manner that will
insure the safety of swimmers. If underwater lighting is used, deck lighting
must be directed away from the pool surface as much as possible and be of a
capacity not less than 6/10 watts per square foot of deck area. If underwater
lighting is not used, pool and pool area lighting must be of a capacity not
less than two watts per square foot of total area.
   (c)   Deck and underwater lighting must also comply with the standards in
Texas Administrative Code Title 25, Part 1, Subchapter L, Chapter 265,
Subsection 265.199(k), as amended. (Ord. Nos. 15256; 30090)
SEC. 43A-16.   TOILET FACILITIES.
   (a)   Semi-public pools must have toilet facilities available within 200
feet of the pool.
   (b)   Public pools must have toilet facilities for each sex at the pool
site. (Ord. 15256)
ARTICLE III.
MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION OF SWIMMING POOLS.
SEC. 43A-17.   PERMIT AND MANAGER OF OPERATIONS REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person shall not operate a public or semi-public pool without a
permit. To obtain a permit an applicant must complete a form provided by the
director. An applicant must designate a manager of operations of each pool for
which a permit is sought. A person designated as manager of operations of a
pool must reside in the city or be employed on the premises where the pool is
located.
   (b)   If a manager of operations of a pool ceases to perform that function
for any reason, the owner of the pool shall designate a new manager within a
reasonable period of time.
   (c)   The director shall issue a permit to an applicant if a qualified
manager of operations has been designated and the fee has been paid. The amount
of the fee is $20 for each pool owned by an applicant. The fee is due on or
before the first day of March of each calendar year. If a permit is initially
issued after the first day of March of a calendar year, the fee for that year
will be prorated according to the number of whole months remaining in the year.
No refunds will be made.
   (d)   This section does not apply to pools owned by the city. (Ord. Nos.
15256; 16271; 17989; 18411; 19300; 25048; 29879; 31332, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 43A-18.   CERTIFICATION OF MANAGER OF OPERATIONS.
   (a)   A manager of operations of a public or semi-public pool shall obtain
certification from the director by successfully completing a training course
conducted by the director. If a person designated by an owner as manager of
operations of a pool is not certified, he shall attend and successfully
complete the next training course conducted after his designation.
   (b)   The certification of a manager of operations expires two years from
the date of certification and a manager must repeat the training course to
maintain certification. The fee for the training course and certificate is $50.
(Ord. Nos. 15256; 18411; 20612; 25048; 29879; 31332; 32556)
SEC. 43A-19.   OPERATION OF A POOL.
   (a)   A manager of operations, a manager of premises on which a public or
semi-public pool is located, or the owner of a public or semi-public pool shall
not:
      (1)   knowingly permit a condition to exist that endangers the life,
health, or safety of a swimmer or that violates a provision of this article;
      (2)   knowingly permit a person to swim in a pool who has skin abrasions,
open sores, cuts, skin disease, eye disease, nasal or ear discharge, or
communicable disease;
      (3)   knowingly allow dogs within a pool area or enclosure;
      (4)   fail to post placards containing pool regulations and instructions
in conspicuous places within a pool area or enclosure;
      (5)   fail to maintain a pool in accordance with the standards of health
and safety provided in Sections
43A-20 and
43A-21;
      (6)   knowingly violate or permit any person to violate the regulations
regarding food, beverages, and trash containers in Texas Administrative Code
Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, Section 202, as amended; or
      (7)   knowingly violate or permit any person to violate the lifeguard
training and personnel requirements in Texas Administrative Code Title 25, Part
1, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, Subsection 265.199(g), as amended.
   (b)   A manager of operations, a manager of premises on which a public or
semi-public pool is located, and the owner of a public or semi-public pool must
also comply with the pool and spa standards in Texas Administrative Code Title
25, Part 1, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, Subsections 265.203(a)-(l), as amended.
(Ord. 15256; 16271; 30090)
SEC. 43A-20.   QUALITY OF WATER; PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC POOLS.
   (a)   Water quality. A manager of operations, a manager of premises on which
a public or semi-public pool is located, and the owner of a public or semi-
public pool must comply with the water quality standards in Texas
Administrative Code Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, Subsection
265.204 and Figure 265.204(a), as amended.
   (b)   Disinfectant. In a public or semi-public pool disinfectant capable of
killing bacteria and algae, but not harmful to humans, shall be added to the
pool water through a continuous feed machine. If chlorine or bromine is used, a
residual level shall be maintained consistent with the levels in Texas
Administrative Code Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, Subsection
265.204 and Figure 265.204(a), as amended.
   (c)   Algae. A public or semi-public pool must be kept free of algae.
   (d)   Circulation. The recirculation system of a public or semi-public pool
must be in operation at all times.
   (e)   Heating. Hot water must not enter a public or semi-public pool at a
temperature exceeding 110 degrees Fahrenheit.
   (f)   Level. Fresh water must be added to a public or semi-public pool at a
rate that will keep the pool water at a level sufficient to allow skimming
devices or overflow gutters to work properly.
   (g)   Cleaning. The walls, floors, equipment, and appurtenant facilities of
a public or semi-public pool must be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times. (Ord. 15256; 16271; 30090)
SEC. 43A-20.1.   POOLS NOT MAINTAINED.
   (a)   The owner of a semi-public pool that is not being maintained as a
swimming pool in accordance with this article shall drain all water from the
pool and either:
      (1)   fill the pool with dirt or sand that is not capable of holding
water; or
      (2)   cover the pool with a material of sufficient strength, durability,
and water tightness to prevent the entrance of water or children.
   (b)   A semi-public pool that remains drained of water for 60 days is
presumed to be no longer maintained as a swimming pool. (Ord. 16271)
SEC. 43A-21.   SAFETY EQUIPMENT.
   Texas Administrative Code Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 265, Subchapter L,
Subsection 265.199(b), Subsections 265.199(g)-(h), and (j), and Subsection
265.199(i)(1)(A)-(B), as amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference into this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 15256; 30090)
SEC. 43A-22.   REGULATIONS IN POOL AREA.
   A person commits an offense if he:
   (1)   allows a dog under his control to remain within the pool area or pool
enclosure of a public or semi-public pool;
   (2)   has skin abrasions, open sores, cuts, skin disease, eye disease, nasal
or ear discharge, or communicable disease and swims in a public or semi- public
pool;
   (3)   carries glass within a public or semi-public pool area or enclosure;
or
   (4)   alters or removes safety equipment from a public or semi-public pool
except in a bona fide emergency. (Ord. 15256)
SEC. 43A-23.   POOL DRAINAGE.
   A person commits an offense if he drains water from a pool at a rate that
causes the water to leave a natural drainage course and flow onto adjacent
property. (Ord. 15256)
SEC. 43A-24.   SUSPENSION.
   (a)   The director shall suspend a permit to operate a public or semi-public
pool if:
      (1)   the annual permit fee is not paid; or
      (2)   an owner fails to designate and retain a certified manager of
operations as specified in this article; or
      (3)   the condition of a pool is hazardous to the health or safety of
swimmers or the general public; or
      (4)   the owner fails to keep all pool equipment and devices working
properly.
   (b)   The suspension shall continue until the cause of suspension is
corrected. (Ord. 15256)
SEC. 43A-25.   APPEAL.
   (a)   If the director denies the issuance of a permit, or suspends a permit,
he shall send to the applicant, or permit holder, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, written notice of his action and the right to an appeal. The
applicant, or permit holder, may appeal the decision of the director to the
city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing
within 10 days after receipt of the notice from the director. If a request for
an appeal hearing is not made within the 10 day limit, the action of the
director is final.
   (b)   The city manager, or designee, shall serve as hearing officer at an
appeal hearing and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The
formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing; the hearing officer
shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence
presented at the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within 30
days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer
shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the director and his decision is
final unless the applicant, or permit holder, files a written request with the
city council for a hearing within 10 days after receipt of notice of the action
of the hearing officer.
   (c)   If a request for an appeal hearing with the city council is filed
within the 10 day limit, the city council shall hear and consider evidence
offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at
an appeal hearing before the city council. The city council shall decide the
appeal on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The city council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the
hearing officer by a majority vote; failure to reach a majority decision on a
motion shall leave the hearing officer’s decision unchanged. The result of an
appeal hearing before the city council is final. (Ord. 15256)
TABLE I
   MINIMUM SWIMMING POOL SHAPE & DIVING BOARD DATA (See Plate I)
BOARD TYPE BOARD LENGTH A B1 B2 B1+B2 C1 C2 DD1 DD2 DB DS E EE
BOARD  BOARD     A    B1    B2   B1+B2 C1    C2    DD1   DD2   DB   DS   E     EE
TYPE   LENGTH
Deck   Min. 6’02’08’0�2’010’012’020’08’0�7’9�4’0”  7’0�8’0”
Level
(18” Max.      4’0”                                      5’03’6”
Max.)  10’0”
Resid
entia  Min. 8’03’08’0�3’011’013’621’68’0�7’9�4’0”  7’6�8’0”
l
(30” Max.      4’6”                                      5’03’6”
Max.)  12’0”
1      Min.      5’08’6�3’612’014’022’010’08’3�4’0”  10’08’0”
Meter  14’0”
(Max.  Max.      6’0”                                      5’03’6”
)      16’0”
3      Min.      5’010’05’015’021’031’013’010’04’0”  12’08’0”
Meter  14’0”
(Max.  Max.      6’0”                                      5’03’6”
)      16’0”
 
See Plate I for floor slopes and radii.   All pool shell dimensions shall be
minimum inside.
TABLE II
SWIMMING POOL INLETS REQUIRED
Min. No. Inlets (N) Pool Volume Gals. (V)
TABLE II
SWIMMING POOL INLETS REQUIRED
Min. No. Inlets (N) Pool Volume Gals. (V)
                    UP TO
2                   12,000
3                   18,000
4                   26,000
5                   36,000
6                   48,000
7                   62,000
8                   78,000
9                   96,000
10                  116,000
11                  138,000
12                  162,000
13                  188,000
14                  216,000
15                  246,000
16                  278,000
17                  312,000
18                  348,000
19                  386,000
20                  426,000
21                  468,000
22                  512,000
23                  558,000
24                  581,000
25                  630,000
26                  655,200
27                  680,400
28                  705,600
29                  730,800
30                  756,000
31                  781,200
32                  806,400
33                  831,600
34                  856,800
35                  882,000
36                  907,200
37                  932,400
38                  957,600
39                  982,800
40                  1,008,000
 
By formula N2 + N + 6 =  V  through 25 inlets.
          1000
Over 25 inlets are limited to a maximum of 70 GPM per each 2” inlet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-41.png]
 
ARTICLE IV.
SPAS.
SEC. 43A-26.   SPA SAFETY STANDARDS.
   Texas Administrative Code Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 265, Subchapter L,
Subsection 265.205(f), as amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference into this chapter. (Ord. 30090)
CHAPTER 44
TAXATION
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
Sec.
44-1.   Persons required to render; time for rendition.
Sec.
44-2.   Fire insurance companies.
Sec.
44-3.   Penalties for failure to make timely and correct rendition of certain
property.
Sec.
44-4.   Prorating of real property taxes - Authority.
Sec.
44-5.   Same - At request of owner; notice to owners when proration made on
initiative of assessor and collector.
Sec.
44-6.   Duty of building inspector.
Sec.
44-7.   Assessment rolls to show name of owner and description of property.
Sec.
44-8.   Assessment rolls to show total amount of taxes.
Sec.
44-9.   Manner of making up original tax assessment sheets not affected.
Sec.
44-10.   Assessment of franchises, etc.
Sec.
44-11.   Taxes due on adjudication of bankruptcy.
Sec.
44-12.   Assessment, etc., of ad valorem taxes in certain contingencies;
support of ad valorem bonds during interim period.
Sec.
44-13.   Deduction of penalty and interest accruing after bankruptcy.
Sec.
44-14.   Taxes due upon assignment for benefit of creditors or receivership.
Sec.
44-15.   Collection of taxes upon assignment for benefit of creditors or
receivership.
Sec.
44-16.   Service charge for verification of taxes on real property.
Sec.
44-17.   Historic landmark tax exemptions.
Sec.
44-17.1.   Tax certificates.
ARTICLE II.
TAX ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
Sec.
44-18.   Definitions.
Sec.
44-19.   Levy of tax; amount.
Sec.
44-20.   Repeal of exemption.
Sec.
44-21.   Other obligations not affected by tax.
ARTICLE III.
OCCUPATION TAXES.
Sec.
44-22.   Occupation tax levied.
Sec.
44-23.   Collection of tax and issuance of receipt generally.
Sec.
44-24.   Countersigning licenses; signing receipts.
Sec.
44-25.   Collector’s monthly reports; failure to collect tax or give receipt.
Sec.
44-26.   Levy and enforcement of payment.
Sec.
44-27.   Payment generally; receipt to constitute license.
Sec.
44-28.   Unlawful to pursue occupation without license; prosecution not to
affect civil remedy.
Sec.
44-29.   Exemption of eleemosynary institutions.
Sec.
44-30.   Transfer of license - Authority of licensee.
Sec.
44-31.   Same - Effect; only one transfer allowed.
Sec.
44-32.   Occupation tax on coin-operated machines.
Sec.
44-33.   Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
BINGO GROSS RECEIPTS TAX.
Sec.
44-33.1.   Levy of tax; amount.
ARTICLE V.
HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX.
Sec.
44-34.   Definitions.
Sec.
44-35.   Levy; amount; disposition of revenue.
Sec.
44-35.1   Exemptions and refunds.
Sec.
44-36.   Responsibility for collection, reporting, and payment of tax.
Sec.
44-37.   Reports; payments; fees.
Sec.
44-37.1.   Tax collection on purchase of a hotel.
Sec.
44-37.2.   Convenience charge for certain payments made by credit card.
Sec.
44-38.   Rules and regulations.
Sec.
44-39.   Penalties.
ARTICLE VI.
SHORT-TERM MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL TAX.
Sec.
44-40.   Definitions.
Sec.
44-41.   Tax imposed.
Sec.
44-42.   Collection of tax.
Sec.
44-43.   Reports; payment to the city; fees; records.
Sec.
44-44.   Collection procedures on purchase of a motor vehicle rental business.
Sec.
44-45.   Use of revenue derived from imposition of tax.
Sec.
44-46.   Rules and regulations.
Sec.
44-47.   Penalties.
ARTICLE VII.
ADDITIONAL HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX.
Sec.
44-48.   Definitions.
Sec.
44-49.   Levy of tax; amount; duration.
Sec.
44-50.   Use of tax revenue.
Sec.
44-51.   Exemptions and refunds.
Sec.
44-52.   Responsibility for collection, reporting, and payment of tax;
statement of tax purpose required.
Sec.
44-53.   Reports; payments; fees.
Sec.
44-54.   Tax collection on purchase of a hotel.
Sec.
44-55.   Rules and regulations.
Sec.
44-56.   Penalties.
ARTICLE VIII.
TAXATION OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY IN TRANSIT.
Sec.
44-57.   Taxation of tangible personal property in transit.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL.
SEC. 44-1.   PERSONS REQUIRED TO RENDER; TIME FOR RENDITION.
   (a)   All persons shall, on or before the first day of April of each year,
furnish the assessor and collector of taxes of the city a full and complete
statement, list and schedule, verified by affidavit, of all real and personal
property situated in the city not otherwise exempt and all personal property
located elsewhere and subject to taxation in the city, owned, held or
controlled by them or in their possession as agent, bailee, warehouseman or
custodian on the first day of January next preceding and shall, in such
statement, list and schedule, state the name and address of the owner of such
property.
   (b)   The assessor and collector of taxes shall provide a form for the
rendition of income producing personal property. A person furnishing the
statement, list, and schedule of income producing personal property required in
Subsection (a) shall use the form provided by the assessor and collector of
taxes and shall state the market value of the property listed.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section “income producing personal property”
means tangible personal property used in the course of conducting a business.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section the market value of income producing
personal property shall be established using any method approved by the State
Property Tax Board in its current edition of the General Appraisal Manual.
(Ord. 16788)
SEC. 44-2.   FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
   Each fire insurance company incorporated under the laws of this state or
legally authorized to do business in this state, whose property is under the
law subject to ad valorem taxation by the city, shall render for taxation by
the city all of its real estate as other real estate is rendered and all of the
personal property of such insurance company shall be valued as other personal
property is valued for assessment for taxation by the city in the following
manner. From the total valuation of its assets shall be deducted the legal
reserves required to be maintained by it under the laws of the state and from
the remainder shall be deducted the assessed value of all real estate owned by
the company and the capital stock of such company, except in case its surplus
should not equal 50 percent of its capital stock, then only 50 percent of its
capital stock shall be deducted, and the remainder of the valuation of its
total assets, after the deduction of the assessed value of its reserves, its
real estate and its capital stock, in whole or in part as herein provided,
shall be the assessed taxable value of its personal property. The surplus
provided for in this section shall be computed for the purpose of taxation
whether the same constitutes or is made up, in part or in whole, of exempt
securities under law, it being the purpose of this section to provide a method
for arriving at the proper assessment of such companies irrespective of the
character of property constituting the same. (Code 1941, Art. 148-2)
SEC. 44-3.   PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO MAKE TIMELY AND CORRECT RENDITION OF
CERTAIN PROPERTY.
   (a)   A person who willfully fails to deliver a complete and accurate
rendition for all income producing personal property in the time and manner
required by Section
44-1, is guilty of a separate offense for each day after the first day of April
that the person fails to properly file the rendition.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty prescribed in Subsection (a), a person who
fails to deliver a complete and accurate rendition for all income producing
personal property in the time and manner required by Section
44-1, is liable to the city for a civil penalty as follows:
      (1)   $25 a day for each calendar day after April 1st and through April
15th that a person fails to deliver the rendition to the assessor and collector
of taxes; and
      (2)   $200 a day for each calendar day after April 15th and before July
1st that a person fails to deliver the rendition to the assessor and collector
of taxes; however,
      (3)   in no case shall the person be liable to the city for a civil
penalty that exceeds one-half the amount ultimately determined to be owed by
the person to the city in taxes on income producing personal property.
   (c)   A rendition form delivered by United States mail that is postmarked on
or before April 1st is considered to be delivered timely. For the purposes of
calculating the amount of civil penalties owed, a rendition form delivered by
the United States mail that is postmarked after April 1st is considered
delivered when received by the assessor and collector of taxes.
   (d)   The assessor and collector of taxes shall notify a person of the
amount owed to the city in civil penalties when tax bills are mailed. A person
who is liable for a civil penalty shall pay the amount owed when the taxes are
paid. If taxes are paid in more than one installment, the civil penalty must be
paid with the first installment.
   (e)   The assessor and collector of taxes shall notify the city attorney of
any unpaid civil penalty. The city attorney shall collect the penalty in a suit
on the city’s behalf.
   (f)   If the assessor and collector of taxes has reason to believe that
income producing personal property has been intentionally undervalued on a
rendition form, he shall refer the matter to the city attorney for appropriate
action. A person who submits an incomplete rendition form or a rendition form
on which the income producing property has been intentionally undervalued, is
liable for the civil penalty imposed in Subsection (b) until a complete and
accurate rendition is made in accordance with Section
44-1. (Ord. 16849)
SEC. 44-4.   PRORATING OF REAL PROPERTY TAXES - AUTHORITY.
   The assessor and collector of taxes of the city is hereby authorized, and it
is hereby made his duty, to prorate the taxes against tracts of land owned by
different owners, which have been taxed together as one tract, and apportion
the lien held by the city for such taxes on each of the several tracts
according to its proportion to the whole assessment. (Code 1941, Art. 149-1)
SEC. 44-5.   SAME - AT REQUEST OF OWNER; NOTICE TO OWNERS WHEN PRORATION MADE
ON INITIATIVE OF ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR.
   The assessor and collector of taxes shall, upon the request of any owner of
any tract of land whose property has been assessed together with any other
tract of land, divide and apportion the lien to each of the tracts and prorate
the taxes to each, as prescribed by Section
44-4. If deemed necessary by the assessor and collector of taxes for the
enforcement of the taxes due the city, he may prorate the taxes and apportion
the lien, as prescribed by Section
44-4, without first being requested so to do by the owner or owners of the
tracts of land, but in such case he shall notify the owner or owners of such
tracts of land of his intention so to do, where the owners of the same are
known to him, by giving each of such owners or their agents notice in writing.
(Code 1941, Art. 149-2; Ord. 8144)
SEC. 44-6.   DUTY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   For the purpose of assisting the assessor and collector of taxes in arriving
at a just and proper prorating of the assessment, the building inspector, upon
the request of the assessor and collector of taxes, shall render to him all
assistance and information in his office bearing upon the values of the
improvements on such property and other information had in connection
therewith. (Code 1941, Art. 149-4)
SEC. 44-7.   ASSESSMENT ROLLS TO SHOW NAME OF OWNER AND DESCRIPTION OF
PROPERTY.
   The tax assessment rolls of the city shall be so compiled that the same
shall exhibit a complete record of the name of the owner of each piece of
property listed and included upon the assessment rolls, so far as such owner
can be ascertained. If the property be real property the assessment roll shall
give the assessed value and an adequate description of each piece of property
upon the rolls and shall give the number of acres or portion of an acre or
number of lots and blocks or portions of such contained in or composing the
particular piece of property so listed, together with the value of any
improvements that may be located thereon. If the property be personal property
the rolls shall give a general description of the personal property owned,
according to its class or character, and the total value thereof shall be shown
by the assessment rolls. (Code 1941, Art. 149-6)
SEC. 44-8.   ASSESSMENT ROLLS TO SHOW TOTAL AMOUNT OF TAXES.
   The assessment rolls of the city shall exhibit opposite the property listed
for taxation the total amount of taxes assessed against such piece of property
so listed, but it shall not be necessary for the assessment roll to show what
proportionate amount of the total tax levied against any particular piece of
property is levied by virtue of the general ad valorem tax or several special
taxes assessed and levied under the authority of the city; that is to say, it
shall not be required or necessary that the city assessor shall extend upon the
tax assessment roll the amount of taxes levied and assessed against the
property by virtue of the general ad valorem tax, school tax, tax for interest
and sinking fund or any other partial or special tax of the city, which partial
or special taxes in the aggregate compose and constitute the total ad valorem
tax levy of the city. (Code 1941, Art. 149-7)
SEC. 44-9.   MANNER OF MAKING UP ORIGINAL TAX ASSESSMENT SHEETS NOT AFFECTED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the manner and form of
making up the original tax assessment sheets by the city tax assessor. (Code
1941, Art. 149-9)
SEC. 44-10.   ASSESSMENT OF FRANCHISES, ETC.
   Every franchise, privilege, easement or right of an intangible or
incorporeal character, whether owned by an individual or corporation, shall be
rendered by the owner thereof or the agent of the owner and shall be assessed
for taxation separately and distinct from the real property and tangible or
corporeal personal property of the owner. The same shall in every case be
valued separately from the real property and tangible personal property of the
owner, and shall in every instance be carried as an item of separate and
distinct valuation upon the assessment sheets and tax rolls of the city. (Code
1941, Art. 149-11)
SEC. 44-11.   TAXES DUE ON ADJUDICATION OFBANKRUPTCY.
   When any person shall be adjudged bankrupt under the laws of the United
States, and when such person shall own any property within the city, real or
personal, which is subject to taxation by the city, such taxes for such year
shall thereupon immediately be and become due and payable to the city, from and
after such adjudication in bankruptcy. (Code 1941, Art. 149- 12)
SEC. 44-12.   ASSESSMENT, ETC., OF AD VALOREM TAXES IN CERTAIN CONTINGENCIES;
SUPPORT OF ADVALOREM BONDS DURING INTERIM PERIOD.
   During the interim period beginning January 1 and ending the following
September when the city passes its annual tax levy ordinance, for the purposes
stated in this section, there is levied an ad valorem tax, supported by a lien
as of January 1, as provided by the charter of the city and the state
constitution, for all municipal purposes, upon all taxable property, real,
personal and mixed, within the city, based upon current valuations and the same
rate which the city levied for those purposes for the preceding year. In the
event any such taxable property was not on the tax roll for the preceding year
but becomes subject to taxation as of January 1 for the then current calendar
year, the same tax at the same rate is levied, based upon the current
valuations of all other taxable property.
   Taxes at the rate and in the manner provided in this section are likewise
levied upon all taxable property that was not on the tax roll for the preceding
year by reason of not being in the jurisdiction of the city, or improvements
not in existence on January 1 of the next preceding year, or property that was
tax exempt by reason of public, charitable or religious order ownership and has
lost its tax exempt status prior to January 1 or thereafter loses such status
during the calendar year.
   All taxes heretofore levied and necessary to meet the city’s obligations in
connection with ad valorem tax supported bonds or so much thereof as may be
necessary are confirmed, and the levy shall be a continued levy so long as such
bonds or any additional bonds issued subsequent to the passage of this section
are outstanding.
   This section is enacted for the purpose of enabling the assessor of taxes on
request to furnish the amount of taxes to be due and owing for the current
calendar year beginning January 1 to the owner or purchaser of property subject
to taxation who may desire to prorate taxes in the event the property is sold
voluntarily, involuntarily or in the custody of the law, or becomes subject to
taxation after the first of the year by reason of losing its tax exempt status
during the current calendar year.
   The taxes levied and assessed in this section also shall likewise apply in
all cases where taxes become due and payable under the ordinances and charter
of the city and the state law at an earlier date than provided for by law, by
reason of special circumstances that may arise.
   The provisions of this section shall be in force and effect during the
interim period mentioned in this section; provided, such taxes are actually
paid prior to enactment of the tax levy ordinance and shall be operative only
during that interim period, and shall be superseded by that ordinance when
passed as to that particular year. This section shall have prospective
application and shall continue in full force and effect from year to year until
modified or repealed. (Code 1941, Art. 149-13; Ord. 9581)
SEC. 44-13.   DEDUCTION OF PENALTY AND INTEREST ACCRUING AFTER BANKRUPTCY.
   When taxes due to the city shall become due and payable by any person who
has been adjudged bankrupt under the laws of the United States, the assessor
and collector of taxes of the city is hereby authorized and directed to deduct
all penalties and interest accruing on such taxes from and after such
adjudication in bankruptcy and to accept in full satisfaction thereof all
taxes, penalties and interest due to the city at the date of such adjudication.
(Code 1941, Art. 149-14)
SEC. 44-14.   TAXES DUE UPON ASSIGNMENT FOR BENEFIT OF CREDITORS OR
RECEIVERSHIP.
   When any person shall make an assignment of his property for the benefit of
his creditors or where any person shall suffer, voluntarily or involuntarily or
procure or permit the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take charge of
his property and when such property shall be subject to taxation by the city
such taxes for that year shall thereupon immediately be and become due and
payable to the city from and after such assignment for the benefit of creditors
or such receivership or trusteeship, and shall be secured by the lien provided
by of the charter. (Ord. 8144)
SEC. 44-15.   COLLECTION OF TAXES UPON ASSIGNMENT FOR BENEFIT OF CREDITORS OR
RECEIVERSHIP.
   When any taxes shall become due and payable to the city under the provisions
of the preceding section, the assessor and collector of taxes of the city shall
be vested with full and complete authority and it shall be his duty to proceed
at once to determine the amount of such taxes and to collect such taxes
immediately upon the assignment for benefit of creditors or the appointment of
the receiver or trustee, and such taxes shall be collected under the authority
and in the manner provided by the charter of the city and the laws of the state
for the collection of taxes. (Ord. 8144)
SEC. 44-16.   SERVICE CHARGE FOR VERIFICATION OF TAXES ONREALPROPERTY.
   (a)   A person who requests city personnel to verify whether taxes have been
paid on particular property, shall pay a charge for this service to the
assessor and collector of taxes. The service charge is 80 cents on each item of
verification. When the assessor and collector of taxes issues a statement of
verification, it is a special accommodation to the affected parties and may be
subject to correction by the assessor and collector of taxes.
   (b)   In this section, a person means a mortgage, insurance, land title
guaranty or real estate entity, or an individual who requests five or more
items for verification. (Ord. Nos. 4456; 15220; 18411)
SEC. 44-17.   HISTORIC LANDMARK TAX EXEMPTIONS.
   Property tax exemptions for designated historic landmarks may be granted to
the owner of the property in accordance with the process established in the
Dallas Development Code. (Ord. Nos. 17653; 19455; 21874)
SEC. 44-17.1.   TAX CERTIFICATES.
   At the request of any person, the assessor and collector of taxes of the
city shall issue a certificate showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
penalties, and interest due on a property according to the city’s current tax
records. A fee of $10 shall be charged for each certificate issued. (Ord. Nos.
19680; 19963)
ARTICLE II.
TAX ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
SEC. 44-18.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article, TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES has the meaning given that term
in Section 151.0103, Chapter 151 of the Tax Code of the State of Texas. (Ord.
19580)
SEC. 44-19.   LEVY OF TAX; AMOUNT.
   (a)   A tax is hereby levied on all telecommunications services sold within
the city. For purposes of this article, the sale of telecommunications services
is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications
device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of
origin of the call or other communication cannot be determined, the sale is
consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
   (b)   The rate of the tax imposed by this article shall be the same as the
rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes authorized by
state law. (Ord. 19580)
SEC. 44-20.   REPEAL OF EXEMPTION.
   The application of the local sales and use tax exemption for the sale of
telecommunications services, provided by Section 4B(a), Article 1066c, Vernon’s
Texas Civil Statutes, is hereby repealed as authorized by Section 4B(b) of
Article 1066c. (Ord. 19580)
SEC. 44-21.   OTHER OBLIGATIONS NOT AFFECTED BY TAX.
   The tax imposed by this article shall not affect or offset any amounts
payable to the city by a provider of telecommunications services pursuant to
any license, franchise, ordinance, charter provision, or state or federal law.
(Ord. 19580)
ARTICLE III.
OCCUPATION TAXES.
SEC. 44-22.   OCCUPATION TAX LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied and assessed and shall be collected from every person
pursuing within the city any calling, occupation, profession, trade, vocation
or business upon which a license tax or occupation tax is levied under the laws
of the state, a license or occupation tax equal to one-half of such state tax,
unless specifically provided otherwise by city ordinance, the city charter, or
state law. (Ord. Nos. 8121; 28019)
SEC. 44-23.   COLLECTION OF TAX AND ISSUANCE OF RECEIPT GENERALLY.
   The assessor and collector of taxes of the city shall issue to each
applicant therefor, on payment of the proper fee, a receipt and license showing
the occupation paid for, the location where such occupation is to be conducted,
the amount paid, the date of payment and the time paid for, and he shall make
upon the stub or duplicate impression sheet thereof a correct statement of such
receipt. (Ord. 8121)
SEC. 44-24.   COUNTERSIGNING LICENSES; SIGNING RECEIPTS.
   Each occupation license shall be countersigned by the city manager and city
secretary, and the receipt for the payment of the license shall be signed by
the assessor and collector of taxes of the city or by his duly appointed
deputy. (Ord. Nos. 8121; 20073)
SEC. 44-25.   COLLECTOR’S MONTHLY REPORTS; FAILURE TO COLLECT TAX OR GIVE
RECEIPT.
   It shall be the duty of the assessor and collector of taxes to report
monthly the amount of occupation taxes collected, and if he shall knowingly
fail to collect or try to collect any occupation tax, or shall collect any
occupation tax without giving therefor a receipt as provided for in Section
44-23, reserving the proper stub, he shall be deemed guilty of malfeasance in
office and summarily dismissed therefrom. (Ord. 8121)
SEC. 44-26.   LEVY AND ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT.
   The assessor and collector of taxes shall have the right, and it shall be
his duty, to levy for all occupation taxes due, just as in the case of taxes
for personal property, and he shall pursue the same remedy and in addition
thereto it is made his imperative duty to file complaints against any and all
persons offending against this article. (Ord. 8121)
SEC. 44-27.   PAYMENT GENERALLY; RECEIPT TOCONSTITUTE LICENSE.
   All taxes provided for in this article, when not otherwise expressly
provided, must be paid for an entire year in advance before a license shall
issue. No license shall issue for a less period than 12 months except in cases
otherwise provided in this article. The receipt of the assessor and collector,
countersigned by the city manager and city secretary, shall constitute the
license, and these taxes are hereby made payable in currency or coin of the
United States. (Ord. 8121)
SEC. 44-28.   UNLAWFUL TO PURSUE OCCUPATION WITHOUT LICENSE; PROSECUTION NOT TO
AFFECT CIVIL REMEDY.
   (a)   Any person who shall pursue or follow any occupation, calling or
profession or do any act taxed by this article, or who shall represent as agent
any person, without first having paid the tax required by this article is
guilty of an offense.
   (b)   This section shall not be construed so as to affect any civil remedy
for the collection of such taxes. (Ord. Nos. 8121; 19963)
SEC. 44-29.   EXEMPTION OF ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.
   Associations organized for the promotion of art, science, charity or
benevolence shall be exempt from taxation, as shall all entertainments given by
citizens for charitable purposes, or for support or aid of any literary or
cemetery association. (Ord. 8121)
SEC. 44-30.   TRANSFER OF LICENSE - AUTHORITY OF LICENSEE.
   Any person who shall be the legal owner of any unexpired occupation license
issued in accordance with the provisions of this article is hereby authorized
to transfer the same on the books of the assessor and collector of taxes of the
city. (Ord. 8121)
SEC. 44-31.   SAME - EFFECT; ONLY ONE TRANSFER ALLOWED.
   The assignee or purchaser of any unexpired occupation license shall be
authorized to pursue such occupation under such unexpired license for and
during the unexpired term thereof; provided, that such purchaser or assignee
shall, before following such occupation, comply in all other respects with all
the terms and requirements of the provisions of this code or other ordinances
of the city provided for in the original application for such license; and
provided further, that nothing in this article shall be so construed as to
authorize two or more persons to follow the same occupation under the same
license at the same time; and provided further, that the purchaser of such
occupation license shall have the right to pursue the occupation named therein
or to transfer it to any other person, but under no circumstances shall such
occupation license be transferred more than one time. (Ord. 8121)
SEC. 44-32.   OCCUPATION TAX ON COIN- OPERATED MACHINES.
   (a)   In this section:
      (1)   COIN-OPERATED MACHINE has the meaning given that term in Section
2153.002 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the water utilities department of
the city, or the director’s authorized representative.
      (3)   OWNER means the owner of a coin- operated machine.
      (4)   SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION means the special collections division
of the water utilities department of the city.
      (5)   TAX means the local occupation tax imposed on coin-operated
machines under this section.
   (b)   Pursuant to Section 2153.451 of the Texas Occupations Code, as
amended, an annual occupation tax is imposed on each coin-operated machine that
an owner exhibits or displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in the
city. The rate of the tax is one- fourth the rate of the tax imposed by the
state under Section 2153.401 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended. All
exemptions that apply to the state occupation tax on coin-operated machines
under Chapter 2153 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended, apply to the
local occupation tax imposed under this section.
   (c)   The special collections division of the water department shall issue a
tax permit sticker to an owner who pays the tax for a coin-operated machine.
The sticker must be securely attached to the machine in a manner that requires
continued application of steam and water to remove the sticker.
   (d)   If an owner fails to pay the tax on a coin- operated machine, the
director may seal or cause the sealing of the machine in a manner that prevents
the full operation of the machine. The director shall release or cause the
release of the sealed coin-operated machine after the tax on the machine and a
fee of $5 is paid to the special collections division.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person:
      (1)   removes a tax permit sticker from a coin- operated machine;
      (2)   exhibits or displays a coin-operated machine without a current tax
permit sticker attached;
      (3)   breaks a seal attached to a coin-operated machine;
      (4)   exhibits or displays a coin-operated machine with a broken seal; or
      (5)   removes from its location a coin-operated machine that has a broken
seal.
   (f)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (e)(1) of this section
that the person was the owner or the owner’s authorized representative and
removed the sticker to replace it with a new one issued under this section.
   (g)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (e) of this section
that the person was a city or state employee acting in the performance of
official duties.
   (h)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500. (Ord. Nos. 8121; 28019)
SEC. 44-33.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 28019)
ARTICLE IV.
BINGO GROSS RECEIPTS TAX.
SEC. 44-33.1.   LEVY OF TAX; AMOUNT.
   (a)   There is hereby levied under the Bingo Enabling Act a gross receipts
tax on the conduct of bingo games within the city. The tax is equal to one
percent of the gross receipts collected from bingo games conducted within the
city.
   (b)   The tax does not apply to the gross receipts of bingo games conducted
within those portions of the city in which bingo has not been legalized by an
election. (Ord. 18029)
ARTICLE V.
HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX.
SEC. 44-34.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   CONSIDERATION means the cost of a room in a hotel, and does not
include:
         (A)   the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the
occupant not related to cleaning and readying the room or space for occupancy;
or
         (B)   any tax assessed by any other governmental agency for occupancy
of the room.
      (2)   CONVENTION CENTER COMPLEX means civic centers, civic center
buildings, auditoriums, exhibition halls, and coliseums that are owned by the
city or other governmental entity or that are managed in whole or part by the
city. The term includes parking areas or facilities that are for the parking or
storage of conveyances and that are located at or in the vicinity of other
convention center facilities.
      (3)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article, or the director’s
designated representative.
      (4)   HOTEL means any building in which members of the public obtain
sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel,
tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house,
or bed and breakfast. The term does not include:
         (A)   a hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; or
         (B)   a dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and
operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent
institution of higher education, as those terms are defined by Section 61.003
of the Texas Education Code, as amended, that is used by the institution for
the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an
educational program or activity at the institution.
      (5)   OCCUPANCY means the use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room in a hotel.
      (6)   OCCUPANT means any person who, for a consideration, uses,
possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any
lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement.
      (7)   TAX means the hotel occupancy tax levied in this article pursuant
to Chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code , as amended.
      (8)   TOURIST means an individual who travels from the individual’s
residence to a different municipality, county, state, or country for pleasure,
recreation, education, or culture.
      (9)   VISITOR INFORMATION CENTER means a building or a portion of a
building used to distribute or disseminate information to tourists. (Ord. Nos.
12470; 17955; 20073; 22026; 23555)
SEC. 44-35.   LEVY; AMOUNT; DISPOSITION OF REVENUE.
   (a)   There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant of any room that:
      (1)   is in a hotel;
      (2)   is ordinarily used for sleeping; and
      (3)   the cost of occupancy of which is $2 or more each day.
   (b)   The tax is equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the
occupant of the room to the hotel.
   (c)   Disposition of revenues collected from the seven percent tax must be
as follows:
      (1)   4.718 percent must be paid prior to any other dispositions of
revenue to:
         (A)   the acquisition of sites for and the constructing, improving,
enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating, and maintaining of the convention
center complex or visitor centers, or both; or
         (B)   pledging payment of bonds as authorized by Chapter 1504 of the
Texas Government Code, as amended.
      (2)   1.232 percent to advertising and conducting solicitations and
promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or
registrants to the city;
      (3)   1.050 percent to:
         (A)   the encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of
the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art,
creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture,
photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape
and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance,
execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; and
         (B)   historical restoration and preservation projects to encourage
tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums:
            (1)   at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center
facilities or visitor information centers; or
            (2)   located elsewhere in the municipality or its vicinity that
would be frequented by tourists and convention delegates.
(Ord. Nos. 12470; 12572; 15555; 15684; 17955; 19631; 19997; 23555; 23915;
29880; 31554; 33028)
SEC. 44-35.1.   EXEMPTIONS AND REFUNDS.
   (a)   A person described in Section 156.101 or Section 156.103(d) of the
Texas Tax Code, as amended, is exempt from the payment of the tax imposed under
this article.
   (b)   A governmental entity excepted from the tax imposed by Chapter 156 of
the Texas Tax Code, as amended, under Section 156.103(a)(1) or (a)(3) of that
chapter shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but is entitled to a refund
of the tax paid.
   (c)   A person described in Section 156.103(c) of the Texas Tax Code, as
amended, shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but the state governmental
entity with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax
paid.
   (d)   To receive a refund of tax paid under this article, the governmental
entity entitled to the refund must file a refund claim with the director on a
form prescribed by the state comptroller and provided by the director. A
governmental entity may file a refund claim with the director only for each
calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during that quarter. (Ord.
23555)
SEC. 44-36.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR COLLECTION, REPORTING, AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel shall
collect the tax for the city and report and pay the tax to the city in
accordance with all requirements and procedures set forth in this article.
(Ord. Nos. 12470; 17955; 23555)
SEC. 44-37.   REPORTS; PAYMENTS; FEES.
   (a)   On the 15th day of the month following each month in which a tax is
earned, every person required by this article to collect the tax shall file a
report with the director showing:
      (1)   the consideration paid for all occupancies in the preceding month;
      (2)   the amount of the tax collected on the occupancies; and
      (3)   any other information the director may reasonably require.
   (b)   Every person required by this article to collect the tax shall pay the
tax due on all occupancies in the preceding month to the director at the time
of filing the report required under Subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   Every person collecting a tax under this article may deduct a one
percent collection fee from the gross amount of tax collected on all
occupancies in the preceding month if the tax is paid to and received by the
director no later than the 15th day of the month following the month in which
the tax is required to be collected. If the 15th day falls on a weekend or
holiday, the director must receive the tax by the next business day. If the tax
is paid by mail, the date of receipt by the director is the date postmarked by
the U. S. Postal Service.
   (d)   Each remittance of a tax required by this article must contain the
following statement and representation:
      The tax remitted and paid to the City of Dallas with this report was
collected pursuant to the requirements of
Article V,
Chapter 44, Dallas City Code, as amended.
(Ord. Nos. 12470; 17955; 23555)
SEC. 44-37.1.   TAX COLLECTION ON PURCHASE OF A HOTEL.
   (a)   If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this article
is the owner of the hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or
the seller’s assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient
to pay the tax due until the seller provides a receipt from the director
showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no tax is
due.
   (b)   The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the
purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to
be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price.
   (c)   The purchaser of a hotel may request that the director issue a
certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the amount
required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The director shall
issue the certificate or statement not later than 60 days after receiving the
request.
   (d)   If the director fails to issue the certificate or statement within the
period provided by Subsection (c) of this section, the purchaser is released
from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. (Ord.
Nos. 19388; 23555)
SEC. 44-37.2.   CONVENIENCE CHARGE FOR CERTAIN PAYMENTS MADE BY CREDIT CARD.
   (a)   Pursuant to Chapter 132 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, the director shall collect a convenience fee charge in an amount equal
to the credit card processing fee charged to the city for all fees, taxes, and
payments included in this article, when the payment is made by credit card.
   (b)   The convenience fee charge collected under this section shall be
deposited in the fund of the city which recorded the associated credit card
processing fee. (Ord. 31332, eff. 10/1/19)
SEC. 44-38.   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The director shall have the power to make any rules and regulations
necessary to effectively collect the tax. The director shall, upon giving
reasonable notice, have access to all books and records necessary to enable him
to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article
and the amount of taxes due under this article. (Ord. Nos. 12470; 17955)
SEC. 44-39.   PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   fails to collect the tax imposed by this article;
      (2)   fails to file a report as required by this article;
      (3)   fails to pay the director the tax when payment is due;
      (4)   files a false report; or
      (5)   fails to comply with Section
44-37.1(a) when purchasing a hotel.
   (b)   An offense committed under Subsection (a) of this section is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (c)   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under Subsection (b) of
this section, a person failing to pay the tax to the director by the 25th day
of the month following the month in which the tax is required by this article
to be collected shall pay an amount equal to 15 percent of the tax due as a
penalty. Delinquent taxes draw interest at the rate of 10 percent per year
beginning 30 days from the date the tax is due to the director.
   (d)   In addition to the amount of any tax owed, a person is liable to the
city for all reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the city in enforcing this
article against the person and in collecting any tax owed by the person under
this article. (Ord. Nos. 12470; 17955; 19388; 19963; 23555)
ARTICLE VI.
SHORT-TERM MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL TAX.
SEC. 44-40.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   ACT means Chapter 334, Local Government Code, as amended.
      (2)   APPROVED VENUE PROJECT means the Dallas Sports Arena Project that
was approved by a majority of the voters voting at an election held in the city
on January 17, 1998, in accordance with the Act.
      (3)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (4)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article, or the director’s
designated representative.
      (5)   GROSS RENTAL RECEIPTS means the value promised or received as
consideration to the owner of a motor vehicle for the rental of the motor
vehicle, but does not include:
         (A)   separately stated charges for insurance;
         (B)   charges for damages to the motor vehicle occurring during the
rental agreement period;
         (C)   separately stated charges for motor fuel sold by the owner of
the motor vehicle; or
         (D)   discounts.
      (6)   MOBILE OFFICE means a trailer designed to be used as an office,
sales outlet, or other workplace.
      (7)   MOTOR VEHICLE means a self-propelled vehicle designed principally
to transport persons or property on a public roadway and includes a passenger
car, van, station wagon, sports utility vehicle, and truck. The term does not
include:
         (A)   a trailer, semitrailer, house trailer, truck having a
manufacturer’s rating of more than one-half ton, or road-building machine;
         (B)   a device moved only by human power;
         (C)   a device used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks;
         (D)   a farm machine; or
         (E)   a mobile office.
      (8)   OWNER OF A MOTOR VEHICLE means a person who:
         (A)   is named in the certificate of title as the owner of a motor
vehicle; or
         (B)   has the exclusive use of a motor vehicle for the purpose of
renting it to another person.
      (9)   PERSON means any individual, partnership, trust, company,
corporation, association, or other entity.
      (10)   RENTAL means an oral or written agreement by the owner of a motor
vehicle that authorizes for not longer than 30 days the exclusive use of that
motor vehicle to another person for consideration, where the transfer of
possession of the motor vehicle occurs within the corporate limits of the city.
      (11)   VENUE PROJECT FUND means the “Arena Project Fund” created in
Resolution No. 98- 0749, adopted by the city council on February 25, 1998, as
it may be amended. (Ord. 23456)
SEC. 44-41.   TAX IMPOSED.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed a tax at the rate of five percent
on the gross rental receipts from the rental of a motor vehicle, except that
the same exemptions provided in Chapter 152, Subchapter E, of the Texas Tax
Code apply to the tax imposed under this section.
   (b)   The tax imposed under this section must be collected on every rental
occurring on or after May 1, 1998, and must continue to be collected for so
long as any bonds or other obligations that are issued by the city before May
1, 1999 under Section 334.043 of the Act for the purpose of financing a portion
of the costs of the approved venue project, and any bonds refunding or
refinancing those bonds or other obligations, are outstanding and unpaid. (Ord.
23456)
SEC. 44-42.   COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (a)   Every owner of a motor vehicle who enters into a rental of a motor
vehicle with any other person shall collect the tax imposed by this article on
behalf of the city.
   (b)   The owner of a motor vehicle subject to the tax imposed by this
article shall add the tax to the rental charge.
   (c)   Each bill or other receipt for a rental subject to the tax imposed by
this article must contain a statement in a conspicuous location stating:
      The City of Dallas requires that an additional tax of five percent be
imposed on each motor vehicle rental for the purpose of financing a portion of
the costs of the Dallas Sports Arena Project approved by the voters of the city
on January 17, 1998.
   (d)   An attorney acting on behalf of the city may bring suit against any
person who fails to collect the tax imposed by this article and to pay it over
to the director as required by this article. (Ord. 23456)
SEC. 44-43.   REPORTS; PAYMENT TO THE CITY; FEES; RECORDS.
   (a)   On the 15th day of the month following each month in which a tax is
required to be collected under this article, the owner of a motor vehicle
required to collect the tax shall file a report with the director showing:
      (1)   the consideration paid for all rentals in the preceding month;
      (2)   the amount of the tax collected on the rentals; and
      (3)   any other information the director may reasonably require.
   (b)   Every owner of a motor vehicle required by this article to collect the
tax shall pay the tax due on all rentals in the preceding month to the director
at the time of filing the report required under Subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   Every owner of a motor vehicle collecting a tax under this article may
deduct a one percent collection fee from the gross amount of tax collected on
all rentals in the preceding month if the tax is paid to and received by the
director no later than the 15th day of the month following the month in which
the taxes are required to be collected. If the 15th day falls on a weekend or
holiday, the director must receive the tax by the next business day. If the tax
is paid by mail, the date of receipt by the director is the date postmarked by
the U. S. Postal Service.
   (d)   The owner of a motor vehicle used for rental purposes shall keep for
four years records and supporting documents (except that mileage records are
not required) containing the following information:
      (1)    the amount of gross rental receipts received from the rental of
the motor vehicle; and
      (2)   the amount of tax imposed under this article and paid to the city
on each motor vehicle used for rental purposes by the owner. (Ord. 23456)
SEC. 44-44.   COLLECTION PROCEDURES ON PURCHASE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL
BUSINESS.
   (a)   If the owner of a motor vehicle rental business that makes rentals
subject to the tax imposed under this article sells the business, the successor
to the seller or the seller’s assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase
price sufficient to pay the amount of tax due until the seller provides a
receipt from the director showing that the amount has been paid or a
certificate showing that no amount is due.
   (b)   The purchaser of a motor vehicle rental business who fails to withhold
an amount of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the
amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase
price.
   (c)   The purchaser of a motor vehicle rental business may request that the
director issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of
the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The director
shall issue the certificate or statement not later than 60 days after receiving
the request.
   (d)   If the director fails to issue the certificate or statement within the
period provided by Subsection (c) of this section, the purchaser is released
from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. (Ord.
23456)
SEC. 44-45.   USE OF REVENUE DERIVED FROM IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The revenue derived from the tax imposed under this article must be
deposited in the Arena Tax Proceeds Account within the venue project fund.
Money in the account may be used only for the purposes specified in Resolution
No. 98-0749 that created the venue project fund, as it may be amended. (Ord.
23456)
SEC. 44-46.   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The director shall have the power to make any rules and regulations
necessary to effectively collect the tax. The director shall, upon giving
reasonable notice, have access to all books and records necessary to enable the
director to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this
article and the amount of taxes due under this article. (Ord. 23456)
SEC. 44-47.   PENALTIES.
   (a)   An owner of a motor vehicle commits an offense if that person:
      (1)   fails to collect the tax imposed by this article;
      (2)   fails to file a report as required by this article;
      (3)   fails to pay the director the tax when payment is due;
      (4)   files a false report;
      (5)   fails to make and retain complete records as required by Section
44-43(d) of this article; or
      (6)   fails to comply with Section
44-44(a) when purchasing a motor vehicle rental business.
   (b)   An offense committed under Subsection (a) of this section is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500, except that an offense committed under
Subsection (a)(5) of this section is punishable by a fine of not less than $25
or more than $500.
   (c)   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under Subsection (b) of
this section, the owner of a motor vehicle failing to pay the tax to the
director by the 25th day of the month following the month in which the tax is
required by this article to be collected shall pay an amount equal to 10
percent of the tax due as a penalty. An additional penalty equal to 10 percent
of the tax due must be paid 30 days later if the tax is still not paid. The
penalties provided by this subsection may never be less than $5. Delinquent
taxes draw interest at the rate of 10 percent per year beginning 60 days after
the date the tax is due to the director. (Ord. 23456)
ARTICLE VII.
ADDITIONAL HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX.
SEC. 44-48.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   ACT means Chapter 334, Local Government Code, as amended.
      (2)   APPROVED VENUE PROJECTS means the Convention Center Expansion Venue
Project and Fair Park Facilities Venue Project that were approved
by a majority of the voters voting at the election held in the city on November
8. 2022, in accordance with the Act.
      (3)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (4)   CONSIDERATION means the cost of a room in a hotel, and does not
include:
         (A)   the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the
occupant not related to cleaning and readying the room or space for occupancy;
or
         (B)   any tax assessed by any other governmental agency for occupancy
of the room.
      (5)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article, or the director's
designated representative.
      (6)   HOTEL means any building in which members of the public obtain
sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel,
tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house,
or bed and breakfast. For the purposes of the imposition of the tax under this
chapter, "hotel" includes a "short term rental." The term does not include:
         (A)   a hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; or
         (B)   a dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and
operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent
institution of higher education, as those terms are defined by Section 61.003
of the Texas Education Code, as amended, that is used by the institution for
the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an
educational program or activity at the institution.
      (7)   OCCUPANCY means the use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room in a hotel.
      (8)   OCCUPANT means any person who, for a consideration, uses,
possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any
lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement.
      (9)   SHORT TERM RENTAL means the rental of all or part of a residential
property to a person who is not a permanent resident under Texas Tax Code
Section 156.101.
      (10)   TAX means the hotel occupancy tax levied in this article pursuant
to Chapter 334 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
      (11)   VENUE PROJECTS FUND means the fund entitled the "Venue Projects
Fund," created in Resolution No. 22-1817, adopted by the city council on
December 14, 2022, as it may be amended. (Ord. Nos. 23555; 32363)
SEC. 44-49.   LEVY OF TAX; AMOUNT; DURATION.
   (a)   In addition to the hotel occupancy tax levied in Section
44-35 of this chapter, there is hereby levied a tax upon an occupant of any
room that:
      (1)   is in a hotel;
      (2)   is ordinarily used for sleeping; and
      (3)   the cost of occupancy of which is $2 or more each day.
   (b)   The tax is equal to two percent of the consideration paid by the
occupant of the room to the hotel.
   (c)   The tax imposed under this section must be collected on every
occupancy occurring on or after January 1. 2023, and must continue to be
collected for so long as any bonds or other obligations that are issued by the
city under Section 334.043 of the Act for the purpose of financing a portion of
the costs of the approved venue projects, and any bonds refunding or
refinancing those bonds or other obligations, are outstanding and unpaid. (Ord.
Nos. 23555; 32363)
SEC. 44-50.   USE OF TAX REVENUE.
   (a)   The revenue derived from the two percent tax imposed under this
article must be deposited in the 2% HOT Account within the Venue Projects Fund
established by Resolution No.22-1817. Money in this account may be used only
for the following purposes:
      (1)   to reimburse the city for prior expenditures made in connection
with, or to pay the costs of, planning, acquiring, establishing, developing,
constructing, or renovating the approved venue projects to the extent not
prohibited by any ordinance or indenture authorizing bonds or other obligations
payable from and secured by a pledge of the two percent tax imposed under this
article;
      (2)   to pay the principal of, interest on, and other costs relating to
bonds or other obligations issued by the city, or to refund bonds or other
obligations, that were issued for the purpose of providing the approved venue
projects; and
      (3)   such other uses as permitted by applicable law.
   (b)   For purposes of Subsection (a)(1) of this section, "costs" include,
but are not limited to, overhead, legal, and accounting expenses of the city.
(Ord. Nos. 23555; 32363)
SEC. 44-51.   EXEMPTIONS AND REFUNDS.
   (a)   A person described in Section 156.101 or Section 156.103(d) of the
Texas Tax Code, as amended, is exempt from the payment of the tax imposed under
this article.
   (b)   A governmental entity excepted from the tax imposed by Chapter 156 of
the Texas Tax Code, as amended, under Section 156.103(a)(1) or (a)(3) of that
chapter shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but is entitled to a refund
of the tax paid.
   (c)   A person described in Section 156.103(c) of the Texas Tax Code, as
amended, shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but the state governmental
entity with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax
paid.
   (d)   To receive a refund of tax paid under this article, the governmental
entity entitled to the refund must file a refund claim with the director on a
form prescribed by the state comptroller and provided by the director. A
governmental entity may file a refund claim with the director only for each
calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during that quarter. (Ord.
23555)
SEC. 44-52.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR COLLECTION, REPORTING, AND PAYMENT OF TAX;
STATEMENT OF TAX PURPOSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel
shall collect the tax for the city and report and pay the tax to the city in
accordance with all requirements and procedures set forth in this article.
   (b)   Each bill or other receipt for a hotel charge subject to the tax
imposed by this article must contain a statement in a conspicuous location
stating:
      The City of Dallas requires that an additional tax of two percent be
imposed on each hotel charge for the purpose of financing venue projects,
consisting of the Convention Center Expansion Venue Project and Fair Park
Facilities Venue Project approved by the voters of the city on November 8,
2022.
(Ord. Nos. 23555; 32363)
SEC. 44-53.   REPORTS; PAYMENTS; FEES.
   (a)   On the 15th day of the month following each month in which a tax is
earned, every person required by this article to collect the tax shall file a
report with the director showing:
      (1)   the consideration paid for all occupancies in the preceding month;
      (2)   the amount of the tax collected on the occupancies; and
      (3)   any other information the director may reasonably require.
   (b)   Every person required by this article to collect the tax shall pay the
tax due on all occupancies in the preceding month to the director at the time
of filing the report required under Subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   Every person collecting a tax under this article may deduct a one
percent collection fee from the gross amount of tax collected on all
occupancies in the preceding month if the tax is paid to and received by the
director no later than the 15th day of the month following the month in which
the tax is required to be collected. If the 15th day falls on a weekend or
holiday, the director must receive the tax by the next business day. If the tax
is paid by mail, the date of receipt by the director is the date postmarked by
the U. S. Postal Service.
   (d)   Each remittance of a tax required by this article must contain the
following statement and representation:
      The tax remitted and paid to the City of Dallas with this report was
collected pursuant to the requirements of
Article VII,
Chapter 44, Dallas City Code, as amended.
(Ord. 23555)
SEC. 44-54.   TAX COLLECTION ON PURCHASE OF A HOTEL.
   (a)   If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this article
is the owner of the hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or
the seller’s assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient
to pay the tax due until the seller provides a receipt from the director
showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no tax is
due.
   (b)   The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the
purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to
be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price.
   (c)   The purchaser of a hotel may request that the director issue a
certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the amount
required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The director shall
issue the certificate or statement not later than 60 days after receiving the
request.
   (d)   If the director fails to issue the certificate or statement within the
period provided by Subsection (c) of this section, the purchaser is released
from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. (Ord.
23555)
SEC. 44-55.   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The director shall have the power to make any rules and regulations
necessary to effectively collect the tax. The director shall, upon giving
reasonable notice, have access to all books and records necessary to enable the
director to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this
article and the amount of taxes due under this article. (Ord. 23555)
SEC. 44-56.   PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   fails to collect the tax imposed by this article;
      (2)   fails to file a report as required by this article;
      (3)   fails to pay the director the tax when payment is due;
      (4)   files a false report; or
      (5)   fails to comply with Section
44-54(a) when purchasing a hotel.
   (b)   An offense committed under Subsection (a) of this section is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (c)   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under Subsection (b) of
this section, a person failing to pay the tax to the director by the 25th day
of the month following the month in which the tax is required by this article
to be collected shall pay an amount equal to 15 percent of the tax due as a
penalty. Delinquent taxes draw interest at the rate of 10 percent per year
beginning 30 days after the date the tax is due to the director.
   (d)   In addition to the amount of any tax owed, a person is liable to the
city for all reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the city in enforcing this
article against the person and in collecting any tax owed by the person under
this article. (Ord. 23555)
ARTICLE VIII.
TAXATION OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY IN TRANSIT.
SEC. 44-57.   TAXATION OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY IN TRANSIT.
   (a)   The definitions set forth in Section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as
amended, are hereby adopted and made a part of this article by reference.
   (b)   Tangible personal property located in the city and consisting of
goods-in-transit [which would otherwise be exempt from taxation under Section
11.253(b) of the Texas Tax Code, as amended, and Section 1-n(a), Article VIII
of the Texas Constitution, as amended] is subject to ad valorem taxation
pursuant to Sections 11.253(j) and 11.253(j-1) of the Texas Tax Code, as
amended, and Section 1-n(d), Article VIII of the Texas Constitution, as
amended. Such goods-in- transit will remain subject to ad valorem taxation
until the city council repeals this subsection or otherwise takes official
action to adopt the exemption prescribed by Section 11.253(b) of the Texas Tax
Code, as amended, and Section 1-n(a), Article VIII of the Texas Constitution,
as amended, for such goods-in-transit.
   (c)   Nothing in this article subjects to ad valorem taxation any tangible
personal property that is exempt from taxation under Section 11.251 of the
Texas Tax Code, as amended, under Section 1-j, Article VIII of the Texas
Constitution, as amended, or under another law. (Ord. Nos. 27026; 28512)
CHAPTER 45
TEMPORARY INCLEMENT WEATHER SHELTER PROGRAM
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
45-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
45-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
45-3.   Authority and duties of the coordinator.
Sec.
45-4.   Operation of shelters generally.
Sec.
45-5.   Shelter space.
Sec.
45-6.   Chapter cumulative.
Sec.
45-7.   Exemption.
ARTICLE II.
TEMPORARY INCLEMENT WEATHER SHELTER PERMITS.
Sec.
45-8.   Application; issuance.
Sec.
45-9.   Operation plan.
Sec.
45-10.   Expenses.
Sec.
45-11.   Indemnification.
Sec.
45-12.   Emergency response notice.
Sec.
45-13.   Expiration; reapplication.
Sec.
45-14.   Permit denial or revocation.
Sec.
45-15.   Notice and appeal from denial or revocation of a temporary inclement
weather shelter permit.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 45-1.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the operation of
temporary shelters during times of inclement weather by entities that assure
compatibility of shelter activities with surrounding uses and provide a safe
place for individuals and families to obtain temporary shelter. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter,
      (1)   APPLICANT means a person or entity who submits a written
application to host or operate a temporary inclement weather shelter.
      (2)   INCLEMENT WEATHER means the following weather conditions:
         (A)   COLD WEATHER ADVISORY means an advisory issued:
            (1)   when the minimum nighttime temperature is forecasted by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Weather Service to
be 36 degrees Fahrenheit or below at any point between 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(the next day);
            (2)   for any amount of freezing rain or ice; or
            (3)   for two or more inches of snow (alone or in combination with
sleet and freezing rain).
         (B)   HEAT WEATHER ADVISORY means an advisory issued when the minimum
nighttime temperature is forecasted by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's National Weather Service to be 90 degrees Fahrenheit or higher
at any point between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (the next day).
      (3)   OPERATOR means a person or entity permitted by the city to operate
a temporary inclement weather shelter for a specified period.
      (4)   SHELTER PARTICIPANT means a homeless individual or family lodging
overnight at a shelter.
      (5)   TEMPORARY INCLEMENT WEATHER SHELTER or SHELTER means a facility
operating as a temporary inclement weather shelter as defined in Sections
51-4.217 and
51A-4.217 and in accordance with this chapter.
      (6)   TEMPORARY INCLEMENT WEATHER SHELTER COORDINATOR or COORDINATOR
means a city employee designated by the city manager to implement, administer,
and enforce this chapter or his or her designated representative.
      (7)   TEMPORARY INCLEMENT WEATHER SHELTER PERMIT means written approval
issued by the coordinator to operate a shelter. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-3.   AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE COORDINATOR.
   (a)   The coordinator shall implement and enforce this chapter and shall
discharge any duty necessary under or to affect the policy of this chapter.
   (b)   The coordinator may assist the applicant or operator in coordinating
applications for any required city-issued permit or license in addition to the
temporary inclement weather shelter permit. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-4.   OPERATION OF SHELTERS GENERALLY.
   (a)   Shelters may only operate and host shelter participants during times
of cold weather advisory and heat weather advisory.
   (b)   Shelters must be operated in compliance with an approved operation
plan.
   (c)   Shelters' intake procedures must comply with
Chapter 46, "Unlawful Discriminatory Practices Relating to Sexual Orientation
and Gender Identity and Expression." (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-5.   SHELTER SPACE.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, shelters must provide a minimum of
40 square feet of space per shelter participant.
   (b)   Each designated sleeping area must provide a walkway of four feet
between each row to provide emergency access. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-6.   CHAPTER CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative of all city ordinances.
Building, electrical, food establishment, fire safety, and all other permits
and licenses required by ordinance or other law for specific activities to be
conducted in conjunction with or as part of a temporary inclement weather
shelter permit must be applied for separately, in accordance with the
applicable city ordinance or state or federal law. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-7.   EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to a shelter established as
disaster relief operated by the office of emergency management and crisis
response. (Ord. Nos. 31695; 32864)
ARTICLE II.
TEMPORARY INCLEMENT WEATHER SHELTER PERMITS.
SEC. 45-8.   APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   To obtain a temporary inclement weather shelter permit, an applicant
shall submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the
coordinator.
   (b)   The application must contain the following information:
      (1)   Proof of a valid certificate of occupancy for a use allowed by the
Dallas Development Code.
      (2)   Project plans, including a site plan and floor plan, that
accurately depict the location of the shelter facility and areas to be used by
shelter participants.
      (3)   A proposed operation plan that complies with Section
45-9.
   (c)   Upon receipt of the completed temporary inclement weather shelter
permit application, the coordinator may request a building and fire inspection
to ensure required life safety systems and equipment are in working condition.
City departments and the coordinator may prescribe additional licenses,
permits, and authorizations required by other city ordinances or applicable
law, restrictions, regulations, safeguards, and other conditions necessary for
the safe and orderly operation of a shelter, to be incorporated into the
temporary inclement weather shelter permit before issuance. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-9.   OPERATION PLAN.
   The operation of a shelter must comply with an operation plan approved by
the coordinator. The operation plan must include the following:
      (1)   A supportive services plan that describes supportive services,
programs, and case management services, if any, offered to shelter
participants.
      (2)   Infection control policies and plans that comply with the
guidelines of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
      (3)   Reasonable accommodations made for shelter participants who are
deemed a vulnerable sub-population or require supportive equipment, such as a
wheelchair, lift equipment, or service animals.
      (4)   Staffing plan to support operations. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-10.   EXPENSES.
   An operator shall pay any expenses incurred by the city associated with the
operation of a shelter, such as a fire watch or requests for security to be
provided by the city. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-11.   INDEMNIFICATION.
    An applicant shall execute a written agreement to indemnify the city and
its officers and employees against all claims of injury or damage to persons or
property, whether public or private, arising out of the temporary inclement
weather shelter operation. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-12.   EMERGENCY RESPONSE NOTICE.
   The coordinator shall notify the fire and police departments when a permit
has been issued for a shelter at least 36 hours prior to operation and shall
provide those departments with the approved site plan and floor plan. (Ord.
31695)
SEC. 45-13.   EXPIRATION; REAPPLICATION.
   A temporary inclement weather shelter permit expires two years after the
date of issuance. Applicants may file a new application to operate a temporary
inclement weather shelter for the next two-year period before the expiration of
the current period. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-14.   PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   The coordinator shall deny or revoke a temporary inclement weather
shelter permit if:
      (1)   The applicant falsifies information on, or fails to properly
complete, the temporary inclement weather shelter application.
      (2)   The operator fails to maintain public order in or around the
shelter location.
      (3)   The fire or police department declares a structure or property a
serious threat to the public's health, safety, and welfare.
      (4)   The applicant or operator has had a temporary inclement weather
shelter permit revoked within the preceding 24 months or has committed two
violations of this chapter within the preceding 12 months.
      (5)   The operator fails to comply with or the shelter violates a city
ordinance or state or federal law.
      (6)   The operator fails to comply with
Chapter 46, "Unlawful Discriminatory Practices Relating to Sexual Orientation
and Gender Identity and Expression."
   (b)   Any violation of a city ordinance or state or federal law by shelter
participants while on shelter premises may be grounds for revocation of
shelter's temporary inclement weather permit. When considering whether to
revoke a temporary inclement weather shelter permit on these grounds, the
coordinator shall consider the severity of the violation and the frequency of
repeated violations. (Ord. 31695)
SEC. 45-15.   NOTICE AND APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A TEMPORARY
INCLEMENT WEATHER SHELTER PERMIT.
   (a)   If the coordinator denies or revokes a permit, the coordinator shall
contact and send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return
receipt requested, written notice of the denial or revocation and the right to
an appeal to the permit and license appeal board.
   (b)   An applicant or operator whose permit is denied or revoked by the
coordinator may file an appeal with the permit and license appeal board in
accordance with Section
2-96, "Appeals from Actions of Department Directors," of this code.
   (c)   The applicant or permit holder may reapply for a temporary inclement
weather shelter permit once conditions are met upon inspection by appropriate
city departments. (Ord. 31695)
CHAPTER 46
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES RELATING TO
SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY AND EXPRESSION
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
Sec.
46-1.   Declaration of policy.
Sec.
46-2.   Administration.
Sec.
46-3.   Interpretation and effect.
Sec.
46-4.   Definitions.
Sec.
46-5.   Exceptions.
ARTICLE II.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES.
Sec.
46-6.   Unlawful employment practices.
Sec.
46-6.1.   Unlawful public accommodation practices.
Sec.
46-7.   Unlawful housing practices.
Sec.
46-8.   Unlawful intimidation, retaliation, and coercion.
ARTICLE III.
ENFORCEMENT.
Sec.
46-9.   Procedures for filing complaints.
Sec.
46-10.   Investigation.
Sec.
46-11.   Conciliation.
Sec.
46-12.   Disposition of a complaint.
Sec.
46-13.   Offenses and penalties.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
SEC. 46-1.   DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (a)   It is the policy of the city of Dallas to bring about through fair,
orderly, and lawful procedures the opportunity for every person to obtain
employment, access to all places of public accommodation, and housing, without
regard to sexual orientation or gender identity and expression. The city of
Dallas is proud of the diversity of its employees, as reflected in Section 34-
35 of this Code, and is proud of the diversity of its citizens. The city
strongly encourages all entities within the city, including those who are
excepted from the requirements of this chapter, to recognize the rights of
every individual to work and earn wages through gainful employment, to obtain
and enjoy goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and
accommodations in all places of public accommodation, and to obtain housing.
   (b)   The denial or deprivation of these rights because of a person's actual
or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity and expression is
detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Dallas and is
within the power and responsibility of the city to prevent. (Ord. Nos. 24927;
29942)
SEC. 46-2.   ADMINISTRATION.
   The city manager is responsible for administering and implementing this
chapter. The city manager may delegate the authority to receive, investigate,
and conciliate complaints under this chapter to an administrator or other city
employees. (Ord. 24927)
SEC. 46-3.   INTERPRETATION AND EFFECT.
   This chapter does not create a private cause of action, nor does it create
any right or remedy that is the same or substantially equivalent to the
remedies provided under federal or state law. (Ord. 24927)
SEC. 46-4.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this chapter:
      (1)   ADMINISTRATOR means the person designated by the city manager to
receive, investigate, and conciliate complaints under this chapter and includes
the administrator's designated representatives.
      (2)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (3)   COMPLAINANT means a person, including the administrator, who files
a complaint under this chapter.
      (4)   CONCILIATION means the attempted resolution of issues raised in a
complaint filed under this chapter, or raised in the investigation of the
complaint, through informal negotiations involving the complainant, the
respondent, and the administrator.
      (5)   CONCILIATION AGREEMENT means a written agreement setting forth the
resolution of the issues in a conciliation.
      (6)   DISCRIMINATION means any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction,
segregation, limitation, refusal, denial, or other differentiation in the
treatment of a person or persons because of sexual orientation or gender
identity and expression.
      (7)   DWELLING means:
         (A)   any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence for one
or more persons; and
         (B)   any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of any building, structure, or part of a building or
structure designed and intended for occupancy as a residence for one or more
persons.
      (8)   EMPLOYEE means any individual employed by an employer. The term
does not include an elected official.
      (9)   EMPLOYER means any person who has 15 or more employees for each
working day in each of 20 or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding
calendar year, and includes any agent of such a person. The term does not
include a bona fide private membership club (other than a labor organization)
that is exempt from taxation under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1954, as amended.
      (10)   EMPLOYMENT AGENCY means any person, and any agent of a person, who
regularly undertakes, with or without compensation, to procure:
         (A)   employees for an employer; or
         (B)   opportunities for a person to work for an employer.
      (11)   GENDER IDENTITY AND EXPRESSION means "gender identity and
expression" as defined in
Chapter 34 of the Dallas City Code.
      (12)   LABOR ORGANIZATION means a labor organization and any of its
agents, and includes:
         (A)   any organization, agency, or employee representation committee,
group, association, or plan in which employees participate and that exists for
the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning
grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours, or other terms or
conditions of employment; and
         (B)   any conference, general committee, joint or system board, or
joint council so engaged that and Gender Identity and Expression is subordinate
to a national or international labor organization.
      (13)   PERSON means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, and other legal entities.
      (14)   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION means any of the following
establishments if they are open to the general public and, for compensation,
offer any product, service, or facility to the general public:
         (A)   Any inn, hotel, motel, or other establishment that provides
lodging to transient guests, other than an establishment:
            (i)   located within a building that contains not more than five
rooms for rent or hire and that is actually occupied by the proprietor of the
establishment as a residence; or
            (ii)   in which the majority of the occupants are permanent
residents and maintain their fixed place of domicile in the establishment.
         (B)   Any restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom, lunch counter, soda
fountain, or other facility principally engaged in selling food for consumption
on the premises, including, but not limited to, any such facility located on
the premises of a retail establishment or gasoline station.
         (C)   Any motion picture house, theater, concert hall, sports arena,
stadium, or other place of exhibition or entertainment.
         (D)   Any bar, tavern, pub, drinking establishment, or facility where
alcoholic beverages are served.
         (E)   Any retail or wholesale establishment selling any kind of goods
or services.
         (F)   Any public conveyance, including stations and terminals.
      (15)   RELIGION means all aspects of religious observance and practice,
as well as belief.
      (16)   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION means:
         (A)   a religious corporation, association, or society; or
         (B)   a school, college, university, or other educational institution
or institution of learning, if:
            (i)   the institution is, in whole or in substantial part,
controlled, managed, owned, or supported by a religion, religious corporation,
association, or society; or
            (ii)   the curriculum of the institution is directed toward the
propagation of a religion.
      (17)   RENT means to lease, sublease, let, or otherwise grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
      (18)   RESPONDENT means a person identified in a complaint as having
committed an unlawful practice under this chapter.
      (19)   SEXUAL ORIENTATION means "sexual orientation" as defined in
Chapter 34 of the Dallas City Code.
      (20)   UNLAWFUL PRACTICE means a discriminatory act or practice relating
to employment, public accommodations, or housing that is prohibited under this
chapter.
   (b)   For purposes of this chapter, an individual's gender is determined
solely by that individual's own perception of their gender. (Ord. Nos. 24927;
29942)
SEC. 46-5.   EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   a religious organization;
      (2)   the United States government, any of its departments or agencies,
or any corporation wholly owned by it; or
      (3)   the government of the State of Texas or any of its departments,
agencies, or political subdivisions. (Ord. 24927)
ARTICLE II.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES.
SEC. 46-6.   UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES. 
   (a)   Employers. It is unlawful for an employer, because of sexual
orientation or gender identity and expression:
      (1)   to fail or refuse to hire, or to discharge, any person;
      (2)   to discriminate against any person with respect to compensation,
terms, conditions, or privileges of employment; or
      (3)   to limit, segregate, or classify employees or applicants for
employment in any way that would deprive or tend to deprive a person of
employment or employment opportunities, or that would otherwise adversely
affect a person's status as an employee.
   (b)   Employment agencies. It is unlawful for an employment agency:
      (1)   to fail or refuse to refer for employment, or to otherwise
discriminate against, any person because of sexual orientation or gender
identity and expression; or
      (2)   to classify or refer for employment any person on the basis of
sexual orientation or gender identity and expression.
   (c)   Labor organizations. It is unlawful for a labor organization:
      (1)   to exclude or expel from its membership, or to otherwise
discriminate against, any person because of sexual orientation or gender
identity and expression;
      (2)   to fail or refuse to refer for employment any person because of
sexual orientation or gender identity and expression;
      (3)   to limit, segregate, or classify its members or applicants for
membership in any way that would deprive or tend to deprive a person of
employment or employment opportunities, or that would otherwise adversely
affect a person's status as an employee or as an applicant for employment; or
      (4)   to cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate against a
person in violation of this chapter.
   (d)   Training programs. It is unlawful for an employer, a labor
organization, or a joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship
or other training or retraining (including on-the-job training programs) to
discriminate against any person because of sexual orientation or gender
identity and expression in the admission to, or employment in, any program
established to provide apprenticeship or other training.
   (e)   Notices and advertisements.
      (1)   It is unlawful for an employer to print or publish, or cause to be
printed or published, any notice or advertisement relating to employment by the
employer that indicates any preference, limitation, specification, or
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity and expression.
      (2)   It is unlawful for an employment agency to print or publish, or
cause to be printed or published, any notice or advertisement relating to
membership in or any classification or referral for employment by the
employment agency that indicates any preference, limitation, specification, or
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity and expression.
      (3)   It is unlawful for a joint labor-management committee controlling
apprenticeship or other training or retraining (including on-the-job training
programs) to print or publish, or cause to be printed or published, any notice
or advertisement relating to admission to, or employment in, any program
established to provide apprenticeship or other training by the joint labor-
management committee that indicates any preference, limitation, specification,
or discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity and
expression.
      (4)   Nothing in this subsection prohibits a notice or advertisement from
indicating a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based on
sexual orientation or gender identity and expression when sexual orientation or
gender identity and expression is a bona fide occupational qualification for
employment.
   (f)   Exception. This section does not apply to, and does not require, the
provision of employee benefits to a person for the benefit of the person's
domestic partner. (Ord. Nos. 24927; 29942)
SEC. 46-6.1.   UNLAWFUL PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION PRACTICES.
   (a)   Discrimination in public accommodations. It is unlawful for any owner,
proprietor, or lessee of any place of public accommodation, because of sexual
orientation or gender identity and expression:
      (1)   to directly or indirectly exclude, segregate, limit, refuse, or
deny to any person any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, benefits,
privileges, services, or goods offered to the general public at that place; or
      (2)   to circulate, issue, display, post, mail, or otherwise publish a
statement, advertisement, or sign indicating that:
         (A)   a person will be denied accommodations, advantages, facilities,
benefits, privileges, services, or goods at that place; or
         (B)   the patronage or presence of a person at that place is
objectionable, unwelcome, unacceptable, undesirable, or unsolicited.
   (b)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
refusal to admit a person to a place of public accommodation or the expulsion
of a person from a place of public accommodation was required by law.
   (c)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   a hotel, restaurant, bar, lounge, nightclub, cabaret, theater,
bowling alley, skating rink, or golf course when the accommodations,
advantages, facilities, and services are restricted to members of a club and
their guests; or
      (2)   any bona fide social, fraternal, educational, civic, political, or
religious organization, when the profits of the accommodations, advantages,
facilities, and services (above reasonable and necessary expenses) are solely
for the benefit of the organization. (Ord. Nos. 24927; 29942)
SEC. 46-7.   UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES. 
   (a)   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.
      (1)   It is unlawful for a person, because of sexual orientation or
gender identity and expression:
         (A)   to refuse to negotiate with a person for the sale or rental of a
dwelling or to otherwise deny or make unavailable a dwelling to a person;
         (B)   to refuse to sell or rent a dwelling to a person who has made a
bona fide offer for the dwelling;
         (C)   to discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of the sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling; or
         (D)   to represent to a person that a dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale, or rental when the dwelling is in fact so available.
      (2)   It is unlawful for a person:
         (A)   to make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published, any notice, statement, or advertisement relating to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity and expression or
an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination; or
         (B)   for profit, to induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or
rent, or to not sell or rent, a dwelling by representations that a person or
persons of a particular sexual orientation or with a particular gender identity
or expression are present in or may enter into the neighborhood.
   (b)   Discrimination in housing financing. It is unlawful for any bank,
building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose
business, in whole or in part, consists of the making of real estate
loans to, on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity and expression:
      (1)   deny any person a loan or other financial assistance for the
purchase, construction, improvement, repair, or maintenance of a dwelling; or
      (2)   discriminate against any person in the fixing of the amount,
interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of a loan or other
financial assistance for the purchase, construction, improvement, repair, or
maintenance of a dwelling.
   (c)   Discrimination in providing brokerage services. It is unlawful for any
person, because of sexual orientation or gender identity and expression:
      (1)   to deny another person access to, membership in, or participation
in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other
service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting dwellings; or
      (2)   to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions
of access to, membership in, or participation in any multiple listing service,
real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization, or facility
relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings.
   (d)   Exceptions.
      (1)   This section does not apply to the following:
         (A)   The sale or rental of any single-family dwelling, if the owner:
            (i)   does not own an interest in or title to more than three
single-family dwellings at one time, regardless of whether the dwellings are
located inside or outside of the city;
            (ii)   has resided in the dwelling within the 24-month period
preceding the sale or rental of the dwelling; and
            (iii)   does not use the services or facilities of any real estate
broker, agent, or salesman, or of any other person in the business of selling
or renting dwellings, in connection with the sale or rental of the dwelling.
         (B)   The rental of a dwelling that is occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, when
the owner actually maintains and occupies part of the dwelling as a residence.
         (C)   The rental of a dwelling by a private organization only to its
members, when the dwelling is owned, controlled, or managed by the organization
for other than a commercial purpose and the rental of the dwelling is
incidental to the organization's primary purpose.
   (e)   Nothing in this section prohibits conduct against a person because of
the person's conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance under state or federal
law. (Ord. Nos. 24927; 29942)
SEC. 46-8.   UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION, RETALIATION, AND COERCION.
   It is unlawful for any person to discriminate against, harass, threaten,
harm, damage, or otherwise penalize another person for opposing an unlawful
practice, for filing a complaint, or for testifying, assisting, or
participating in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under
this chapter. (Ord. 24927)
ARTICLE III.
ENFORCEMENT. 
SEC. 46-9.   PROCEDURES FOR FILING COMPLAINTS.
   (a)   Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful practice may
file a complaint with the administrator. A complaint may also be filed by the
administrator if the administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
person has committed an unlawful practice. A complaint must be filed within 180
calendar  days after an alleged unlawful practice has occurred.
   (b)   A complaint must be in writing on a form provided by the
administrator, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name and address of the respondent.
      (2)   Name, address, and signature of the complainant.
      (3)   Date of occurrence of the alleged unlawful practice.
      (4)   Statement of the facts upon which the allegation of an unlawful
practice are based.
   (c)   Promptly after the filing of a complaint, the administrator shall, in
writing:
      (1)   notify the respondent named in the complaint that a complaint
alleging the commission of an unlawful practice has been filed against the
respondent;
      (2)   furnish a copy of the complaint to the respondent; and
      (3)   advise the respondent of the procedural rights and obligations of
the respondent, including the right to file a written, signed, and verified
informal answer to the complaint within 15 days after service of notice of the
complaint.
   (d)   Not later than the 15th day after service of the notice and copy of
the complaint, a respondent may file an answer to the complaint. The answer
must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number, and signature of the respondent or
the respondent’s attorney, if any.
      (2)   Concise statement of facts in response to the allegations in the
complaint, including facts of any defense or exception. (Ord. 24927)
SEC. 46-10.   INVESTIGATION.
   (a)   Upon the filing of a complaint, the administrator shall commence a
prompt and full investigation to determine the facts behind the complaint and
whether there is reasonable cause to believe an unlawful practice was
committed, except that no investigation may commence if, after personally
reviewing the allegations with the complainant, the administrator determines
that the complaint does not come within the scope of this chapter. Within 15
days after determining that a particular complaint does not come within the
scope of this chapter, the administrator shall give the complainant a clear and
concise explanation of the reasons why it does not and take no further action
on the complaint.
   (b)   In connection with any investigation of a complaint filed under this
chapter, the administrator shall seek the voluntary cooperation of any person
to:
      (1)   obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and any
other possible source of information;
      (2)   examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and
      (3)   take and record testimony or statements of any person reasonably
necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
   (c)   The administrator may, at the administrator’s discretion or at the
request of the respondent or the complainant, request the city council to issue
a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum to compel the attendance of a witness or the
production of relevant materials or documents pursuant to its power under
Chapter III, Section 12 of the city charter. Violation of a subpoena issued
under this subsection is punishable by the same fines and penalties for
contempt as are authorized before the county court. (Ord. Nos. 24927; 29942)
SEC. 46-11.   CONCILIATION.
   (a)   During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of
the notice of the complaint to the respondent, the administrator shall, if it
appears that an unlawful practice has occurred, attempt to conciliate the
complaint. In conciliating a complaint, the administrator shall try to achieve
a just resolution and obtain assurances that the respondent will satisfactorily
remedy any violation of the complainant’s rights and take action to ensure the
elimination of both present and future unlawful practices in compliance with
this chapter. Nothing said or done during the course of conciliation may be
made public or be used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this
chapter, without the written consent of all persons concerned.
   (b)   A conciliation agreement executed under this section must be in
writing in a form approved by the city attorney and must be signed and verified
by the respondent and the complainant, subject to approval of the administrator
who shall indicate approval by signing the agreement. A conciliation agreement
is executed upon its signing and verification by all parties to the agreement.
   (c)   A party to an executed conciliation agreement may not be prosecuted in
municipal court for the unlawful practice identified in the agreement unless
the administrator determines that the agreement has been violated and notifies
the city attorney in writing of the violation. (Ord. 24927)
SEC. 46-12.   DISPOSITION OF A COMPLAINT.
   (a)   If, upon completion of an investigation of a complaint, the
administrator determines that an unlawful practice has occurred and is unable
to secure an acceptable conciliation agreement from the respondent, then the
administrator shall refer the case to the city attorney for prosecution in
municipal court. The administrator shall refer the entire file to the city
attorney, who shall, after such referral, determine whether to proceed with
prosecution of the complaint in municipal court.
   (b)   If the city attorney determines that reasonable cause exists that an
unlawful practice occurred and the facts are sufficient to warrant the
initiation of a criminal action in municipal court, then the city attorney
shall notify the administrator, who shall then provide written notification to
the complainant and the respondent that the complaint will be prosecuted in
municipal court. If the city attorney determines that there is no reasonable
cause that an unlawful practice occurred or that the facts are insufficient to
warrant the initiation of a criminal action in municipal court, the city
attorney shall notify the administrator, who shall then dismiss the complaint.
   (c)   The administrator may dismiss a complaint:
      (1)   during the investigation and prior to referral to the city attorney
when the administrator determines that:
         (A)   the complaint was not filed within the required time period;
         (B)   the location of the alleged unlawful practice is not within the
city’s jurisdiction;
         (C)   the alleged unlawful practice is not a violation of this
chapter;
         (D)   the complainant refuses to cooperate with the administrator in
the investigation of the complaint or enforcement of an executed conciliation
agreement;
         (E)   the complainant cannot be located after the administrator has
performed a reasonable search; or
         (F)   a conciliation agreement has been executed by the complainant
and respondent; or
      (2)   after receipt of a statement from the city attorney that there is
no reasonable cause that an unlawful practice occurred or that the facts are
insufficient to warrant the initiation of a criminal action in municipal court.
   (d)   The administrator shall, in writing, notify the complainant and the
respondent of the dismissal of a complaint and include a statement of the
reasons for the dismissal. (Ord. 24927)
SEC. 46-13.   OFFENSES AND PENALTIES.
   A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly violates a
provision of this chapter or if he intentionally or knowingly obstructs or
prevents compliance with this chapter. An offense committed under this chapter
is punishable by a fine of not less than $200 or more than $500. (Ord. 24927)
CHAPTER 47
TRAILERS, TRAILER PARKS AND TOURIST CAMPS
Sec.
47-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
47-2.   Purpose of chapter.
Sec.
47-3.   Scope of chapter.
Sec.
47-4.   Building permit - Required.
Sec.
47-5.   Same - Application.
Sec.
47-6.   Same - Building inspector to approve plans.
Sec. 47-7.   Reserved.
Sec. 47-8.   Reserved.
Sec. 47-9.   Reserved.
Sec. 47-10.   Reserved.
Sec.
47-11.   Location of court, camp or park.
Sec.
47-12.   Requirements for each unit plot generally.
Sec.
47-13.   Toilet buildings generally.
Sec.
47-14.   Unit plots occupied by independent trailers.
Sec.
47-15.   Sanitary facilities for dependent trailers.
Sec.
47-16.   Water supply.
Sec.
47-17.   Waste disposal.
Sec.
47-18.   Certificate of occupancy.
Sec.
47-19.   Parking house trailer in city.
Sec.
47-20.   Records to be kept - Inspection.
Sec.
47-21.   Same - Registration of guests.
Sec.
47-22.   Fire regulations.
Sec.
47-23.   One family to use one unit plot.
Sec.
47-24.   Utilities.
SEC. 47-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
   (1)   COTTAGE UNIT means any fixed building or structure or part thereof
located in a tourist court, licensed tourist camp or house trailer park as
defined in this section and used as sleeping quarters or temporary dwelling by
one or more persons living together as one family.
   (2)   DEPENDENT HOUSE TRAILER means a trailer which does not have sewer and
water connections to accommodate a flush water closet, a tub or shower and a
lavatory or sink within the unit.
   (3)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the city
manager to enforce and administer this chapter, or the director’s authorized
representative.
   (4)   HOUSE TRAILER means a vehicle used or intended to be used as a
conveyance upon the public streets or highways, and duly licensed as such, and
shall include self-propelled and non-self-propelled vehicles so designed,
constructed, reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such manner
as will permit the occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place
for one or more persons, and having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or
skirtings so arranged as to be integral to or portable by the house trailer.
   (5)   HOUSE TRAILER PARK means a lot, tract or parcel of land used in whole
or in part and divided into unit plots for the parking of house trailers or
mobile homes which are used by persons for temporary or permanent dwelling
places. Where cottages and facilities for house trailers or mobile homes are
provided at one site, the whole shall also be known as a house trailer park.
   (6)   INDEPENDENT HOUSE TRAILER means a trailer which has approved sewer and
water connections to accommodate and containing a flush water closet and a tub
or shower and a lavatory or sink within the unit.
   (7)   MASTER METER means a meter used to measure for billing purposes
electric, gas and water consumption of a tourist court, tourist camp, or house
trailer park, including common areas, common facilities and unit plots.
   (8)   MOBILE HOME means a structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is eight body feet or more in width and is 32 body feet or more in
length, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designated to be used as
a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained therein.
   (9)   OWNER OR MANAGER means any person or society who has the control,
direction, maintenance or supervision of a tourist court, tourist camp or house
trailer park. Executors, administrators, guardians, conservators or trustees
shall also be regarded as owner.
   (10)   SUBMETERING means unit plot metering performed by the owner or
manager of the tourist court, tourist camp or house trailer park.
   (11)   TOURIST CAMP means a lot, tract, or parcel of land used in whole or
in part for the accommodation of transients by day or week, or for a longer
period of time with or without compensation and where parking facilities are
provided for automobiles and accommodations are provided where transients may
pitch their own tents, to be used for temporary dwellings. Where such
facilities are provided in connection with house trailers or cottage units at
one site, the whole shall be known as a tourist camp.
   (12)   TOURIST COURT means a lot, tract or parcel of land upon which one or
more cottages are located and maintained for the accommodation of transients by
the day or week, or for a longer period of time, with or without compensation.
   (13)   UNIT PLOT means an area of land for a cottage and parking space in a
tourist court, a tent and parking space in a tourist camp, or a house trailer
and parking space in a house trailer park.
   (14)   UTILITY COMPANY means the company or municipal service authorized to
provide electric, gas or water service. (Ord. Nos. 5424; 15147; 16130; 19312)
SEC. 47-2.   PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
   (a)   Provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for
safe, sanitary, and suitable methods of construction and operation of house
trailer parks, tourist courts, and tourist camps.
   (b)   Assure that house trailer parks, tourist courts and tourist camps
shall not become a menace to public health, morals, safety or welfare. (Ord.
4720)
SEC. 47-3.   SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   New buildings and structures and new additions to existing buildings and
structures hereafter constructed or erected in the city for or in conjunction
with tourist courts, tourist camps and house trailer parks shall conform to the
requirements of the Building Code and zoning regulations, and in addition,
shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   All tourist courts, tourist camps and house trailer parks now existing or
hereafter constructed or laid out within the city shall conform to or be made
to conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 4720)
SEC. 47-4.   BUILDING PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   No person shall erect or construct or proceed with the erection or
construction of any building or structure, nor add to, enlarge, move, improve,
alter, repair, convert, extend or demolish any building or structure or any
part thereof or install any plumbing, electrical or mechanical equipment as
part of a building or structure, or make any other improvement in any building
or structure or cause the same to be done within a tourist court, tourist camp
or house trailer park as defined in Section
47-1 without first obtaining a building permit therefor from the building
inspector. (Ord. 4720)
SEC. 47-5.   SAME - APPLICATION.
   Application for a building permit shall be filed with the building inspector
in writing on a form to be furnished for that purpose. (Ord. 5424)
SEC. 47-6.   SAME - BUILDING INSPECTOR TO APPROVE PLANS.
   Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by two copies
of plans and specifications and a camp plan or site plot plan showing the unit
plots the tourist court, tourist camp or house trailer park will consist of,
together with the unit plots which will be set aside for exclusive use of
independent house trailers, the location of the proposed buildings to be
erected and all existing buildings, if any, on the property or premises. The
camp plan or site plot plan shall also clearly indicate all streets, roads,
drives, property lines, administrative buildings, toilet buildings, plumbing
connections for independent house trailers, accessory buildings and fences,
together with the necessary space for parking passenger vehicles. Before
proceeding with the actual work of constructing the tourist court, tourist camp
or house trailer park, the applicant shall have such plans approved by the
building inspector.
   Such plans shall be drawn to scale upon either substantial, clean, colorless
paper, or shall be good blueprints. All the essential parts shall be drawn to a
scale of not less than one-eighth inch to one foot. Plans and specifications
shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and character of the work
proposed. (Ord. 5424)
SECS. 47-7 THRU 47-10.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 15147)
SEC. 47-11.   LOCATION OF COURT, CAMP OR PARK.
   All land used as a tourist court, tourist camp or house trailer park shall
be located on a well-drained site of amply size and in an area zoned for such
use. (Ord. 4720)
SEC. 47-12.   REQUIREMENTS FOR EACH UNIT PLOT GENERALLY.
   A unit plot in a tourist court shall not contain more than one cottage unit,
but each cottage unit may have attached to it a roof or enclosure to provide
cover for one automotive vehicle. Each cottage unit shall have not less than
one bedroom space and each bedroom space shall be not less than nine feet by 12
feet in size. Each cottage unit shall have hot and cold running water together
with one lavatory or one sink within the unit and shall have accessible thereto
in the same building one water closet and one tub or shower bath. Ceilings in
cottages shall be not less than eight feet high and each cottage room shall be
provided with light and ventilation by means of windows with an area of not
less than one-eighth of the floor area. Window and door openings shall be fully
screened with screen wire which shall be not less than 16 mesh per inch. Inside
walls and ceilings shall be covered with incombustible material, and, together
with floors and fixtures, shall be constructed in a manner that will minimize
the breeding and harboring of vermin.
   Heating and cooking facilities shall be provided with asbestos board or
metal backing or shields where required by the Fire Code. Each cottage unit
shall adjoin a road or driveway and shall not be closer to any other cottage
unit or building than 10 feet, unless satisfactory and acceptable fire
separations are constructed between units as required by the Building Code.
   Hotels, lodginghouses or administrative buildings when a part of a tourist
court, tourist camp, or house trailer park shall conform to the requirements of
the Building Code relating to the respective occupancy.
   Each unit plot for the accommodation of one house trailer and automotive
vehicle or for the accommodation of one tent and automotive vehicle shall be
not less than 900 square feet in size, which space shall be at least 25 feet
wide and shall adjoin a road or driveway. Each such unit plot shall be clearly
defined on the ground by proper permanent markers at each corner. The use of
tents or trailers provided by the management at a tourist camp or house trailer
park to create what is commonly called a tent city or trailer city is hereby
declared to be unlawful as it is the intent of this chapter to provide sanitary
and safe accommodations for persons who are considered transients to use tents
or trailers owned by themselves as temporary dwellings.
   Toilet buildings shall be provided at all tourist camps and house trailer
parks hereafter constructed or enlarged. All existing tourist courts, tourist
camps and house trailer parks in newly annexed areas not having upon annexation
the toilet facilities required by this chapter shall provide same within 24
months after annexation.
   No cottage or tent shall be erected or placed closer than five feet from any
adjacent property line. House trailers shall be so harbored on each unit plot
that there shall be at least a 15 foot clearance between house trailers. No
house trailer shall be located closer than 10 feet from any property line
bounding the park.
   No building, structure, cottage, tent or house trailer shall be located
nearer a public street than the building line as provided in the zoning
ordinance for the use district in which the premises are located. In no case
shall such structures be set closer than 15 feet to the front property line be
closer than 10 feet from any side street property line.
   The premises shall be surrounded by a suitable fence which is constructed in
accordance with the Building Code and having openings only for necessary
entrance and exit facilities.
   Well-drained driveways which are passable with motor vehicles during
inclement weather shall be provided in each court or park. These driveways
shall not be less than 18 feet in width, and well marked in daytime, and
lighted at night, and so located that each unit of the court or park is easily
accessible. Lateral or branch driveways less than 50 feet in length may be not
less than 10 feet in width.
   All entrances and exits from the premises shall be well marked and shall be
located and so arranged that they are easily controlled and easily supervised.
(Ord. 5424)
SEC. 47-13.   TOILET BUILDINGS GENERALLY.
   Each tourist camp or house trailer park shall be provided with a toilet
building for each sex, each of which toilet buildings shall be located not more
than 200 feet from any unit plot. The toilet buildings shall be roofed and
shall be provided with light and ventilation by means of windows with an area
of not less than one-eighth of the floor area of the room which they serve. The
openings shall be screened with mesh not less than 16 per inch. The toilet
buildings shall be provided with artificial lights having an intensity of not
less than 10 foot candles which lights shall be kept burning all time at night.
The toilet buildings shall have floors and side walls to a height of six inches
of concrete or other impervious material. Each of such buildings shall have the
following facilities as a minimum:
   (a)   One slop sink.
   (b)   One floor drain.
   (c)   Hot and cold running water.
   (d)   One laundry tray for each 15 unit plots shall be provided in a
separate compartment from the water closets and lavatories. Automatic washing
machines may be substituted for each laundry tray required in excess of one.
   In addition to the above-mentioned facilities, the toilet building for males
shall contain the following minimum facilities based upon the number of unit
plots set aside for use by either tents or house trailers:
   (a)   One flush water closet for every 15 unit plots or fraction thereof.
   (b)   One urinal for every 15 unit plots or fraction thereof.
   (c)   One lavatory or wash basin for every 10 unit plots or fraction
thereof.
   (d)   One shower bath for every 10 unit plots or fraction thereof.
   Each toilet building for females shall have the following facilities based
on the unit plots set aside for use by either tents or house trailers:
   (a)   One flush water closet for every 10 unit plots or fraction thereof.
   (b)   One lavatory or wash basin for every 10 unit plots or fraction
thereof.
   (c)   One shower bath for every 10 unit plots or fraction thereof.
   All plumbing installation shall comply with the Plumbing Code, this Code and
other health ordinances of the city. (Ord. 5424)
SEC. 47-14.   UNIT PLOTS OCCUPIED BY INDEPENDENT TRAILERS.
   Unit plots occupied by independent trailers that have a minimum of one flush
water closet, one tub or shower, and one sink or lavatory integral within the
unit and connected to the public sewer through an approved sewer connection or
otherwise to an adequate septic tank constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the department of code compliance and provided with an ample
and adequate supply of water of safe, potable quality approved by the health
officer, and when such unit plot is set aside as provided in Section
47-5 for exclusive use of such trailer, the unit plot may be disregarded in the
counting of the unit plots for determining required sanitary facilities for the
purposes of this section. (Ord. Nos. 5424; 22026; 27697)
SEC. 47-15.   SANITARY FACILITIES FOR DEPENDENT TRAILERS.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful to locate a dependent trailer upon a
unit plot unless the sanitary facilities as required in Section
47-13 are sufficient to accommodate such dependent trailer. (Ord. 5424)
SEC. 47-16.   WATER SUPPLY.
   Each site used as a tourist court, tourist camp or house trailer park shall
be supplied with water from city water lines if such line is within 150 feet of
the site. Otherwise, each site shall be provided with an ample and adequate
supply of water of safe, potable quality approved by the health officer. Water
supply faucets shall be located not more than 100 feet from any camping space.
Each cottage unit shall be supplied with running water. (Ord. 4720)
SEC. 47-17.   WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (a)   All waste water from tourist courts, tourist camps, and house trailer
parks must be wasted into a public sewer through an approved sewer connection
where within 150 feet of a public sewer, or otherwise to an adequate septic
tank constructed in accordance with the requirements of the department of code
compliance.
   (b)   All garbage must be placed into garbage cans with tops, and waste
paper must be placed in suitable containers.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he permits garbage, waste water, or
material from sinks, showers, or other fixtures or utensils in house trailers
or tents to be disposed of on any street or premises or in any other manner
except as provided in this section. (Ord. Nos. 4720; 22026; 27697)
SEC. 47-18.   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No building, cottage or house trailer or tent site or other permanent
structure within the meaning and scope of this chapter shall be occupied in any
part thereof unless or until a certificate of occupancy for the respective
tourist court, tourist camp or house trailer park has been issued by the
building inspector. An application for the certificate of occupancy shall be
filed by the owner or by his agent with the building inspector who shall cause
an inspection to be made to determine whether the premises comply with the
requirements of this chapter. Upon the incorporation of any area to the city,
any person maintaining or operating a tourist court, tourist camp or house
trailer park in such area shall immediately make application as provided in
this section for a certificate of occupancy to continue the operation of such
tourist court, tourist camp or house trailer park. (Ord. 4720)
SEC. 47-19.   PARKING HOUSE TRAILER IN CITY.
   It shall be unlawful to park or place any house trailer being used for human
occupancy on any street, lot, tract or parcel of land in the city fora period
longer than four hours except in a licensed tourist camp or house trailer park,
as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 4720)
SEC. 47-20.   RECORDS TO BE KEPT - INSPECTION.
   Each tourist court, tourist camp, or house trailer park must have on the
site an office in which copies of all records pertaining to the management and
supervision of the premises must be kept. Such records must always be available
for inspection by any member of the state and county law enforcement agencies,
the police department, the department of code compliance, the building
official, the fire marshal, and other agents of the city authorized to inspect.
(Ord. Nos. 4720; 22026; 27697)
SEC. 47-21.   SAME - REGISTRATION OF GUESTS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of each tourist court, tourist camp or
house trailer park to keep a register of all persons furnished accommodations.
Such register shall include the names of all persons furnished accommodations,
the permanent home addresses, the license number and make of their automobiles
and trailers, and the duration of their stay. (Ord. 4720)
SEC. 47-22.   FIRE REGULATIONS.
   Campfires shall not be permitted. The use and handling of gasoline or
flammable liquids shall conform to the requirements of the Fire Code. An
adequate fire extinguisher shall be provided for each 10 unit plots or fraction
thereof. (Ord. 4720)
SEC. 47-23.   ONE FAMILY TO USE ONE UNIT PLOT.
   It shall be unlawful to use any unit plot for more than one family
concurrently. (Ord. 4720)
SEC. 47-24.   UTILITIES.
   (a)   If a tourist court, tourist camp, or house trailer park provides
utility service through a master meter, the master meter must be in the name of
the person to whom a certificate of occupancy is issued under this chapter.
   (b)   A tourist court or tourist camp may provide utility submeters to unit
plots. A house trailer park may provide submeters or individual metering by the
utility companies to unit plots.
   (c)   Where the owner or manager of a tourist court, tourist camp, or house
trailer park provides submeters to the unit plots, the submeter or submeters
shall comply with the standards of accuracy required by law for the master
meter.
   (d)   The owner or manager of a house trailer park that receives utility
service through a master meter shall bill tenants for the utility service in
accordance with one of the following methods:
      (1)   rent the unit plots on a ‘bills paid’ basis and collect for
utilities through the rent;
      (2)   charge separately for utility services and allocate the charges in
a fair and reasonable manner among all unit plots in the park occupied during
the billing period; or
      (3)   if submeters are used, charge to each occupied unit plot based on
its submeter reading an amount that does not exceed the residential rate for
that utility service then in effect in the city.
   (e)   A house trailer park is not required to bill all utility services
under the same method but may bill each utility under a different method.
   (f)   If a house trailer park charges separately for utility services and
allocates the charges as provided in Subsection (d)(2), then the owner or
manager of the house trailer park must comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The house trailer park must allocate either by use of submeters or
based on the size of the house trailer or mobile home and the utility consuming
devices it contains.
      (2)   The house trailer park must apply the allocation to all unit plots
occupied by tenants during the billing period.
      (3)   The house trailer park may include in its allocation utilities
consumed in the common areas of the park related to the park operation,
including, but not limited to swimming pools, wash rooms, and outdoor lighting.
      (4)   The owner or manager of a house trailer park shall not charge to
its tenants an aggregate amount for a utility service that exceeds the amount
that the park is billed for that utility service.
      (5)   The owner or manager of a house trailer park that inadvertently
bills an overcollection shall adjust the collections to compensate the tenants
for that overcollection within 90 days from the date the overcollection was
billed.
   (g)   If a house trailer park charges separately for utility services based
on an amount not exceeding the current residential rate as provided in
Subsection (d)(3), then the owner or manager of the house trailer park must
provide the same services to its tenants that are required of retail utility
companies, including, but not limited to meter testing and investigation of
complaints.
   (h)   The director shall enforce this section and may by written order,
after a public hearing, establish such rules or regulations, not inconsistent
with this section, as he determines are necessary to effect the policy of this
section.
   (i)   The owner or manager of a house trailer park shall keep accurate
records that demonstrate compliance with this section and shall make the
records available to the director upon request. (Ord. Nos. 7772; 15147; 16130;
17226; 19312)
CHAPTER 47A
TRANSPORTATION FOR HIRE
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
47A-1.1.   Statement of policy.
Sec.
47A-1.2.   General authority and duty of director.
Sec.
47A-1.3.   Establishment of rules and regulations.
Sec.
47A-1.4.   Exclusions.
Sec.
47A-1.5.   Definitions.
Sec.
47A-1.6.   Permit fees.
ARTICLE II.
REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL TRANSPORTATION-FOR-HIRE SERVICES.
Division 1. Operating Authority Permit.
Sec.
47A-2.1.1.   Operating authority permit required.
Sec.
47A-2.1.2.   Application for operating authority permit.
Sec.
47A-2.1.3.   Changes to information in operating authority application.
Sec.
47A-2.1.4.   Expiration of operating authority permit.
Sec.
47A-2.1.5.   Suspension or revocation of operating authority.
Sec.
47A-2.1.6.   Zero-tolerance drug policy.
Sec.
47A-2.1.7.   Publicly remotely accessible data site.
Sec.
47A-2.1.8.   Transportation-for-hire service at Dallas Love Field Airport and
Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport.
Sec.
47A-2.1.9.   Nontransferability.
Division 2. Driver Permit.
Sec.
47A-2.2.1.   Driver permit required.
Sec.
47A-2.2.2.   Qualifications for driver permit.
Sec.
47A-2.2.3.   Application for driver permit.
Sec.
47A-2.2.4.   Investigation of application for driver permit.
Sec.
47A-2.2.5.   Approval or denial of driver permit.
Sec.
47A-2.2.6.   Changes to information in driver permit application.
Sec.
47A-2.2.7.   Duration of driver permit.
Sec.
47A-2.2.8.   Duplicate driver permit.
Sec.
47A-2.2.9.   Display of driver permit.
Sec.
47A-2.2.10.   Suspension or revocation of driver permit.
Sec.
47A-2.2.11.   Nontransferability.
Sec.
47A-2.2.12.   Driver regulations.
Division 3. Vehicle Permit.
Sec.
47A-2.3.1.   Vehicle permit required.
Sec.
47A-2.3.2.   Requirements for vehicle permit.
Sec.
47A-2.3.3.   Vehicle quality standards.
Sec.
47A-2.3.4.   Display of vehicle permit.
Sec.
47A-2.3.5.   Expiration of vehicle permit.
Division 4. Service Rules.
Sec.
47A-2.4.1.   No solicitation.
Sec.
47A-2.4.2.   Non-discrimination.
Sec.
47A-2.4.3.   City-wide service.
Sec.
47A-2.4.4.   Wheelchair accessibility.
Sec.
47A-2.4.5.   Direct and expeditious route.
Sec.
47A-2.4.6.   Payment by credit card.
Sec.
47A-2.4.7.   Reserved.
Sec.
47A-2.4.8.   Rates and fares.
Sec.
47A-2.4.9.   Additional requirements for hailable vehicles.
Sec.
47A-2.4.10.   Gouging prohibited.
Sec.
47A-2.4.11.   Reserved.
Sec.
47A-2.4.12.   Solicitation of passengers by business establishments.
Sec.
47A-2.4.13.   Driver availability log.
Division 5. Insurance.
Sec.
47A-2.5.1.   Insurance policy requirements and prohibitions.
Sec.
47A-2.5.2.   Minimum insurance limits.
ARTICLE III.
REGULATIONS SPECIFIC TO NON-MOTORIZED PASSENGER TRANSPORT VEHICLES.
Sec.
47A-3.1.   Route.
Sec.
47A-3.2.   Requirements for horses in service.
Sec.
47A-3.3.   Required equipment.
Sec.
47A-3.4.   Application for operating authority.
ARTICLE IV.
ENFORCEMENT.
Sec.
47A-4.1.   Responsibility for enforcement.
Sec.
47A-4.2.   Removal of evidence of authorization.
Sec.
47A-4.3.   Towing and impounding.
Sec.
47A-4.4.   Correction order.
Sec.
47A-4.5.   Service of notice.
Sec.
47A-4.6.   Appeal of correction order.
Sec.
47A-4.7.   Criminal offenses.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 47A-1.1.   STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city of Dallas to promote safety and quality in
transportation-for-hire services in the city. The purpose of these regulations
is to:
      (1)   protect the public health and safety;
      (2)   promote the public convenience and necessity;
      (3)   ensure that transportation-for-hire is a viable component of the
public transportation system;
      (4)   ensure public safety and consumer protection by regulating
transportation-for-hire operating authorities, drivers, and vehicles;
      (5)   allow different modes of transportation- for-hire to compete
directly with each other; and
      (6)   allow consumers to select the type of transportation-for-hire they
prefer to use. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-1.2.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this chapter and may by written
order establish such rules or regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter
or state or federal law, as he determines are necessary to discharge his duty
under, or to effect the policy of this chapter. (Ord. 29596, eff. 4/30/15)
SEC. 47A-1.3.   ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Before adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule, the director shall
hold a public hearing on the proposal.
   (b)   The director shall fix the time and place of the hearing and, in
addition to notice required under the Open Meetings Act (Chapter 551, Texas
Government Code), as amended, shall notify each operating authority and such
other persons as the director determines are interested in the subject matter
of the hearing.
   (c)   After the public hearing, the director shall notify the holders of
permits issued under this section and other interested persons of the
director’s action and shall post an order adopting, amending, or abolishing a
rule on the official bulletin board in the city hall for a period of not fewer
than 10 days. The order becomes effective immediately upon expiration of the
posting period. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-1.4.   EXCLUSIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   a vehicle operating as a Dallas Area Rapid Transit ("DART")
vehicle;
      (2)   courtesy vehicles;
      (3)   carpooling;
      (4)   the transportation of a person by a transportation-for-hire vehicle
licensed by another governmental entity from a point outside the city to a
destination inside the city, if the transportation-for-hire vehicle leaves the
city without receiving a passenger inside the city;
      (5)   a motor vehicle used to transport persons for hire that is
regulated by another chapter of this code, such as ambulances regulated under
Chapter 15D, "Emergency Vehicles"; or
      (6)   a bus or shuttle vehicle that is:
         (A)   operated for a funeral home in the performance of funeral
services;
         (B)   provided by an employer or employee association for use in
transporting employees between the employees' homes and the employer's place of
business or between workstations, with the employees reimbursing the employer
or employee association in an amount calculated only to offset the reasonable
expenses of operating the vehicle;
         (C)   owned and operated by the federal or state government, by a
political subdivision of the state, or by a person under contract with the city
for operation of the vehicle;
         (D)   used to transport children to or from school if only a fee
calculated to reasonably cover expenses is charged;
         (E)   regulated by Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT) or the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA);
         (F)   owned by a nonprofit organization and carrying only passengers
associated with that organization, if no compensation is received from any
other person for carrying the passengers; or
         (G)   operated under authority granted by the Surface Transportation
Board. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 30180)
SEC. 47A-1.5.   DEFINITIONS.
   The definition of a term in this section applies to each grammatical
variation of the term. In this chapter, unless the context requires a different
definition:
      (1)   BUS means a motor vehicle that has a manufacturer's rated seating
capacity of more than 15 passengers.
      (2)   CARPOOLING means any voluntary sharing of transportation without
compensation.
      (3)   COMPENSATION means any money, service, or other thing of value that
is received, or is to be received, in return for transportation-for-hire
services.
      (4)   CONTINGENT PRIMARY LIABILITY COVERAGE means a liability insurance
policy that will act as a primary liability policy in the event that no other
applicable primary liability policy exists or a policy exists but denies
coverage.
      (5)   COURTESY VEHICLE means a vehicle that is not for hire, is not used
to transport passengers for compensation, and is operated by or for a business
that provides free transportation to customers as an accessory to the main
business activity.
      (6)   DEPARTMENT means the department designated by the city manager to
enforce and administer this chapter.
      (7)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter and includes
representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director.
      (8)   DISPATCH means any communication system that conveys passenger ride
requests to drivers.
      (9)   DRIVE means to control the physical movements of a transportation-
for-hire vehicle.
      (10)   DRIVER means an individual who drives or otherwise controls the
physical movements of a transportation-for-hire vehicle.
      (11)   DRIVER PERMIT means the permit required by this chapter to drive a
transportation-for-hire vehicle.
      (12)   HAILABLE VEHICLE means a transportation-for-hire vehicle that can
be immediately summoned by a passenger without the use of dispatch, and that
meets the requirements in Section
47A-2.4.9.
      (13)   HORSE means any member of the species Equus Caballus.
      (14)   HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE means a non-motorized vehicle designed to
carry passengers while being pulled by one or more horses.
      (15)   METER means a device that measures the time and distance of a
trip.
      (16)   NON-MOTORIZED PASSENGER TRANSPORT VEHICLE means a horse-drawn
carriage or a pedicab.
      (17)   OPERATING AUTHORITY means a person who is granted operating
authority under this chapter to provide transportation-for-hire services.
      (18)   OPERATING AUTHORITY PERMIT means the permit required by this
chapter to provide transportation-for-hire services.
      (19)   PEDICAB means a non-motorized vehicle with three or more wheels
propelled by human power or human-assisted power with seating for one or more
passengers.
      (20)   PERSON means an individual; corporation; government or
governmental subdivision; or agency, trust, partnership, or two or more persons
having a joint or common economic interest.
      (21)   PUBLICLY REMOTELY ACCESSIBLE DATA SITE means a website, digital
platform, or mobile application ("app") that provides content in a manner that
is accessible to the public through a network.
      (22)   SHUTTLE VEHICLE means a van-type motor vehicle that has a
manufacturer's rated seating capacity of not less than seven passengers and not
more than 15 passengers.
      (23)    TRANSPORTATION-FOR-HIRE SERVICE means the business of offering or
providing transportation of persons for compensation. The term does not include
a transportation network company as defined in Section 2402.001(5) of the Texas
Occupations Code, as amended.
      (24)    TRANSPORTATION-FOR-HIRE VEHICLE means any vehicle used to offer
or provide transportation-for-hire services.
      (25)   VEHICLE PERMIT means the permit required by this chapter for a
vehicle to operate as a transportation-for-hire vehicle.
      (26)   WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBLE VEHICLE means a vehicle designed or modified
to transport passengers in wheelchairs or other mobility devices and conforming
to the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended.
(Ord. Nos. 29596; 31689; 32180)
SEC. 47A-1.6.   PERMIT FEES.
   (a)   The non-refundable fee for an operating authority permit is $382 per
year for transportation-for-hire service provided by non-motorized passenger
transport vehicles; and the non-refundable fee for an operating authority
permit per year for transportation-for-hire service provided by all other
transport vehicles are indicated in the fee schedule below.
 
Number of vehicles in a transportation-for-hire service fleet Annual Fee
1 to 5 vehicles                                               $198.00
6 to 10 vehicles                                              $292.00
11 or more vehicles                                           $327.00
 
   (b)   The non-refundable fee for a transportation-for-hire vehicle permit is
$185 per vehicle permit per year for non-motorized passenger transport
vehicles, and $39 per vehicle permit per year or any portion thereof, for all
other transportation-for-hire vehicles.
   (c)   The non-refundable fee for a driver permit is $125 per year.
   (d)   The fee to reinstate a suspended operating authority or driver permit
is $23. (Ord. 29596; 29706; 30180; 31689; 32180; 33232)
ARTICLE II.
REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL TRANSPORTATION-FOR-HIRE SERVICES.
DIVISION 1.
OPERATING AUTHORITY PERMIT.
SEC. 47A-2.1.1.   OPERATING AUTHORITY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person may not operate a transportation-for-hire service inside the
city without operating authority granted under this chapter.
   (b)   A person may not transport a passenger for hire inside the city unless
the person driving the transportation-for-hire vehicle or another who employs
or contracts with the driver has been granted operating authority under this
chapter. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.1.2.   APPLICATION FOR OPERATING AUTHORITY PERMIT.
   (a)   To obtain an operating authority permit, a person shall make
application in the manner prescribed by the director. The applicant must be the
person who will own, control, or operate the proposed transportation-for-hire
company.
   (b)   An applicant shall file with the director a verified application
statement, accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $108, containing
the following:
      (1)   the form of business of the applicant and, if the business is a
corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business
and the name and address of each person with a 20 percent or greater ownership
interest in the business;
      (2)   the verified signature of the applicant;
      (3)   the address of the fixed facilities to be used in the operation, if
any, and the address of the applicant's corporate headquarters, if different
from the address of the fixed facilities;
      (4)   the name of the person designated by the applicant to receive on
behalf of the operating authority any future notices sent by the City to the
operating authority, and that person's contact information, including a mailing
address, telephone number, and email or other electronic address;
      (5)   a method for the director to immediately verify whether a driver or
vehicle are currently operating under that operating authority or were
operating under that operating authority within the past 90 days;
      (6)   documentary evidence from an insurance company listed as an
authorized auto liability lines carrier on the Texas Department of Insurance's
List of Authorized Insurance Companies or a surplus lines insurer listed on the
Texas Department of Insurance's list of Eligible Surplus Lines Insurance
Companies, indicating that such insurance company has bound itself to provide
the applicant with the liability insurance required by this chapter;
      (7)   documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on the local
property, if any, to be used in connection with the operation of the proposed
transportation-for-hire company; and
      (8)   a copy of the company's zero-tolerance policy for intoxicating
substances. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 29706; 30180; 31689; 32180; 33232)
SEC. 47A-2.1.3.   CHANGES TO INFORMATION IN OPERATING AUTHORITY APPLICATION.
   Any changes to the information provided in the operating authority permit
application must be reported to the director, in the manner prescribed by the
director, within 10 days of the change. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.1.4.   EXPIRATION OF OPERATING AUTHORITY PERMIT.
An operating authority permit expires one year from the date it is issued.
(Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.1.5.   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF OPERATING AUTHORITY.
   (a)   Suspension. The following regulations apply to the suspension of a
temporary or annual operating authority permit:
      (1)   The director may suspend an operating authority permit if the
director determines that the operating authority permit holder failed to comply
with a correction order issued to the holder by the director within the time
specified in the order.
      (2)   Suspension of an operating authority permit does not affect the
expiration date of the permit.
   (b)   Revocation. The following regulations apply to the revocation of a
temporary or annual operating authority permit:
      (1)   The director shall revoke operating authority if the director
determines that the operating authority permit holder has:
         (A)    made a false statement as to a material matter in the
application concerning the operating authority; or
         (B)    failed to maintain the insurance required by this chapter.
      (2)    After revocation of an operating authority permit, an operating
authority permit holder is not eligible for another permit for a period of up
to two years, depending on the severity of the violation resulting in the
revocation. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.1.6.   ZERO-TOLERANCE DRUG POLICY.
   (a)   An operating authority shall employ, maintain, and enforce as to its
drivers a zero-tolerance policy prohibiting the use of intoxicating substances.
   (b)   An operating authority shall include on its publicly remotely
accessible data site notice of the
operating authority’s zero-tolerance policy for intoxicating substances and
information on how passengers may report a possible violation of the policy to
the operating authority and to the City. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.1.7.   PUBLICLY REMOTELY ACCESSIBLE DATA SITE.
   Each operating authority shall maintain a publicly remotely accessible data
site that contains, at a minimum:
      (1)   the operating authority’s rate information;
      (2)   the operating authority’s zero-tolerance policy for intoxicating
substances;
      (3)   the operating authority’s contact information;
      (4)   a statement that wheelchair accessible vehicles are available upon
request; and
      (5)   information on how to report complaints to the city. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.1.8.   TRANSPORTATION-FOR-HIRE SERVICE AT DALLAS LOVE FIELD AIRPORT
AND DALLAS- FORT WORTH INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT.
   (a)   In general. In addition to complying with this chapter, an operating
authority providing transportation-for-hire services at Dallas Love Field
Airport or Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport shall comply with all of the
rules and regulations of those airports.
   (b)   Dallas Love Field Airport. An operating authority that tracks vehicle
location for transportation services shall, upon request of the director,
provide the director with the information necessary to independently verify
trip fees, as that trip fee is set in Chapter five of this code, as amended,
owed by that operating authority on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis. (Ord.
Nos. 29596; 30180; 31689)
SEC. 47A-2.1.9.   NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   An operating authority permit is not transferable. This regulation should
not be construed to impede the continuing use of trade names. (Ord. 29596)
DIVISION 2.
DRIVER PERMIT.
SEC. 47A-2.2.1.   DRIVER PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person may not drive a transportation-for-hire vehicle for the
purpose of providing transportation-for-hire services without a valid driver
permit, associated with an operating authority, issued under this article.
   (b)   An operating authority may not knowingly request or allow a person who
does not hold a valid driver permit issued under this article to drive a
transportation-for-hire vehicle for the purpose of providing transportation-
for-hire services for that operating authority. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 30180; 31689)
SEC. 47A-2.2.2.   QUALIFICATIONS FOR DRIVER PERMIT.
   (a)   To qualify for a driver permit, an applicant must:
      (1)   hold a driver’s license that meets the requirements of Chapter 521,
Texas Transportation Code;
      (2)   not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability
that is likely to prevent the applicant from exercising ordinary and reasonable
control over a motor vehicle or that is likely to otherwise endanger the public
health or safety;
      (3)   not have been convicted of more than three moving traffic
violations arising out of separate incidents, or involved in more than one
automobile accident in which it could be reasonably determined that the
applicant was more than fifty percent at fault, within any 12-month period
during the preceding 24 months;
      (4)   not have been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   criminal homicide as described in Chapter 19 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (ii)   kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal
Code;
            (iii)   a sexual offense as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (iv)   an assaultive offense as described in Chapter 22 of the
Texas Penal Code;
            (v)   robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (vi)   any offense under the Texas Penal Code committed against a
person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in transportation-
for-hire service;
            (vii)   the transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in
violation of Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal Code, but only if the violation is
punishable as a felony;
            (viii)   a violation of the Dangerous Drugs Act (Chapter 483 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code) that is punishable as a felony;
            (ix)   a violation of the Controlled Substances Act (Chapter 481 of
the Texas Health and Safety Code) that is punishable as a felony; or
            (x)   criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in
Subdivision (7)(A)(i) through (viii) of this subsection;
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony
offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the
applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination
of misdemeanor offenses;
      (5)   not have been convicted of, or discharged by probation or deferred
adjudication for, driving while intoxicated:
         (A)   within the preceding 12 months; or
         (B)   more than one time within the preceding five years; and
      (6)   not be subject to an outstanding warrant of arrest in the State of
Texas.
   (b)   If an applicant is denied a driver permit on the basis that they have
been convicted of an offense listed in Subsection (a)(4) or (5), for which the
required time period has not elapsed since the date of conviction or the date
of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, the Applicant may
appeal the denial to the Permit and License Appeal Board in the manner set out
in Dallas City Code 2-96. The Permit and License Appeal Board may determine
that the driver is presently fit to engage in the occupation of a
transportation-for-hire driver by considering the following:
      (1)   the extent and nature of the applicant’s past criminal activity;
      (2)   the age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the
crime;
      (3)   the amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant’s last
criminal activity;
      (4)   the conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and
following the criminal activity;
      (5)   evidence of the applicant’s rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort
while incarcerated or following release; and
      (6)   other evidence of the applicant’s present fitness, including
letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional
officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the
applicant; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the applicant
resides; and any other persons in contact with the applicant. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.2.3.   APPLICATION FOR DRIVER PERMIT.
   To obtain a driver permit or renewal of a driver permit, the applicant must
complete a written application on a form provided for the purpose. The
application must include the applicant’s contact information, including the
applicant’s mailing address and telephone number, and a method for privately
contacting the applicant electronically (such as an email address). (Ord.
29596)
SEC. 47A-2.2.4.   INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION FOR DRIVER PERMIT.
   (a)   An applicant seeking an initial driver permit or renewal of an
existing driver permit must provide to the director:
      (1)   a current official criminal history report, issued by the Texas
Department of Public Safety within the preceding 12 months, on each applicant
to determine the applicant's qualification under Section
47A-2.2.2; and
      (2)   a current copy of the applicant's motor vehicle driving record and
a list of any outstanding warrants for arrest of the applicant; and
      (3)   any other information the director considers necessary to determine
whether an applicant qualifies for a driver's permit.
   (b)   The director shall provide the applicant, upon written request, a copy
of all materials contained in the applicant's file to the extent allowed under
Chapter 552 of the Texas Government Code. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 29706; 31689)
SEC. 47A-2.2.5.   APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF DRIVER PERMIT.
   (a)   Applicants who are not seeking renewal of an existing driver permit
must complete a training class approved by the director on city regulations,
familiarity with the city, and customer service before the applicant may
receive a driver permit.
   (b)    The director shall issue a driver permit to the applicant if:
      (1)   the director determines that the applicant is qualified to receive
a permit under Section
47A-2.2.2; and
      (2)   the applicant has completed the training class required by
Subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   The director shall deny the application for a driver permit if the
applicant:
      (1)   is not qualified under Section
47A-2.2.2, or
      (2)   makes a false statement of a material fact in his application for a
driver permit.
   (d)   If the director determines that a driver permit should be denied, the
director shall notify the applicant in writing that his application is denied
and include in the notice the reason for denial and a statement informing the
applicant of his right of appeal. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.2.6.   CHANGES TO INFORMATION IN DRIVER PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any changes in the driver’s contact information must be reported to the
director prior to or contemporaneously with those changes. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.2.7.   DURATION OF DRIVER PERMIT.
   (a)   A driver permit expires one year from the date it is issued.
   (b)   If a driver’s state driver’s license is suspended or revoked by the
state, his transportation- for-hire driver permit automatically becomes void. A
driver shall immediately notify the director and each operating authority for
which he drives of a suspension or revocation of his driver’s license by the
state and shall immediately surrender his driver permit to the director. (Ord.
29596; 31689)
SEC. 47A-2.2.8.   DUPLICATE DRIVER PERMIT.
   If a driver permit is lost or destroyed, the director shall, for a $21 fee,
issue the driver a duplicate driver permit. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 29706; 31689;
33232)
SEC. 47A-2.2.9.   DISPLAY OF DRIVER PERMIT.
   (a)   A driver shall have the driver permit in his possession at all times
that the driver is providing transportation-for-hire services.
   (b)   A driver shall allow the director or a peace officer to examine the
driver permit upon request.
   (c)   A driver shall at all times, while actively seeking or providing
transportation-for-hire services, display driver permit information in a manner
that is visible and legible to passengers, including the driver's first name,
picture, permit number, and information on how to contact the city to make a
complaint. (Ord. 29596; 31689)
SEC. 47A-2.2.10.   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DRIVER PERMIT.
   (a)   Suspension.
      (1)   If the director determines that a driver has failed to comply with
this chapter or a rule or regulation established under this chapter, the
director may suspend the driver permit for a definite period of time not to
exceed 60 days.
      (2)   If at any time the director determines that a driver is not
qualified under Section
47A-2.2.2, or is under indictment or has charges pending for any offense
involving driving while intoxicated or a felony offense involving a crime
described in Section
47A-2.2.2 or criminal attempt to commit any of those offenses, the director
shall suspend the driver permit until such time as the director determines that
the driver is qualified or that the charges against the driver have been
finally adjudicated.
      (3)   A driver whose driver permit is suspended shall not drive a
transportation-for-hire vehicle inside the city during the period of
suspension.
      (4)   The director shall notify in writing the driver and all operating
authorities of a suspension under this section and include in the notice the
reason for the suspension, the date the director orders the suspension to
begin, the duration of suspension, and a statement informing the driver of a
right of appeal. The period of suspension begins on the date specified by the
director or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the permit and
license appeal board.
      (5)    A driver whose driver permit has been suspended may not resume
providing transportation- for-hire driver services after the suspension period
has ended until the driver repeats the training class required by Section
47A-2.2.5(a) of this chapter. A driver may attend the training class at any
available time during or after the suspension period.
   (b)   Revocation.
      (1)   The director shall revoke a driver permit if the director
determines that the driver:
         (A)   drove a transportation-for-hire vehicle for hire inside the city
during a period in which the driver’s permit was suspended;
         (B)   made a false statement of a material fact in the application for
a driver permit;
         (C)   engaged in conduct that constitutes a ground for suspension
under Subsection (a), and received either a suspension in excess of three days
or a conviction for violation of this chapter, two times within the 12-month
period preceding the occurrence of the conduct or three times within the 24-
month period preceding the occurrence of the conduct;
         (D)   engaged in conduct that could reasonably be determined to be
detrimental to the public safety; or
         (E)   was convicted of any felony offense involving a crime described
in Section
47A-2.2.2 while holding a driver permit.
      (2)   A person whose driver permit is revoked shall not:
         (A)   apply for another driver permit before the expiration of two
years from the date the director revokes the permit or, in the case of an
appeal, the date the permit and license appeal board affirms the revocation; or
         (B)   drive a transportation-for-hire vehicle inside the city.
      (3)   The director shall notify the driver in writing of a revocation and
include in the notice the reason for the revocation, the date the director
orders the revocation, and a statement informing the driver of the right of
appeal.
      (4)   After receipt of notice of revocation, the driver shall, on the
date specified in the notice, surrender the driver permit to the director and
discontinue driving a transportation-for-hire vehicle inside the city.
      (5)   If the driver appeals the revocation under this section, the driver
may continue to drive a transportation-for-hire vehicle pending the appeal
unless:
         (A)   the driver permit is revoked pursuant to Subsection (b)(1)(E) of
this section; or
         (B)   the director determines that continued operation of a
transportation-for-hire vehicle by the driver would impose an immediate threat
to public safety. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.2.11.   NONTRANSFERABILITY.
A driver permit issued to one person is not transferable to another. (Ord.
29596)
SEC. 47A-2.2.12.   DRIVER REGULATIONS.
While driving a transportation-for-hire vehicle, a driver shall comply with
this chapter, rules and regulations established under this chapter, and all
other laws applicable to the operation of a motor vehicle in this state. A
driver providing transportation- for-hire services at Dallas Love Field Airport
or Dallas- Fort Worth International Airport shall also comply with all of the
rules and regulations of those airports. (Ord. 29596)
DIVISION 3.
VEHICLE PERMIT.
SEC. 47A-2.3.1.   VEHICLE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No vehicle may be used to provide transportation-for-hire services without
current insurance, association with a registered operating authority, and a
valid permit for that vehicle issued under this article. (Ord. Nos. 29596;
31689)
SEC. 47A-2.3.2.   REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLE PERMIT.
   (a)   To obtain a vehicle permit, a permit applicant must provide the
director with the following information, including the:
      (1)   vehicle's current state issued vehicle registration expiration year
and month;
      (2)   permit applicant's name, mailing address, email address, and
telephone contact information;
      (3)   vehicle identification number of the vehicle to be permitted;
      (4)   year, make, and model of the vehicle to be permitted;
      (5)   license plate number of the vehicle to be permitted;
      (6)   state vehicle inspection; and
      (7)   a vehicle lease agreement, if applicable.
   (b)   To obtain a vehicle permit for a previously permitted vehicle, in
addition to providing the above information, a permit applicant must
demonstrate that, within the preceding 90 days, the vehicle has been inspected
and has a state vehicle inspection report. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 29706; 30180;
31689)
SEC. 47A-2.3.3   VEHICLE QUALITY STANDARDS.
   (a)   An operating authority shall maintain all motorized vehicles operating
under its permit, and a driver shall maintain the motorized transportation-for-
hire vehicle he or she is driving for hire, in accordance with the Texas
Department of Public Safety Vehicle Inspection program. Additionally, each
vehicle must be deemed safe, mechanically sound, and road worthy. The exterior
and interior must be clean and meet the following standards:
      (1)   body panels, trim, and moldings are free of dents and scratches
(other than minor dents and scratches that are less than five inches in length
and less than 0.5 inch in depth);
      (2)   paint is in good condition, free of unrepaired damage, visible
fading, mismatched colors, or excessive orange peel;
      (3)   front and rear tires, wheels, and wheel covers match and are the
proper size and type for the vehicle;
      (4)   all recall work recommended by the vehicle's manufacturer has been
performed;
      (5)   air conditioner, heater, and defoggers function properly;
      (6)   all exterior lights function and are aimed as designed by the
manufacturer;
      (7)   all doors open and close smoothly using interior and exterior door
handles. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 30180; 31689; 32467)
SEC. 47A-2.3.4.   DISPLAY OF VEHICLE PERMIT.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   operates a transportation-for-hire vehicle with an expired vehicle
permit or with no vehicle permit affixed to the vehicle;
      (2)   attaches a vehicle permit to a transportation-for-hire vehicle not
authorized to operate as a transportation-for-hire vehicle;
      (3)   forges, alters, or counterfeits a transportation-for-hire vehicle
permit required by this section; or
      (4)   possesses a forged, altered, or counterfeited transportation-for-
hire vehicle permit required by this section.
   (b)   A transportation-for-hire vehicle permit assigned to one vehicle is
not transferable to another. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.3.5.   EXPIRATION OF VEHICLE PERMIT.
   A vehicle permit is valid for the period of and expires concurrently with
the permitted vehicle's state registration displayed on the vehicle at the time
the permit is issued. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 30180)
DIVISION 4.
SERVICE RULES.
SEC. 47A-2.4.1.   NO SOLICITATION.
   A driver may not solicit passengers if the solicitation is:
      (1)   from a location other than the driver’s compartment or the
immediate vicinity of the driver’s transportation-for-hire vehicle; or
      (2)   in a way that annoys or obstructs the movement of a person. (Ord.
29596)
SEC. 47A-2.4.2.   NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   An operating authority or driver shall not refuse service to a passenger
based on the passenger’s race; color; age; religion; sex; marital status;
sexual orientation, as that term is defined in Chapter 34 of this code; gender
identity and expression, as that term is defined in Chapter 34 of this code;
national origin; disability; political opinions; or affiliations. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.4.3.   CITY-WIDE SERVICE.
   (a)   An operating authority may not exclude from service any portion of the
city.
   (b)   An operating authority may not refuse to convey a ride request to an
available driver based on point of origin, destination, or length of trip.
   (c)   While operating a transportation-for-hire vehicle, a driver shall not
refuse a person who requests service unless:
      (1)   the person is disorderly;
      (2)   the driver is engaged in answering a previous request for service;
      (3)   the driver has reason to believe that the person is engaged in
unlawful conduct; or
      (4)   the driver, based on observation of a specific passenger,
reasonably fears for the driver’s own safety.
   (d)   This section does not apply to transportation-for-hire service
provided by non- motorized passenger transport vehicles. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.4.4.   WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY.
   (a)   When a wheelchair accessible vehicle is requested, the operating
authority must provide a wheelchair accessible vehicle, or cause one to be
provided, without unreasonable delay.
   (b)   Operating authorities and drivers are prohibited from charging a
higher fare rate for wheelchair accessible transportation-for-hire vehicles.
(Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.4.5.   DIRECT AND EXPEDITIOUS ROUTE.
   (a)   A driver must take the most direct and expeditious route available,
unless otherwise directed by the passenger.
   (b)   This section does not apply to transportation- for-hire service
provided by non-motorized passenger transport vehicles. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.4.6.   PAYMENT BY CREDIT CARD.
   (a)   An operating authority or driver, whichever accepts payment for a
fare, must allow fares to be paid by credit card.
   (b)   When accepting a credit card payment, an operating authority or driver
must use a secure credit card processing method that encrypts information
transmitted to authenticate a credit card payment transaction for approval.
(Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.4.7.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 31689)
SEC. 47A-2.4.8.   RATES AND FARES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, "payor" means the person paying for
transportation-for-hire service.
   (b)   An operating authority shall inform the payor of the rate for the
transportation-for-hire service before the transportation-for-hire service is
provided.
   (c)   An operating authority must disclose its rates on a publicly remotely
accessible data site. An operating authority must also disclose its rates on a
sign placed in or on all hailable transportation-for-hire vehicles operated
under the operating authority's permit.
   (d)   A driver or operating authority shall provide the payor of a fare with
a legible receipt at the time of payment. The receipt, alone or in combination
with additional contemporaneously produced document(s), must contain the
following information:
      (1)   the fare rate;
      (2)   the total fare;
      (3)   an itemization showing how the fare was calculated;
      (4)   the trip distance (if fare based in whole or in part on distance);
      (5)   the duration of the trip in minutes (if fare based in whole or in
part on time);
      (6)   the name of the operating authority under which the driver was
operating at the time of the ride;
      (7)   the driver's first name and driver permit number; and
      (8)   the vehicle permit number.
   (e)   The receipt may be submitted to the payor electronically if the ride
was dispatched electronically or if the payor agrees to accept an electronic
receipt.
   (f)   Hailable vehicles shall not charge any fare for providing
transportation-for-hire service in the city that exceeds the maximum rates of
fare authorized by the following schedule:
      (1)   General fares.
         (A)   Initial meter drop: $3.00;
         (B)   Each 1/4 mile: $0.70;
         (C)   Traffic delay time/waiting time, per 1 minute: $0.40; and
         (D)   Each extra passenger (up to manufacturer's rated seating
capacity): $2.00.
      (2)   Love Field Airport fares.
         (A)   Each trip departing from the airport (in addition to the general
fare) shall include the trip fee as that trip fee is set in Chapter 5 of this
code, as amended.
         (B)   Minimum charge for each trip departing from the airport: $10.00.
         (C)   Flat rate for each trip either originating at the airport and
terminating at a location within the Dallas Central Business District area or
originating at a location within the Dallas Central Business District area and
terminating at the airport: $26.00.
         (D)   Flat rate for each trip either originating at the airport and
terminating at a location within the Dallas Market Center area or originating
at a location within the Dallas Market Center area and terminating at the
airport: $20.00.
      (3)   Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport fares.
         (A)   Minimum charge for each terminal transfer: $10.00.
         (B)   Minimum charge for each trip that requires exiting the Airport
parking plaza and terminates inside of airport property: $18.50.
         (C)   Minimum charge for each trip that requires exiting the Airport
parking plaza and terminates outside of airport property: $22.00.
         (D)   Flat rate for each trip either originating at the airport and
terminating at a location within the Dallas Central Business District area or
originating at a location within the Dallas Central Business District area and
terminating at the airport: $55.00.
         (E)   Flat rate for each trip either originating at the airport and
terminating at a location within the Dallas Market Center area or originating
at a location within the Dallas Market Center area and terminating at the
airport: $47.00.
      (4)   Gasoline surcharge.
         (A)   A gasoline surcharge approved by the director may be added to a
hailable vehicle fare when the average weekly retail price of regular grade
gasoline in the State of Texas exceeds $2.00 per gallon as determined by the
United States Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration.
         (B)   The gasoline surcharge is calculated in $0.50 increments and
applied per trip. For every $0.50 increase or decrease in the average price per
gallon of gasoline above the $2.00 threshold, the per trip surcharge fee is
adjusted $0.50 up or down to reflect the change in the average gasoline price.
For example:
 
AVERAGE PRICE OF GASOLINE (PER GALLON)        AMOUNT OF SURCHARGE (PER TRIP)
$2.00 or less                                 No surcharge
$2.01 to $2.50                                $0.50
$2.51 to $3.00                                $1.00
$3.01 to $3.50                                $1.50
Each additional $0.50 increase in the average Additional $0.50 per trip
per gallon price of gasoline
 
         (C)   The director shall determine the gasoline surcharge on a
quarterly basis each year by checking, in accordance with the following
schedule, the average price per gallon of gasoline as posted by the United
States Department of Energy in its weekly updates:
 
DATE OF QUARTERLY PRICE CHECK BY DIRECTOR DATE OF QUARTERLY ADJUSTMENT (IF
                                          REQUIRED)
December 20                               January 1
March 20                                  April 1
June 20                                   July 1
September 20                              October 1
 
   (g)   Each driver of a hailable vehicle shall charge the rates of fare
prescribed in Subsection (f) in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
      (1)   "Dallas Central Business District area" includes:
         (A)   the Dallas Central Business District, which is the area bounded
by Woodall Rodgers Freeway on the north, Central Expressway on the east, R. L.
Thornton Freeway on the south, and Stemmons Freeway on the west; and
         (B)   all points located within 1,000 feet of the Dallas Central
Business District boundaries described in Paragraph (1)(A) of this subsection.
      (2)   "Dallas Market Center area" includes:
         (A)   the Dallas Market Center, which is the area bounded by Medical
District Drive on the northwest, Harry Hines Boulevard on the northeast, Oak
Lawn Avenue on the southeast, and Irving Boulevard on the southwest; and
         (B)   all points located within 1,000 feet of the Dallas Market Center
boundaries described in Paragraph (2)(A) of this subsection.
      (3)   "Extra passengers" means the total number of passengers, less one,
riding in the same vehicle whether or not going to the same destination.
      (4)   "Traffic delay time" is that time, as set and determined by the
meter, during which the vehicle is stopped in traffic or proceeding at a speed
of less than 11.5 miles per hour due to traffic conditions.
      (5)   "Waiting time" may be charged only when a passenger or party
requests a vehicle to wait and be held exclusively for the use of that
passenger or party.
      (6)   Passengers in the same vehicle traveling between the same points
must be considered as one trip, and a multiple fare may not be charged. The
only extra charge permitted for additional passengers is the $2.00 allowed
under Subsection (e) for each extra passenger.
      (7)   When passengers in the same vehicle have different destinations,
the fare must be collected and the meter must be reset at each destination
point, except when the vehicle is engaged by, and the fare for the entire trip
is paid by, one passenger or party. The $2.00 charge for each extra passenger
is permitted under this paragraph only when the fare for the entire trip is
paid by one passenger or party or when more than one passenger disembarks at a
single location.
      (8)   A passenger or party must reimburse the driver for all lawful tolls
paid during the time of engagement only if the passenger or party was notified
of the toll route beforehand by the driver and did not object to the toll
route.
      (9)   Flat rate fares provided in Subsection (f) of this section, as
amended, shall include all fares described in this section, except for the
extra passenger fare, also as described in this section.
   (h)   The director shall periodically review the hailable vehicle rates of
fare and, after receiving input from operators and drivers of hailable
vehicles, recommend any change to the city council. The city council shall hold
a public hearing to consider the proposed change in rates of fare. After the
hearing, the city council may approve, disapprove, or modify the proposed
change.
   (i)   Nothing in this section prohibits a hailable vehicle from being
operated for a discounted rate or charge. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 30180; 32467;
32704)
SEC. 47A-2.4.9.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR HAILABLE VEHICLES.
   (a)   All hailable vehicles must:
      (1)   have a roof mounted top light that illuminates when the vehicle is
in service but not available to be hailed; and
      (2)   display the following information on at least one door on each side
of the vehicle:
         (A)   the name of the operating authority under which the vehicle is
currently operating;
         (B)   the vehicle permit number;
         (C)   the fare rate; and
         (D)   the current fuel surcharge.
   (b)   The size and format of the information required by this section must
be approved by the director.
   (c)    If a hailable vehicle is neither engaged in service nor available to
be hailed, the driver must place a sign in the front window on the right side
of the vehicle with the words “NOT FOR HIRE” printed in letters not less than
3” in height with a stroke of not less than 3/8”. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 32467)
SEC. 47A-2.4.10.   GOUGING PROHIBITED.
   Drivers and operating authorities may not knowingly or intentionally quote,
charge, or attempt to charge a fare higher than the fare calculated based on
the operating authority’s published rates or the rates allowed by this chapter
for hailable vehicles, whichever is applicable. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.4.11.   [RESERVED.]
SEC. 47A-2.4.12.   SOLICITATION OF PASSENGERS BY BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (a)   An employee of a business establishment, other than an operating
authority, who acts as an agent in obtaining transportation-for-hire service
for prospective passengers shall not:
      (1)   solicit nor accept payment from a driver in return for giving
preferential treatment in directing passengers to a driver; or
      (2)   interfere with the orderly progression of transportation-for-hire
vehicles from the rear to the front of a queue.
   (b)   Business establishments or their agents may not require guests to use
a specific transportation-for- hire operating authority, driver, or vehicle.
   (c)   Drivers may not pay an employee of a business establishment to solicit
passengers or to give preferential treatment in directing passengers to that
driver. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-2.4.13.   DRIVER AVAILABILITY LOG.
   (a)   An operating authority that employs contingent primary liability
coverage to meet the insurance requirements of Section
47A-2.5.2 shall maintain a real time record that demonstrates each date and
time that a driver providing transportation- for-hire services under that
operating authority has, in the manner prescribed by the operating authority,
signaled to the operating authority that the driver:
      (1)   is available to accept a ride request;
      (2)   has accepted a ride request; and
      (3)   has completed a requested ride.
   (b)   The operating authority shall retain the record required by Subsection
(a) for a minimum of ninety (90) days after the record is made, and shall make
the records available for inspection by the director upon reasonable notice.
(Ord. 29596)
DIVISION 5.
INSURANCE.
SEC. 47A-2.5.1.   INSURANCE POLICY REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   An operating authority shall procure and keep in full force and effect
no less than the insurance coverage required by this article through a policy
or policies written by an insurance company that:
      (1)   is listed as an authorized auto liability lines carrier on the
Texas Department of Insurance’s List of Authorized Insurance Companies or a
surplus lines insurer listed on the Texas Department of Insurance’s list of
Eligible Surplus Lines Insurance Companies;
      (2)   is acceptable to the city; and
      (3)   does not violate the ownership or operational control prohibitions
described in Subsection (e) of this section.
   (b)   The insured provisions of the policy must name the city and its
officers and employees as additional insureds, and the coverage provisions must
provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or
property by reason of the operation of a transportation-for-hire vehicle when
driven by any authorized driver.
   (c)   Insurance required under this article must:
      (1)   include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is
required to notify the director in writing not fewer than 30 days before
cancelling the insurance policy (for a reason other than non-payment) or before
making a reduction in coverage;
      (2)   include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is
required to notify the director in writing not fewer than 10 days before
cancelling for non-payment;
      (3)   cover all transportation-for-hire vehicles during all times that
the vehicles are operating in furtherance of the operating authority's
business, whether the vehicles are owned, non-owned, hired, rented, or leased
by the operating authority, and whether the vehicles are or are not listed on a
schedule of vehicles provided to the insurance company;
      (4)   include a provision requiring the insurance company to pay every
covered claim on a first-dollar basis;
      (5)   require notice to the city of Dallas if the policy is cancelled or
if there is a reduction in coverage; and
      (6)   comply with all applicable federal, state, or local laws.
   (d)   A driver must keep proof of any and all liability insurance policies
applicable to the driver or vehicle in the vehicle while the driver is
providing transportation-for-hire services.
   (e)   No person who has a 20 percent or greater ownership interest in the
operating authority may have any interest in the insurance company.
   (f)   The operating authority may not be self-insured.
   (g)   Any insurance policy required by this article must be on file with the
city within forty-five (45) days of the issuance of the initial operating
authority permit, and thereafter within 45 days of the expiration or
termination of a previously issued policy. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 30180)
SEC. 47A-2.5.2.   MINIMUM INSURANCE LIMITS.
   (a)   Insurance policy limits for motorized transportation-for-hire
vehicles. At a minimum, the liability coverage for motorized transportation-
for-hire vehicles must be provided as follows:
      (1)   From the time a driver indicates that the vehicle is available to
accept a ride request, but before the driver has accepted a ride request, the
vehicle and driver must be covered by contingent primary liability coverage for
injury and property damage arising out of or caused by the operation of the
vehicle in the amount of $50,000 per person, $100,000 per occurrence for bodily
injury and $25,000 in property damage; and
      (2)   From the time a driver accepts a ride request, either by being
physically hailed or dispatched, to the time the passenger exits the vehicle,
the vehicle and driver must be covered by primary commercial automobile
liability coverage with a combined single limit of liability for injury and
property damage arising out of or caused by the operation of the vehicle in the
following amounts:
 
For vehicles with a manufacturer’s rated seating capacity of 1-    $300,000
5 passengers
For vehicles with a manufacturer’s rated seating capacity of 6-10  $500,000
passengers
For vehicles with a manufacturer’s rated seating capacity of 11-14 $1,000,000.
passengers
 
   (b)   Insurance policy limits for non-motorized passenger transport
vehicles. The commercial general liability insurance for non-motorized
passenger transport vehicles must provide combined single limits of liability
for bodily injury and property damage of not less than $500,000 for each
occurrence, or the equivalent, and include coverage for premises operations,
independent contractors, products/ completed operations, personal injury,
contractual liability, and medical payments. Coverage for medical payments must
include a minimum limit of $5,000 per person. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 30180; 31689)
ARTICLE III.
REGULATIONS SPECIFIC TO NON- MOTORIZED PASSENGER TRANSPORT VEHICLES.
SEC. 47A-3.1.   ROUTE.
   Transportation-for-hire service offered by non- motorized passenger
transport vehicles may only be offered in accordance with a preapproved route,
with fixed pickup and destination points, that must be current and kept on file
with the director. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-3.2.   REQUIREMENTS FOR HORSES IN SERVICE.
   (a)   Before any horse may be used in a non- motorized passenger transport
service, the operating authority permit holder must furnish the director with:
      (1)   a state certificate of veterinarian inspection identifying the
horse by description or photograph and showing that the horse has been examined
at least once within the preceding six months by a veterinarian licensed by the
State of Texas who specializes in equine medicine;
      (2)   proof that the horse has had tetanus, rabies, and Eastern-Western
encephalitis vaccinations; and
      (3)   photographs showing identifying markings of the horse.
   (b)   A horse used in a non-motorized passenger transport service must:
      (1)   be appropriately shod to work on paved streets; if a horse loses a
shoe while working, an "easy" type boot may be used to finish the scheduled
work day;
      (2)   not have any open wound, oozing sore, cut below skin level, or
bleeding wound;
      (3)   not have evidence of lameness, such as but not limited to head
bobbing or irregular rhythm;
      (4)   be offered not less than five gallons of drinking water at least
every two hours;
      (5)   have at least a 10-minute rest period after every 50 minutes
worked;
      (6)   not work longer than eight hours in a 24-hour period with a minimum
of 12 hours rest;
      (7)   have all harnesses properly fitted and in good repair with no
deficiencies that could reasonably be deemed a safety hazard;
      (8)   be properly cleaned with no offensive odors or caked dirt or mud;
      (9)   wear a special sanitary device for containing animal excrement;
      (10)   not work when the outside temperature exceeds 99 degrees
Fahrenheit, or the thermal heat index exceeds 150, as measured by the National
Weather Service at Love Field; and
      (11)   be examined at least once every six months by a veterinarian
licensed by the State of Texas who specializes in equine medicine and receive a
state certificate of veterinarian inspection, which must be submitted to the
director.
   (c)   The director, or a designated representative of the department, may
require the operating authority or driver of a horse-drawn carriage to remove
from service any horse that appears to be ill, overtired, undernourished,
overloaded, injured, or lame or whose health or life, in the opinion of a
veterinarian or qualified equine animal services officer, is in imminent
danger. To reinstate a horse removed from service, the horse must be re-
examined and a new state certificate of veterinarian inspection issued for the
horse by a veterinarian licensed by the State of Texas and specializing in
equine medicine, which certificate must be submitted to the director.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if he harasses or startles, or attempts to
harass or startle, any horse while the horse is pulling a carriage or at rest
or otherwise treats a horse inhumanely while it is working in a non-motorized
passenger transport service.
   (e)   An operating authority and driver shall use a trailer to transport a
horse to a job location in the city that is more than three miles from the
location where the horse is stabled.
   (f)   For purposes of this section, a horse is considered to be working any
time it is on a public street or sidewalk, or other public right-of-way, during
any hour of operation of the non-motorized passenger transport service that is
authorized by and on file with the director. (Ord. Nos. 29596; 30240; 31689)
SEC. 47A-3.3.   REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   An operating authority shall maintain for all non-motorized passenger
transport vehicles operating under its permit, and a driver shall maintain for
the non-motorized passenger transport vehicle he is driving for hire, the
following equipment in good condition:
      (1)   head-lights;
      (2)   tail-lights;
      (3)   flashing lights;
      (4)   a braking system approved by the director;
      (5)   rubber on all wheels;
      (6)   a “slow moving vehicle” sign attached to the rear of the vehicle;
      (7)   evidence of insurance required by
Division 5 of
Article II of this chapter;
      (8)   the company name and a unit number conspicuously located on the
rear of the vehicle in letters not less than two inches high;
      (9)   a vehicle permit or temporary permit placed in a manner and
location approved by the director;
      (10)   any other equipment required to comply with all applicable federal
and state laws; and
      (11)   any other special equipment that the director determines to be
necessary for the service to be operated.
   (b)   An operating authority and driver shall, at all times, keep each non-
motorized passenger transport vehicle clean and free of refuse and in safe
operating condition.
   (c)   A non-motorized passenger transport vehicle must not have any cracks,
broken or missing parts, or other visible damage. All wheels must be firmly
attached to the hub of a vehicle and all springs, axles, and supporting
structures of each vehicle must be intact. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-3.4.   APPLICATION FOR OPERATING AUTHORITY.
   In addition to the information required by Section
47A-2.1.2 of this chapter, to obtain an operating authority permit for
transportation-for-hire service offered by non-motorized passenger transport
vehicles, the verified application statement filed with the director must
include:
      (1)   the number of horses the applicant proposes to use in the operation
of the service with a description or photograph and a state certificate of
veterinarian inspection for each horse; and
      (2)   the proposed routes to be offered. (Ord. 29596)
ARTICLE IV.
ENFORCEMENT.
SEC. 47A-4.1.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The director may, with or without notice, inspect any transportation-
for-hire vehicle operating under this chapter to determine whether the vehicle
complies with this chapter, rules and regulations established under this
chapter, or other applicable law.
   (b)   The director shall enforce this chapter with the assistance of the
police department. A police officer upon observing a violation of this chapter
or the rules or regulations established by the director, shall take necessary
enforcement action to ensure effective regulations of transportation-for-hire
service. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-4.2.   REMOVAL OF EVIDENCE OF AUTHORIZATION.
   Whenever an operating authority permit, driver permit, or vehicle permit is
suspended, revoked, or renewal denied, the director may remove or require the
surrender of all evidence of authorization as an operating authority, driver,
or transportation-for-hire vehicle, including, but not limited to, removal or
surrender of operating authority, permits, decals, and signage. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-4.3.   TOWING AND IMPOUNDING.
   A vehicle shall be towed and impounded if determined by the director or any
peace officer to be operating as a transportation-for-hire vehicle without:
      (1)   the operating authority required by this chapter,
      (2)   a driver permit required by this chapter,
      (3)   a vehicle permit required by this chapter, or
      (4)   the insurance required by this chapter. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-4.4.   CORRECTION ORDER.
   (a)   If the director determines that an operating authority or driver is
violating or has violated this chapter, terms of its permit, a rule or
regulation established by the director, or other law, the director may notify
the operating authority or driver in writing of the violation and by written
order direct the operating authority or driver to correct the violation within
a reasonable period of time. In setting the time for correction the director
shall consider the degree of danger to the public health or safety and the
nature of the violation. If the violation involves equipment that is unsafe or
functioning improperly, the director shall order the operating authority or
driver to immediately cease use of the equipment.
   (b)   If the director determines that a violation constitutes an imminent
and serious threat to the public health or safety, the director shall order the
operating authority or driver to correct the violation immediately, and, if the
operating authority or driver fails to comply, the director shall promptly take
or cause to be taken such action as the director considers necessary to enforce
the order immediately.
   (c)   The director shall include in a notice issued under this subsection an
identification of the violation, the date of issuance of the notice and the
time period within which the violation must be corrected, a warning that
failure to comply with the order may result in suspension or revocation of the
permit or imposition of a fine or both, and a statement indicating that the
order may be appealed. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-4.5.   SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (a)   An operating authority shall designate and maintain a representative
to receive service of notice required under this chapter to be given an
operating authority and to serve notice required under this chapter.
   (b)   Notice required under this chapter to be given to:
      (1)   an operating authority must be personally served by the director on
the operating authority or the operating authority’s designated representative;
or
      (2)   a driver must be personally served or sent by certified United
States Mail, return receipt requested, to the address, last known to the
director, of the person to be notified, or to the designated representative for
drivers.
   (c)   Notice required under this chapter to be given to a person other than
an operating authority or driver may be served in the manner prescribed by
Subsection (b)(2).
   (d)   Service executed in accordance with this subsection constitutes notice
to the person to whom the notice is addressed. The date of service for notice
that is mailed is three days after the date of mailing. (Ord. 29596)
SEC. 47A-4.6.   APPEAL OF CORRECTION ORDER.
   (a)   The holder of a permit may appeal a correction order issued under
Section
47A-4.4 if an appeal is requested in writing not more than five days after
notice of the order or action is received.
   (b)   The city manager or a designated representative shall act as the
appeal hearing officer in an appeal under this section. The hearing officer
shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and make
argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under
this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling on the basis of a
preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the
order of the director. The decision of the hearing officer is final. (Ord.Nos.
29596; 32180)
SEC. 47A-4.7.   CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he violates or attempts to violate a
provision of this chapter, or a rule or regulation established by the director
under this chapter, that is applicable to the person. A culpable mental state
is not required for the commission of an offense under this chapter unless the
provision defining the conduct expressly requires a culpable mental state. A
separate offense is committed each day in which an offense occurs.
   (b)   Prosecution for an offense under Subsection (a) does not prevent the
use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person
charged with or the conduct involved in the offense. (Ord. 29596)
CHAPTER 48
TREES AND SHRUBS
Sec.
48-1.   Park board - Authority to regulate planting, cutting, etc.
Sec.
48-2.   Same - Appointment and qualifications of city forester.
Sec.
48-3.   Duty to encourage planting of trees; pecuniary interest in marketing
trees.
Sec.
48-4.   Permits required for planting, trimming, spraying, etc.
Sec.
48-5.   Injuring trees.
Sec.
48-6.   Reserved.
Sec.
48-7.   Protection of trees in case of erection or repair of buildings.
Sec.
48-8.   Reserved.
Sec.
48-9.   Injuring trees, shrubs or plants on another’s property.
Sec.
48-10.   Discharge of oil, brine or substance likely to injure grass, shrubs or
trees.
Sec.
48-11.   Duty to remove dead, diseased, and damaged trees from parkway.
SEC. 48-1.   PARK BOARD - AUTHORITY TO REGULATE PLANTING, CUTTING, ETC.
   The park board shall have the power to regulate and control the planting,
cutting, trimming and caring for all trees within the highways and streets of
the city and shall make such rules and regulations governing the same as may be
deemed advisable in conjunction with the city forester and shall from time to
time make such rules and regulations as they may deem advisable concerning the
planting, cutting and caring for trees and require the city forester to be
governed thereby. (Code 1941, Art. 147-1)
SEC. 48-2.   SAME - APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF CITY FORESTER.
   The park board shall have the authority to appoint and employ a city
forester and such other officers, assistants and laborers as it may deem
necessary for the efficient administration of the duties prescribed by this
chapter. No person shall be appointed to the office of city forester unless
such person, at the date of his appointment, has satisfied the park board that
he possesses at least four years of practical experience in regular forest
service, two of which shall have been in city forestry, and also that he has a
thorough knowledge of soils, insects and plant diseases as they affect trees
and their growth. The park board shall have the power to establish such rules
and regulations as it shall deem necessary for the conduct of the city forester
and for the administration of this chapter. (Code 1941, Art. 147-2; Ord. 8020)
SEC. 48-3.   DUTY TO ENCOURAGE PLANTING OF TREES; PECUNIARY INTEREST IN
MARKETING TREES.
   It shall be the duty of the park board either directly or through the city
forester to encourage the planting of trees within the city and to recommend
the kind and character of trees to be planted which are suitable to the soil
and will furnish the most practical results with a view of yielding shade and
being ornamental in their nature. The city forester shall be courteous and
attentive to the public in seeking advice and in aiding and assisting the
public as well as encouraging the public in the planting of the proper kind of
trees. No member of the park board nor the city forester shall be interested
directly or indirectly in a pecuniary manner in selling or marketing any shade
trees required to be used by the public but nothing in this section shall be
construed to prevent the park board or the city forester from giving proper
advice as to the kind and character of trees to be planted and the time when
such planting shall be done and all other information that may be necessary for
such purposes. (Code 1941, Art. 147-3; Ord. 8020)
SEC. 48-4.   PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PLANTING, TRIMMING, SPRAYING, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or set out any shade trees or
cause or authorize any person to plant or set out any shade trees in or on any
public highway within the city without first obtaining from the director of the
park department a written permit to do so. It shall be unlawful for any
individual or officer or employee of a corporation without the written permit
of director of the park department to cut, prune, break, climb, injure or
remove any living tree in a public highway, or cut, disturb or interfere in any
way with the roots of any tree on a public highway or spray with any chemicals
or insecticides any tree in a public highway; or place any rope, sign, poster
or other fixture on a tree or guard in a public highway; or injure, misuse or
remove any device placed to protect such tree on a public highway. (Code 1941,
Art. 147-4)
SEC. 48-5.   INJURING TREES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pull up, cut down, burn or destroy,
or in any manner injure any living tree standing in any street or public
highway of the city. (Code 1941, Art. 147-5)
SEC. 48-6.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 48-7.   PROTECTION OF TREES IN CASE OF ERECTION OR REPAIR OF BUILDINGS.
   In the erection or repair of any building or structure the owner thereof
shall place such guards around all nearby trees on the public highways as shall
effectually prevent injury to them. (Code 1941, Art. 147-8)
SEC. 48-8.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33224)
SEC. 48-9.   INJURING TREES, SHRUBS OR PLANTS ON ANOTHER’S PROPERTY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, injure, mutilate or
destroy any shrub, plant or tree in the city, in or upon property not belonging
to such person, without the permission of the owner of the property.
   (b)   Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of an
offense. (Code 1941, Art. 87-3; Ord. 19963)
SEC. 48-10.   DISCHARGE OF OIL, BRINE OR SUBSTANCE LIKELY TO INJURE GRASS,
SHRUBS OR TREES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent, servant, or employee,
while handling, using, or transporting any oil, salt water, brine, or other
substance or liquid of any character in connection with any ice cream business,
oil business, or other character or kind of business, or otherwise, to suffer
or permit any of the substance or liquid to drip upon or be thrown or
discharged into any street or gutter of any street, or on any sidewalk or
parkway on any street, so that the substance or liquid may injure or likely or
probably cause injury to any growing grass plot, shrubbery, or tree, or to
discharge any of the substance or liquid into any gutter of any street or
otherwise so that the substance or liquid may flow onto or near any growing
grass plot, shrubbery, or tree so as to injure or likely or probably cause
injury to the grass plot, shrubbery, or tree; provided, that nothing contained
in this section shall prevent any person from discharging, throwing, or placing
any substance or liquid described in this section into the inlet of any sewer
that may be in any street where the substance or liquid will not cause injury
to any shrubbery, grass, or tree, save and except that nothing shall be placed
or discharged in any inlet that is likely to cause fire or combustion or that
may be otherwise prohibited by this code or any other city ordinance. Any
person, or his agent, servant, or employee, who violates any provision of this
section shall is guilty of an offense. (Code 1941, Art. 87-16; Ord. 19963)
SEC. 48-11.   DUTY TO REMOVE DEAD, DISEASED, AND DAMAGED TREES FROM PARKWAY.
   (a)   Every person owning, occupying, or in control of property shall, at
the person’s own expense, remove any dead, diseased, or damaged tree from the
parkway abutting the property owned, occupied, or controlled by the person.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, parkway means the area along a public
street between the curb and the sidewalk. (Ord. Nos. 20736; 33224)
CHAPTER 48A
VEHICLE TOW SERVICE
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
48A-1.   Statement of policy.
Sec.
48A-2.   General authority and duty of director.
Sec.
48A-3.   Establishment of rules and regulations.
Sec.
48A-4.   Exceptions.
Sec.
48A-5.   Definitions.
ARTICLE II.
VEHICLE TOW SERVICE LICENSE.
Sec.
48A-6.   License required; application.
Sec.
48A-7.   License qualifications.
Sec.
48A-8.   License issuance; fee; display; transferability; expiration.
Sec.
48A-9.   Refusal to issue or renew license.
Sec.
48A-10.   Revocation of license.
Sec.
48A-11.   Appeals.
ARTICLE III.
WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT.
Sec.
48A-12.   Wrecker driver’s permit required.
Sec.
48A-13.   Qualifications for a wrecker driver’s permit.
Sec.
48A-14.   Application for wrecker driver’s permit; fee.
Sec.
48A-15.   Investigation of application.
Sec.
48A-16.   Issuance and denial of wrecker driver’s permit.
Sec.
48A-17.   Expiration of wrecker driver’s permit; voidance upon suspension or
revocation of state driver’s license.
Sec.
48A-18.   Provisional permit.
Sec.
48A-19.   Probationary permit.
Sec.
48A-20.   Duplicate permit.
Sec.
48A-21.   Display of permit.
Sec.
48A-22.   Suspension by a designated representative.
Sec.
48A-23.   Suspension of wrecker driver’s permit.
Sec.
48A-24.   Revocation of wrecker driver’s permit.
Sec.
48A-25.   Wrecker operation after suspension or revocation.
Sec.
48A-26.   Appeal from denial, suspension, or revocation.
ARTICLE IV.
MISCELLANEOUS LICENSEE AND DRIVER REGULATIONS.
Sec.
48A-27.   Licensee’s and driver’s duty to comply.
Sec.
48A-28.   Licensee’s duty to enforce compliance by drivers.
Sec.
48A-29.   Insurance.
Sec.
48A-30.   Information to be supplied upon request of director.
Sec.
48A-31.   Vehicle tow service records.
Sec.
48A-32.   Failure to pay ad valorem taxes.
ARTICLE V.
SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Sec.
48A-33.   Removal of vehicles from public rights-of-way.
Sec.
48A-34.   Removal of authorized vehicles prohibited.
Sec.
48A-35.   Financial interests of private property owner and licensee
prohibited.
Sec.
48A-36.   Requirements for posting signs.
Sec.
48A-36.1.   Individual parking restrictions in restricted area.
Sec.
48A-36.2.   Designation of restricted parking spaces in otherwise unrestricted
area.
Sec.
48A-37.   Authorization for removal.
Sec.
48A-38.   Release of a vehicle prior to removal.
Sec.
48A-39.   Removal of vehicle with a wrecker.
Sec.
48A-40.   Notification of police department; wrecker slips or tickets.
Sec.
48A-41.   Notification of vehicle owner.
Sec.
48A-42.   Removal to vehicle storage facility.
ARTICLE VI.
VEHICLE TOW SERVICE FEES.
Sec.
48A-43.   Maximum fee schedule.
Sec.
48A-43.1.   Towing fee studies.
ARTICLE VII.
VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
Sec.
48A-44.   Vehicles and equipment.
ARTICLE VIII.
ENFORCEMENT.
Sec.
48A-45.   Authority to inspect.
Sec.
48A-46.   Enforcement by police department.
Sec.
48A-47.   Correction order.
Sec.
48A-48.   Service of notice.
Sec.
48A-49.   Appeal.
Sec.
48A-50.   Offenses.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 48A-1.   STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide for the protection of the public
interest as it relates to the parking of vehicles on private property and to
the removal of those vehicles to vehicle storage facilities without the consent
of the vehicle owners or operators. To this end, this chapter provides for the
regulation of vehicle tow service, to be administered in a manner that protects
the public health and safety and promotes the public convenience and necessity.
(Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-2.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this chapter and may by written
order establish such rules and regulations, consistent with this chapter, as
may be determined necessary to discharge the director’s duty under, or to
effect the policy of, this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-3.   ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Before adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule or regulation, the
director shall hold a public hearing on the proposal.
   (b)   The director shall fix the time and place of the hearing and, in
addition to notice required under the Open Meetings Act (Chapter 551, Texas
Government Code), as amended, shall notify each licensee and such other persons
as the director determines are interested in the subject matter of the hearing.
   (c)   After the public hearing, the director shall notify the licensees and
other interested persons of the action taken and shall post an order adopting,
amending, or abolishing a rule or regulation on the official bulletin board in
the city hall for a period of not fewer than 10 days. The order becomes
effective immediately upon expiration of the posting period. (Ord. Nos. 21435;
24175)
SEC. 48A-4.   EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   a person towing a vehicle with the consent of the vehicle owner or
operator;
      (2)   the removal of a vehicle from private property with the consent of
the vehicle owner or operator;
      (3)   a person parking or storing a vehicle with the consent of the
vehicle owner or operator;
      (4)   the parking or storing of a vehicle with the consent of the vehicle
owner or operator; or
      (5)   a vehicle storage facility at which vehicles are parked or stored
solely with the consent of the vehicle owner or operator. (Ord. Nos. 19099;
21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-5.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (2)   CHIEF OF POLICE means the chief of police for the city of Dallas or
a designated representative.
      (3)   CONSENT TOW means any tow of a vehicle initiated by the owner or
operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control
of the vehicle. The term does not include a tow of a vehicle initiated by a
peace officer investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that
involves the vehicle.
      (4)   CONVICTION means a conviction in a federal court or court of any
state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation
that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned.
      (5)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter, and includes
representatives, agents, and department employees designated by the director.
      (6)   DRIVER means an individual who drives or operates a wrecker.
      (7)   HEAVY DUTY WRECKER means a wrecker that has:
         (A)   a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of not less than
48,000 pounds; and
         (B)   either:
            (i)   a power operated winch, winch line, and boom, with a factory-
rated lifting capacity of not less than 50,000 pounds and a dual line capacity
of not less than 20,000 pounds; or
            (ii)   an underlift device with a factory-rated lifting capacity of
not less than 10,000 pounds when extended.
      (8)   ILLEGALLY PARKED or UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE means a vehicle that is:
         (A)   parked, stored, or located on private property without the
consent of the property owner;
         (B)   parked in or obstructing a fire lane, aisle, entrance, exit,
driveway, or other area not designated for the parking of vehicles; or
         (C)   parked in an area designated for the parking of vehicles but
fails to display a valid parking decal, emblem, badge, sticker, ticket, or
other identification required by the property owner for parking in a designated
area or space.
      (9)   LAWFUL ORDER means a verbal or written directive that:
         (A)   is issued by the director in the performance of official duties
in the enforcement of this chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated
under this chapter; and
         (B)   does not violate the United States Constitution or the Texas
Constitution.
      (10)   LICENSEE means a person licensed under this chapter to engage in
vehicle tow service. The term includes any owner or operator of the licensed
business, but does not include a subcontractor unless the use of the
subcontractor is authorized pursuant to Section
48A-7(e) of this chapter.
      (11)   LIGHT DUTY WRECKER means a wrecker that has:
         (A)   a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of not less than
10,000 pounds; and
         (B)   either:
            (i)   a power operated winch, winch line, and boom, with a factory-
rated lifting capacity of not less than 8,000 pounds, single line capacity; or
            (ii)   an underlift device with a factory-rated lifting capacity of
not less than 3,000 pounds when extended.
      (12)   MEDIUM DUTY WRECKER means a wrecker that has:
         (A)   a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of not less than
18,000 pounds; and
         (B)   either:
            (i)   a power operated winch, winch line, and boom, with a factory-
rated lifting capacity of not less than 24,000 pounds and a dual line capacity
of not less than 8,000 pounds; or
            (ii)   an underlift device with a factory-rated lifting capacity of
not less than 6,000 pounds when extended.
      (13)   NONCONSENT TOW means any tow of a vehicle that is not a consent
tow.
      (14)   OPERATE means to drive or to be in control of a wrecker.
      (15)   OPERATOR means the holder of a vehicle tow service license.
      (16)   PERMITTEE means an individual who has been issued a wrecker
driver’s permit under this chapter.
      (17)   PERSON means an individual, assumed name entity, partnership,
joint-venture, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
      (18)   POLICE DEPARTMENT means the police department of the city of
Dallas.
      (19)   PROPERTY ENTRANCE means any point located on private property that
is designed to provide access by a vehicle to the private property.
      (20)   PROPERTY OWNER means a person, or the person’s agent or lessee,
who holds legal title, deed, or right-of-occupancy to private property, but
does not include a vehicle tow service licensee or an employee or
representative of a vehicle tow service licensee.
      (21)   STREET means any public street, alley, road, right-of-way, or
other public way within the corporate limits of the city. The term includes all
paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way.
      (22)   VEHICLE means a device in, on, or by which a person or property
may be transported on a public street. The term includes, but is not limited
to, an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational
vehicle, or trailer, but does not include a device moved by human power or used
exclusively on a stationary rail or track.
      (23)   VEHICLE OWNER or OPERATOR means a person, or the designated agent
of a person, who:
         (A)   holds legal title to a vehicle, including any lienholder of
record; or
         (B)   has legal right of possession or legal control of a vehicle.
      (24)   VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY has the meaning given that term in the
Vehicle Storage Facility Act.
      (25)   VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY ACT means Chapter 2303 of the Texas
Occupations Code, as amended.
      (26)   VEHICLE TOW SERVICE means the business of towing an illegally
parked or unauthorized vehicle from private property.
      (27)   WRECKER means a vehicle designed for the towing of other vehicles.
      (28)   WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT means a permit issued under this chapter
to an individual by the director authorizing that individual to operate a
wrecker for a vehicle tow service in the city. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 19312; 21435;
23106; 24175; 25812)
ARTICLE II.
VEHICLE TOW SERVICE LICENSE.
SEC. 48A-6.   LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, within the city, he, or his agent or
employee:
      (1)   engages in vehicle tow service for compensation without a valid
vehicle tow service license issued by the director under this article;
      (2)   causes a vehicle to be removed from private property, without the
consent of the vehicle owner or operator, by a vehicle tow service not licensed
by the director under this article; or
      (3)   employs or contracts with a vehicle tow service not licensed by the
director under this article for the purpose of having a vehicle removed from
private property without the consent of the vehicle owner or operator.
   (b)   To obtain a vehicle tow service license, a person must make written
application to the director upon a form provided for that purpose. The
application must be signed by the person who will own, control, or operate the
proposed vehicle tow service. The application must be verified and include the
following:
      (1)   the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, the trade
name under which the applicant does business, the street address and telephone
number of the vehicle tow service establishment, and the name, street address,
and telephone number of each vehicle storage facility used by the vehicle tow
service;
      (2)   the number and types of vehicles to be operated, including the
year, make, model, vehicle identification number, and state license plate
number of, and the type of winch to be operated on, each wrecker;
      (3)   documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating a
willingness to provide liability insurance as required by this chapter;
      (4)   a statement attesting that each wrecker used by the vehicle tow
service has been rendered for ad valorem taxation in the city and that the
applicant is current on payment of those taxes;
      (5)   a list, to be kept current, of the owners and management personnel
of the vehicle tow service, and of all employees who will participate in
vehicle tow service, including names, dates of birth, state driver’s license
numbers, social security numbers, and wrecker driver’s permit numbers;
      (6)   a copy of a written agreement, if one exists, between the vehicle
tow service and each vehicle storage facility used by the tow service, other
than its own, and proof that each vehicle storage facility used is currently
licensed under the Texas Vehicle Storage Facility Act;
      (7)   a list of what methods of payment the applicant will accept from a
vehicle owner for vehicle tow service;
      (8)   any other information deemed necessary by the director; and
      (9)   a nonrefundable application processing fee of $132.
   (c)   A person desiring to engage in vehicle tow service shall register with
the director a trade name that clearly differentiates the person’s company from
all other companies engaging in vehicle tow service and shall use no other
trade name for the vehicle tow service. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 24175; 27695;
30215; 33232)
SEC. 48A-7.   LICENSE QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   To qualify for a vehicle tow service license, an applicant must:
      (1)   be at least 19 years of age;
      (2)   be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States;
      (3)   be able to communicate in the English language; and
      (4)   not have been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   criminal homicide as described in Chapter 19 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (ii)   kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal
Code;
            (iii)   a sexual offense as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (iv)   an assaultive offense as described in Chapter 22 of the
Texas Penal Code;
            (v)   robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (vi)   burglary as described in Chapter 30 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle tow service;
            (vii)   theft as described in Chapter 31 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle tow service;
            (viii) fraud as described in Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle tow service;
            (ix)   tampering with a governmental record as described in Chapter
37 of the Texas Penal Code, but only if the offense was committed against a
person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in vehicle tow
service;
            (x)   public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in
Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (xi)   the transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in
violation of Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal Code, or of any comparable state or
federal law, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the
applicable law;
            (xii)   a violation of the Dangerous Drugs Act (Article 4476-14,
Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), or of any comparable state or federal law, but
only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xiii) a violation of the Controlled Substances Act (Article 4476-
15, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), or of any comparable state or federal law,
but only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xiv)   criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in
Subdivision (4)(A)(i) through (xiii) of this subsection; and
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony
offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the
applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination
of misdemeanor offenses;
      (5)   not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics;
      (6)   be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest;
      (7)   not employ any person who is not qualified under this subsection.
   (b)   An applicant who has been convicted of, or who employs a person who
has been convicted of, an offense listed in Subsection (a)(4), for which the
required time period has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of
release from confinement imposed for the conviction, may qualify for a vehicle
tow service license only if the director determines that the applicant, or the
employee, is presently fit to engage in the business of a vehicle tow service.
In determining present fitness under this section, the director shall consider
the following:
      (1)   the extent and nature of the applicant’s, or employee’s, past
criminal activity;
      (2)   the age of the applicant, or employee, at the time of the
commission of the crime;
      (3)   the amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant’s, or
employee’s, last criminal activity;
      (4)   the conduct and work activity of the applicant, or employee, prior
to and following the criminal activity;
      (5)   evidence of the applicant’s, or employee’s, rehabilitation or
rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; and
      (6)   other evidence of the applicant’s, or employee’s, present fitness,
including letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and
correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility
for the applicant, or employee; the sheriff and chief of police in the
community where the applicant, or employee, resides; and any other persons in
contact with the applicant, or employee.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to
secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present
fitness under Subsection (b) of this section.
   (d)   A licensee shall maintain a permanent and established place of
business at a location within the city where a vehicle tow service is not
prohibited by the Dallas Development Code. A licensee shall use only vehicle
storage facilities located within the city where a vehicle storage facility is
not prohibited by the Dallas Development Code.
   (e)   A licensee shall use employees only to provide vehicle tow service;
except, that vehicle tow services licensed under this article may subcontract
with each other to provide tow service. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21282; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-8.   LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEE; DISPLAY; TRANSFERABILITY; EXPIRATION.
   (a)   The director shall, within 30 days after the date of application,
issue a vehicle tow service license to an applicant who complies with the
provisions of this article.
   (b)   A license issued to a vehicle tow service authorizes the licensee and
any bona fide employee to engage in vehicle tow service.
   (c)   The annual fee for a vehicle tow service license is $672, prorated on
the basis of whole months. The fee for issuing a duplicate license for one
lost, destroyed, or mutilated is $5. The fee is payable to the director upon
issuance of a license. No refund of a license fee will be made.
   (d)   A vehicle tow service license issued pursuant to this article must be
conspicuously displayed in the vehicle tow service establishment.
   (e)   A vehicle tow service license, or any accompanying permit, badge,
sticker, ticket, or emblem, is not assignable or transferable.
   (f)   A vehicle tow service license expires June 30 of each year and may be
renewed by applying in accordance with Section
48A-6. Application for renewal must be made not less than 30 days or more than
60 days before expiration of the license and must be accompanied by the annual
license fee. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 19300; 21435; 24175; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 48A-9.   REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW LICENSE.
   (a)   The director shall refuse to issue or renew a vehicle tow service
license if the applicant or licensee:
      (1)   intentionally or knowingly makes a false statement as to a material
matter in an application for a license or license renewal, or in a hearing
concerning the license;
      (2)   has been convicted twice within a 12-month period or three times
within a 24-month period for violation of this chapter or has had a vehicle tow
service license revoked within two years prior to the date of application;
      (3)   uses a trade name for the vehicle tow service other than the one
registered with the director;
      (4)   is not qualified under Section
48A-7 of this article;
      (5)   uses a subcontractor to provide vehicle tow service, unless the use
of the subcontractor is authorized pursuant to Section
48A-7(e) of this chapter; or
      (6)   has been finally convicted for violation of another city, state, or
federal law that indicates a lack of fitness of the applicant to perform
vehicle tow service.
   (b)   If the director determines that a license should be denied the
applicant or licensee, the director shall notify the applicant or licensee in
writing that the application is denied and include in the notice the specific
reason or reasons for denial and a statement informing the applicant or
licensee of the right to, and process for, appeal of the decision. (Ord. Nos.
19099; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-10.   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The director shall revoke a vehicle tow service license if the director
determines that the licensee has:
   (1)   intentionally or knowingly made a false statement as to a material
matter in the application or hearing concerning the license;
   (2)   intentionally or knowingly failed to comply with applicable provisions
of this chapter or with the conditions and limitations of the license;
   (3)   operated a towing service not authorized by the license or other
applicable law;
   (4)   been finally convicted for violation of another city, state, or
federal law that indicates a lack of fitness of the licensee to perform vehicle
tow service;
   (5)   is under indictment for or has been convicted of any felony offense
while holding a license;
   (6)   does not qualify for a license under Section
48A-7 of this chapter; or
   (7)   failed to pay a license fee required under this chapter. (Ord. Nos.
21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-11.   APPEALS.
   Any person whose application for a license or license renewal is denied by
the director, or a licensee whose license has been revoked or suspended by the
director, may file an appeal with a permit and license appeal board in
accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
ARTICLE III.
WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT.
SEC. 48A-12.   WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he operates a wrecker engaged in
vehicle tow service in the city without a valid wrecker driver’s permit issued
to the person under this article.
   (b)   A licensee commits an offense if he employs or otherwise allows a
person to operate for compensation a wrecker owned, controlled, or operated by
the licensee unless the person has a valid wrecker driver’s permit issued under
this article. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-13.   QUALIFICATIONS FOR A WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   (a)   To qualify for a wrecker driver’s permit, an applicant must:
      (1)   be at least 19 years of age;
      (2)   be currently authorized to work full- time in the United States;
      (3)   hold a valid driver’s license issued by the State of Texas;
      (4)   be able to communicate in the English language;
      (5)   not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability
that is likely to prevent the applicant from exercising ordinary and reasonable
control over a motor vehicle or that is likely to otherwise endanger the public
health or safety, as determined by a medical doctor licensed to practice
medicine in the United States;
      (6)   not have been convicted of more than four moving traffic violations
arising out of separate transactions, nor involved in more than two motor
vehicle accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that the applicant
was at fault, within any 12 month period during the preceding 36 months;
      (7)   not have been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   criminal homicide as described in Chapter 19 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (ii)   kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal
Code;
            (iii)   a sexual offense as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (iv)   an assaultive offense as described in Chapter 22 of the
Texas Penal Code;
            (v)   robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (vi)   burglary as described in Chapter 30 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle tow service;
            (vii)   theft as described in Chapter 31 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle tow service;
            (viii)   fraud as described in Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle tow service;
            (ix)   tampering with a governmental record as described in Chapter
37 of the Texas Penal Code, but only if the offense was committed against a
person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in vehicle tow
service;
            (x)   public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in
Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (xi)   the transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in
violation of Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal Code, or of any comparable state or
federal law, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the
applicable law;
            (xii)   a violation of the Dangerous Drugs Act (Article 4476-14,
Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), or of any comparable state or federal law, that
is punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xiii)   a violation of the Controlled Substances Act (Article
4476-15, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes), or of any comparable state or federal
law, that is punishable as a felony under the applicable law; or
            (xiv)   criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in
Subdivision (7)(A)(i) through (xiii) of this subsection;
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony
offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the
applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination
of misdemeanor offenses;
      (8)   not have been convicted of, or discharged by probation or deferred
adjudication for, driving while intoxicated:
         (A)   within the preceding 12 months; or
         (B)   more than one time within the preceding five years;
      (9)   not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics;
      (10)   be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest;
      (11)   be sanitary and well-groomed in dress and person;
      (12)   be employed by the licensee; and
      (13)   have successfully completed within the preceding 12 months a
defensive driving course approved by the Texas Education Agency and be able to
present proof of completion.
   (b)   An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in Subsection
(a)(7) or (8), for which the required time period has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
may qualify for a wrecker driver’s permit only if the director determines that
the applicant is presently fit to engage in the occupation of a wrecker driver.
In determining present fitness under this section, the director shall consider
the following:
      (1)   the extent and nature of the applicant’s past criminal activity;
      (2)   the age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the
crime;
      (3)   the amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant’s last
criminal activity;
      (4)   the conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and
following the criminal activity;
      (5)   evidence of the applicant’s rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort
while incarcerated or following release; and
      (6)   other evidence of the applicant’s present fitness, including
letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional
officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the
applicant; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the applicant
resides; and any other persons in contact with the applicant.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to
secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present
fitness under Subsection (b) of this section and under Section
48A-19 of this article. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-14.   APPLICATION FOR WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT; FEE.
   To obtain a wrecker driver’s permit, or renewal of a wrecker driver’s
permit, a person must file with the director a completed written application on
a form provided for the purpose and a nonrefundable application fee of $75. The
director shall require each application to state such information as the
director reasonably considers necessary to determine whether an applicant is
qualified. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175; 27695; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 48A-15.   INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.
   (a)   For the purpose of determining qualification under Section
48A-13(a)(5), the director may require an applicant to submit to a physical
examination conducted by a licensed physician, at applicant’s expense, and to
furnish to the director a signed statement from the physician certifying that
the physician has examined the applicant and that in the physician’s
professional opinion the applicant is qualified under Section
48A-13(a)(5).
   (b)   Upon request of the director, the police department shall investigate
each applicant and furnish the director a report concerning the applicant’s
qualification under Section
48A-13. The municipal court shall furnish the director a copy of the
applicant’s motor vehicle driving record and a list of any warrants of arrest
for the applicant which might be outstanding.
   (c)   The director may conduct such other investigation as the director
considers necessary to determine whether an applicant for a wrecker driver’s
permit is qualified.
   (d)   The director shall provide the applicant, upon written request, a copy
of all materials contained in the applicant’s file to the extent allowed under
the Public Information Act (Chapter 552, Texas Government Code), as amended.
(Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-16.   ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   (a)   The director shall issue a wrecker driver’s permit to an applicant,
unless the director determines that the applicant is not qualified.
   (b)   The director shall delay until final adjudication the approval of the
application of any applicant who is under indictment for or has charges pending
for:
      (1)   a felony offense involving a crime described in Section
48A-13(a)(7)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) or criminal attempt to commit any
of those offenses; or
      (2)   any offense involving driving while intoxicated.
   (c)   The director shall deny the application for a wrecker driver’s permit
if the applicant:
      (1)   is not qualified under Section
48A-13;
      (2)   refuses to submit to or does not pass a medical examination
authorized under Section
48A-15(a); or
      (3)   intentionally or knowingly makes a false statement of a material
fact in an application for a wrecker driver’s permit.
   (d)   If the director determines that a permit should be denied the
applicant, the director shall notify the applicant in writing that the
application is denied and include in the notice the specific reason or reasons
for denial and a statement informing the applicant of the right to, and process
for, appeal of the decision. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-17.   EXPIRATION OF WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT; VOIDANCE UPON SUSPENSION
OR REVOCATION OF STATE DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (a)   Except in the case of a probationary or provisional permit, a wrecker
driver’s permit expires one year from the date of issuance.
   (b)   If a permittee’s state driver’s license is suspended or revoked by the
state, the wrecker driver’s permit automatically becomes void. A permittee
shall notify the director and the licensee for whom the permittee drives within
three days of a suspension or revocation of a state driver’s license and shall
immediately surrender the wrecker driver’s permit to the director. (Ord. Nos.
21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-18.   PROVISIONAL PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may issue a provisional wrecker driver’s permit if the
director determines that it is necessary pending completion of investigation of
an applicant for a wrecker driver’s permit.
   (b)   A provisional wrecker driver’s permit expires on the date shown on the
permit, which date shall not exceed 45 days after the date of issuance, or on
the date the applicant is denied a wrecker driver’s permit, whichever occurs
first.
   (c)   The director shall not issue a provisional permit to a person who has
been previously denied a wrecker driver’s permit. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-19.   PROBATIONARY PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may issue a probationary wrecker driver’s permit to an
applicant who is not qualified for a wrecker driver’s permit under Section
48A-13 if the applicant:
      (1)   could qualify under Section
48A-13 for a wrecker driver’s permit within one year from the date of
application;
      (2)   holds a valid state driver’s license or occupational driver’s
license; and
      (3)   is determined by the director, using the criteria listed in Section
48A-13(b) of this article, to be presently fit to engage in the occupation of a
wrecker driver.
   (b)   A probationary wrecker driver’s permit may be issued for a period not
to exceed one year.
   (c)   The director may prescribe appropriate terms and conditions for a
probationary wrecker driver’s permit as the director determines are necessary.
(Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-20.   DUPLICATE PERMIT.
   If a wrecker driver’s permit is lost or destroyed, the director shall issue
the permittee a duplicate permit upon payment to the city of a duplicate permit
fee of $33. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175; 27695; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 48A-21.   DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   A wrecker driver shall at all times conspicuously display a wrecker driver’s
permit on the clothing of the driver’s upper body. A wrecker driver shall allow
the director or a peace officer to examine the wrecker driver’s permit upon
request. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-22.   SUSPENSION BY A DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE.
   (a)   If a duly authorized representative designated by the director to
enforce this chapter determines that a permittee has failed to comply with this
chapter (except Section
48A-13) or a regulation established under this chapter, the representative may
suspend the wrecker driver’s permit for a period of time not to exceed three
days by personally serving the permittee with a written notice of the
suspension. The written notice must include the reason for suspension, the date
the suspension begins, the duration of the suspension, and a statement
informing the permittee of the right of appeal.
   (b)   A suspension under this section may be appealed to the director or the
director’s assistant if the permittee requests an appeal at the time the
representative serves notice of suspension or within 10 days after the notice
of suspension is served. When an appeal is requested, the suspension may not
take effect until a hearing is provided by the director or the director’s
assistant.
   (c)   The director may order an expedited hearing under this section, to be
held as soon as possible after the permittee requests an appeal, but at least
10 days advance notice of the hearing must be given to the permittee. The
director may affirm, reverse, or modify the order of the representative. The
decision of the director is final. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-23.   SUSPENSION OF WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   (a)   If the director determines that a permittee has failed to comply with
this chapter (except Section
48A-13) or any regulation established under this chapter, the director shall
suspend the wrecker driver’s permit for a definite period of time not to exceed
60 days.
   (b)   If at any time the director determines that a permittee is not
qualified under Section
48A-13, or is under indictment or has charges pending for any offense involving
driving while intoxicated or a felony offense involving a crime described in
Section
48A-13(a)(7)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) or criminal attempt to commit any
of those offenses, the director shall suspend the wrecker driver’s permit until
such time as the director determines that the permittee is qualified or that
the charges against the permittee have been finally adjudicated.
   (c)   A permittee whose wrecker driver’s permit is suspended shall not drive
a wrecker for a vehicle tow service inside the city during the period of
suspension.
   (d)   The director shall notify the permittee in writing of a suspension
under this section and include in the notice:
      (1)   the reason for the suspension;
      (2)   the date the suspension is to begin;
      (3)   the duration of the suspension; and
      (4)   a statement informing the permittee of the right of appeal.
   (e)   The period of suspension begins on the date specified by the director
or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the appeal hearing
officer. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21282; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-24.   REVOCATION OF WRECKER DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   (a) The director shall revoke a wrecker driver’s permit if the director
determines that a permittee:
      (1)   operated a wrecker inside the city for a vehicle tow service during
a period when the wrecker driver’s permit was suspended;
      (2)   intentionally or knowingly made a false statement of a material
fact in an application for a wrecker driver’s permit;
      (3)   engaged in conduct that constitutes a ground for suspension under
Section
48A-23 (a), and, at least two times within the 12-month period preceding the
conduct or three times within the 24- month period preceding the conduct, had
received either a suspension in excess of three days or a conviction for
violation of this chapter;
      (4)   engaged in conduct that could reasonably be determined to be
detrimental to the public safety;
      (5)   failed to comply with a condition of a probationary permit; or
      (6)   is under indictment for or has been convicted of any felony offense
while holding a wrecker driver’s permit.
   (b)   A person whose wrecker driver’s permit is revoked shall not:
      (1)   apply for another wrecker driver’s permit before the expiration of
12 months from the date the director revokes the permit or, in the case of an
appeal, the date the appeal hearing officer affirms the revocation; or
      (2)   operate a wrecker for a vehicle tow service inside the city.
   (c)   The director shall notify the permittee and the licensee in writing of
a revocation and include in the notice:
      (1)   the specific reason or reasons for the revocation;
      (2)   the date the director orders the revocation; and
      (3)   a statement informing the permittee of the right to, and process
for, appeal of the decision. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21282; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-25.   WRECKER OPERATION AFTER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   After receipt of a notice of suspension, revocation, or denial of
permit renewal, the permittee shall, on the date specified in the notice,
surrender the wrecker driver’s permit to the director and discontinue operating
a wrecker for a vehicle tow service inside the city.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Section
48A-23(c), Section
48A-24(b), and Subsection (a) of this section, if the permittee appeals a
suspension or revocation under this section, the permittee may continue to
operate a wrecker for a vehicle tow service pending the appeal unless:
      (1)   the permittee’s wrecker driver’s permit is suspended pursuant to
Section
48A-23(b) or revoked pursuant to Section
48A-24(a)(6) of this article; or
      (2)   the director determines that continued operation by the permittee
would impose a serious and imminent threat to the public safety. (Ord. Nos.
19099; 21282; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-26.   APPEAL FROM DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   If the director denies, suspends, or revokes a wrecker driver’s
permit, the action is final unless the permittee files an appeal, in writing,
with the city manager not more than 10 business days after notice of the
director’s action is received.
   (b)   The city manager or a designated representative shall act as the
appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing
officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and
make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing
under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling on the basis of
a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the
action of the director being appealed. The decision of the hearing officer is
final as to available administrative remedies. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 24175)
ARTICLE IV.
MISCELLANEOUS LICENSEE AND DRIVER REGULATIONS.
SEC. 48A-27.   LICENSEE’S AND DRIVER’S DUTY TO COMPLY.
   (a)   Licensee. In the operation of a vehicle tow service, a licensee shall
comply with the terms and conditions of the vehicle tow service license and,
except to the extent expressly provided otherwise by the license, shall comply
with this chapter, rules and regulations established under this chapter, and
other law applicable to the operation of a vehicle tow service.
   (b)   Driver. While on duty, a driver shall comply with this chapter,
regulations established under this chapter, other law applicable to the
operation of a motor vehicle in this state, and orders issued by the licensee
employing, or contracting with, the driver in connection with the licensee’s
discharging of its duty under its vehicle tow service license and this chapter.
(Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-28.   LICENSEE’S DUTY TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE BY DRIVERS.
   (a)   A licensee shall establish policy and take action to discourage,
prevent, or correct violations of this chapter by drivers who are employed by,
or under contract to, the licensee.
   (b)   A licensee shall not permit a driver who is employed by, or under
contract to, the licensee to drive a wrecker if the licensee knows or has
reasonable cause to suspect that the driver has failed to comply with this
chapter, the rules and regulations established by the director, or other
applicable law. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-29.   INSURANCE.
   (a)   A licensee shall procure and keep in full force and effect automobile
liability insurance written by an insurance company that:
      (1)   is approved, licensed, or authorized by the State of Texas;
      (2)   is acceptable to the city; and
      (3)   does not violate the ownership/ operational control prohibition
described in Subsection (j) of this section.
   (b)   The insurance must be issued in the standard form approved by the
Texas Department of Insurance, and all provisions of the policy must be
acceptable to the city. The insured provisions of the policy must name the city
and its officers and employees as additional insureds. The coverage provisions
must provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or
property by reason of the operation of a vehicle tow service by the licensee,
including but not limited to damage to a towed vehicle caused directly or
indirectly by improper hookup or improper towing.
   (c)   The automobile liability insurance must provide combined single limits
of liability for bodily injury and property damage of not less than $500,000
for each occurrence, or the equivalent, for each wrecker used by the licensee.
Aggregate limits of liability are prohibited.
   (d)   The insurance for vehicles while being loaded, unloaded, or
transported must provide limits of liability of not less than $25,000 for each
light duty wrecker and $50,000 for each medium duty or heavy duty wrecker.
   (e)   If a vehicle is removed from service, the licensee shall maintain the
insurance coverage required by this section for the vehicle until the director
receives satisfactory proof that all evidence of operation as a wrecker for a
vehicle tow service has been removed from the vehicle.
   (f)   The insurance required under this section must include:
      (1)   a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required
to notify the director in writing not fewer than 30 days before canceling,
failing to renew, or making a material change to the insurance policy;
      (2)   a provision to cover all vehicles, whether owned or not owned by
the licensee, that are operated under the license, except for any vehicle that:
         (A)   has been subcontracted from another licensee pursuant to Section
48A-7(e) of this chapter; and
         (B)   is covered by insurance of the other licensee that meets the
requirements of this chapter and that includes coverage for use of the vehicle
by subcontractors; and
      (3)   a provision requiring the insurance company to pay every claim on a
first-dollar basis.
   (g)   Insurance required by this section may be obtained from an assigned
risk pool if all of the policies and coverages are managed by one agent, and
one certificate of insurance is issued to the city.
   (h)   A license will not be granted or renewed unless the applicant or
licensee furnishes the director with such proof of insurance as the director
considers necessary to determine whether the applicant or licensee is
adequately insured under this section.
   (i)   If the insurance of a licensee lapses or is canceled and new insurance
is not obtained, the director shall suspend the license until the licensee
provides evidence that insurance coverage required by this section has been
obtained. A person shall not operate a vehicle tow service while a license is
suspended under this section whether or not the action is appealed. A $47 fee
must be paid before a license suspended under this section will be reinstated.
   (j)   No person with any direct or indirect ownership interest in the
licensee’s vehicle tow service may have any operational control, direct or
indirect, in any insurance company that provides insurance required by this
section to the vehicle tow service. For purposes of this subsection,
“operational control” means holding any management position with the insurance
company (including, but not limited to, the chief executive officer, the
president, any vice-president, or any person in a decision- making position
with respect to insurance claims) or having the right to control the actions or
decisions of any person in such a management position in the insurance company.
(Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 23106; 24175; 25215; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 48A-30.   INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED UPON REQUEST OF DIRECTOR.
   Upon request of the director, a licensee shall submit to the director the
following information:
   (1)   a current consolidated list of vehicles;
   (2)   a current financial statement that includes a balance sheet and income
statement;
   (3)   names of current officers, owners, and managers; and
   (4)   a list of current drivers employed by the licensee, with their wrecker
driver’s permits indicated. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-31.   VEHICLE TOW SERVICE RECORDS.
   For each vehicle towed by a vehicle tow service, a licensee shall retain any
record required pursuant to this chapter, including, but not limited to, towing
agreements, photographs, written authorizations for removal, and wrecker slips
or tickets, for not less than one year from the date of removal of the vehicle.
The licensee shall make the vehicle tow service records available for
inspection by the director upon reasonable notice and request. (Ord. Nos.
19099; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-32.   FAILURE TO PAY AD VALOREM TAXES.
   A licensee or an applicant for a vehicle tow service license shall not allow
the payment of ad valorem taxes upon any vehicle, equipment, or other property
used directly or indirectly in connection with the vehicle tow service to
become delinquent. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
ARTICLE V.
SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
SEC. 48A-33.   REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (a)   A licensee commits an offense if, without a valid emergency wrecker
service license issued under
Chapter 15D of this code, he, either personally or through an employee,
subcontractor, or agent, removes a vehicle from:
      (1)   a public street; or
      (2)   any area between the property line of private property abutting a
public street and the center line of the street’s drainage way or the curb of
the street, whichever is farther from the property line of the private
property.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the vehicle
was removed:
      (1)   from a portion of public right-of-way leased by the city to the
person requesting removal of the vehicle, if such removal was not prohibited by
the lease;
      (2)   by a vehicle tow service currently licensed under this chapter; and
      (3)   in compliance with all requirements of this chapter and any other
applicable city ordinance or state or federal law. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435;
23106; 24175)
SEC. 48A-34.   REMOVAL OF AUTHORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly removes or
causes the removal of a vehicle, other than an illegally parked or unauthorized
vehicle, from private property. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-35.   FINANCIAL INTERESTS OF PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNER AND LICENSEE
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A licensee commits an offense if he, either personally or through an
employee, subcontractor, or agent:
      (1)   directly or indirectly gives anything of value, other than a sign
or notice required to be posted under this chapter, to a private property owner
in connection with the removal of a vehicle from the private property; or
      (2)   has a direct or indirect monetary interest in private property from
which the licensee for compensation removes an unauthorized vehicle.
   (b)   An owner of private property commits an offense if he:
      (1)   accepts anything of value, other than a sign or notice required to
be posted under this chapter, from a vehicle tow service in connection with the
removal of a vehicle from the private property; or
      (2)   has a direct or indirect monetary interest in a vehicle tow service
that for compensation removes an unauthorized vehicle from the private
property.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (a)(2) and (b)(2)
that the private property from which the vehicle is removed is a vehicle
storage facility licensed under the Texas Vehicle Storage Facility Act. (Ord.
Nos. 19099; 21435; 23106; 24175)
SEC. 48A-36.   REQUIREMENTS FOR POSTINGSIGNS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he removes or causes the removal of a
vehicle from private property without signs being posted and maintained on the
private property in accordance with this section at the time of towing and for
at least 24 hours prior to removal of the vehicle.
    (b)   Except as otherwise provided by Section
48A-36.2 of this chapter, at least one sign must be placed on the right or left
side of each driveway access or curb cut allowing access to the private
property. If curbs, access barriers, landscaping, or driveways do not establish
definite vehicle entrances onto private property from a public roadway, other
than an alley, or if the width of an entrance exceeds 35 feet, signs must be
placed at intervals along the entrance so that no entrance is farther than 25
feet from a sign. At least two signs must be placed on the interior of the
private property. The director may require one additional interior sign to be
posted for each 50 parking spaces over 150 contained on the property.
   (c)   Each sign required by Subsection (b) to be placed upon private
property must:
      (1)   be approved by the director;
      (2)   contain:
         (A)   a bright red international towing symbol, at least four inches
high, located on the uppermost portion of the sign or on a separate sign placed
immediately above the sign;
         (B)   the following information immediately below the international
towing symbol in white letters on a bright red background:
            (i)   the words “TOWING ENFORCED” in two-inch high letters; and
            (ii)   a statement describing who may park at the location and
prohibiting all others;
         (C)   the following information on the next lower portion of the sign
in bright red letters at least one inch high on a white background:
            (i)   the words, “Unauthorized Vehicles Will Be Towed at Owner’s or
Operator’s Expense”; and
            (ii)   the days and hours towing is enforced at the location, which
may be satisfied by a statement that towing is enforced at all times;
         (D)   the following information on the bottommost portion of the sign
in white letters at least one inch high on a bright red background:
            (i)   the name, street address, and current telephone number,
including area code, of the vehicle tow service;
            (ii)   the name, street address, and current telephone number,
including area code, of the vehicle storage facility to which the vehicle will
be towed, if different from the vehicle tow service; and
            (iii)   a telephone number answered 24 hours a day at which a
vehicle owner or operator may obtain information to locate the vehicle, if
different from the telephone numbers listed in Subparagraph (D)(i) and (D)(ii);
      (3)   be at least 24 inches tall and 18 inches wide and constructed of a
rigid weather-resistant metal;
      (4)   be permanently mounted on a pole, post, permanent wall, or
permanent barrier;
      (5)   be readable day and night;
      (6)   be permanently installed on the private property in a manner and
location approved by the director so that the sign is facing and conspicuous to
any person entering the property; and
       (7)   be posted so that the bottom edge of the sign is not lower than
five feet nor higher than eight feet above ground level.
   (d)   In addition to the signs required to be posted under Subsection (b) of
this section, the following two signs must be posted and maintained on the
interior of the private property in a location and manner approved by the
director:
      (1)   The first sign must meet all of the requirements of Subsection (c)
of this section, except that all wording must be in Spanish instead of English
and the translation must be approved by the director.
      (2)   The second sign must comply with form, size, color, and wording
requirements established by rule or regulation of the director and must include
the following information in both English and Spanish:
         (A)   the maximum towage fees that may be charged under this chapter
and a statement that additional storage, preservation, and notification fees
may be charged under the Vehicle Storage Facility Act; and
         (B)   a statement of how and to whom a complaint concerning a
vehicle’s removal or a violation of this chapter can be made.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if, on the same private property, he posts
or allows the posting of a sign or signs indicating:
      (1)   the name of more than one vehicle tow service; or
      (2)   the name, address, or telephone number of more than one vehicle
storage facility.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if he removes or obstructs or allows the
removal or obstruction of a sign required by this section to be posted on
private property. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the
removal or obstruction was caused by:
      (1)   a city employee in the performance of official duties; or
      (2)   the property owner or a licensee or driver of a vehicle tow service
authorized by the property owner for the purpose of:
         (A)   repairing or maintaining the sign;
         (B)   complying with this chapter or a rule or regulation promulgated
under this chapter; or
         (C)   terminating a vehicle tow service agreement for the private
property.
   (g)   A minor variation of a required or minimum height of a sign or
lettering is not a violation of this chapter.
   (h)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section
that:
      (1)   before the vehicle was removed, the property owner provided the
owner or operator of the vehicle with notice complying with Section 684.012(b)
and (c) of the Texas Transportation Code (which requires the notice to be
attached to the vehicle and sent certified mail to the vehicle’s registered
owner), and the vehicle tow service received written verification from the
property owner that the required notice was given; or
      (2)   the vehicle was removed by or under the direction of a peace
officer. [Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 23106; 24175, § 48A-36(d) effective 2-1-01]
SEC. 48A-36.1.   INDIVIDUAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN RESTRICTED AREA.
   (a)   A private property owner who complies with Section
48A-36 of this chapter may impose further specific parking restrictions in an
area to which the signs apply for individual spaces by installing or painting a
weather-resistant sign or notice on a curb, pole, post, permanent wall, or
permanent barrier so that the sign is in front of a vehicle that is parked in
the space when the rear of the vehicle is at the entrance of the space.
   (b)   The top of the sign or notice may not be higher than seven feet above
the ground.
   (c)   The sign or notice must include an indication that the space is
reserved for a particular unit number, person, or type of person.
   (d)   The letters on the sign or notice must be at least two inches in
height and must contrast to the color of the curb, wall, or barrier so they can
be read during the day and at night. The letters are not required to be
illuminated or made of reflective material. (Ord. Nos. 23106; 24175)
SEC. 48A-36.2.   DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED PARKING SPACES IN OTHERWISE
UNRESTRICTED AREA.
   If a private property owner wishes to designate one or more spaces as
restricted parking spaces on a portion of private property that is otherwise
unrestricted as to parking, the owner must, instead of installing a sign at
each entrance to the private property as provided by Section
48A-36(b) of this chapter, place a sign that prohibits unauthorized vehicles
from parking in the designated spaces and that otherwise complies with Section
48A-36:
      (1)   at the right or left side of each entrance to the designated area
or group of parking spaces located on the portion of the private property on
which parking is restricted; or
      (2)   at the end of each restricted parking space so that the sign, the
top of which may not be higher than seven feet above the ground, is in front of
any vehicle that is parked in the space when the rear of the vehicle is at the
entrance of the space. (Ord. Nos. 23106; 24175)
SEC. 48A-37.   AUTHORIZATION FOR REMOVAL.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he removes or causes the removal of a
vehicle from private property unless, at the time the vehicle is to be removed:
      (1)   the property owner signs written authorization for removal of the
vehicle by the vehicle tow service; or
      (2)   a current written agreement exists between the property owner and
the vehicle tow service authorizing removal of illegally parked or unauthorized
vehicles from the property and a photograph is taken reasonably showing that
the removed vehicle was unauthorized or illegally parked on the property.
   (b)   The written authorization for removal required by Subsection (a)(1)
must contain:
      (1)   a description of the vehicle to be removed, including the year,
make, model, color, state license plate number, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle;
      (2)   the date and time of the vehicle’s removal;
      (3)   the location from which the vehicle is removed;
      (4)   the reasons for removing the vehicle; and
      (5)   the signature of the property owner.
   (c)   The written agreement required by Subsection (a)(2) must:
      (1)   contain a clear election, signed by the property owner or the
property owner’s duly authorized agent, as to whether the vehicle tow service
is authorized to remove illegally parked and unauthorized vehicles from the
property 24 hours a day, seven days a week or only during the normal business
hours of the property owner; and
      (2)   be renewed at least every two years and whenever there is a change
in ownership of the property. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-38.   RELEASE OF A VEHICLE PRIOR TO REMOVAL.
   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee, subcontractor, or agent, fails to release a vehicle
without charge to the vehicle owner or operator, or to the property owner, if
the release is requested before the vehicle is removed from the private
property on which the vehicle is parked. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-39.   REMOVAL OF A VEHICLE WITH A WRECKER.
   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee, subcontractor, or agent, removes a vehicle from private
property without:
      (1)   using a wrecker; or
      (2)   first completing every procedure required to secure the vehicle to
the wrecker or wrecker equipment, including the attachment of any safety
chains, so that the vehicle may be safely towed. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435;
24175)
SEC. 48A-40.   NOTIFICATION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT; WRECKER SLIPS OR TICKETS.
   (a)   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee, subcontractor, or agent, fails to notify the police
department and obtain a tow number within one hour after the removal of each
vehicle from private property.
   (b)   When notifying the police department for the purpose of obtaining a
tow number, the licensee or permittee shall provide the following information:
      (1)   the location from which the vehicle was removed and the date and
time of removal;
      (2)   the reason for removal of the vehicle;
      (3)   a physical description of the removed vehicle, including the year,
make, model, color, state license plate number, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle;
      (4)   the trade name of the vehicle tow service; and
      (5)   the name, address, and telephone number of the vehicle storage
facility to which the vehicle was taken.
   (c)   Upon delivering a vehicle to a vehicle storage facility, the licensee
shall provide to the vehicle storage facility a copy of a wrecker slip or
ticket containing all of the information required in Subsection (b) and the tow
number issued by the police department.
   (d)   A vehicle storage facility commits an offense if, within two hours
after accepting a towed vehicle, it fails to report to the police department
the information required by Subsections (b)(1), (3), (4), and (5) of this
section. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 23106; 24175)
SEC. 48A-41.   NOTIFICATION OF VEHICLE OWNER.
   A licensee or permittee shall provide the owner of any vehicle removed from
private property by the licensee with written notice of how and to whom a
complaint concerning the vehicle’s removal or a violation of this chapter can
be made. The notice must specifically state that the vehicle owner has the
right to challenge the legality of the tow under Chapter 685, Texas
Transportation Code, as amended, and describe the process required for the
challenge. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 23106; 24175)
SEC. 48A-42.   REMOVAL TO VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he removes or causes the removal of any
vehicle from private property to:
      (1)   any location other than the vehicle storage facility indicated on
the signs required by Section
48A-36 of this article; or
      (2)   a vehicle storage facility that:
         (A)   is not currently licensed under the Texas Vehicle Storage
Facility Act or not in compliance with that act or any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant to that act;
         (B)   is located outside the city or located inside the city in
violation of the Dallas Development Code; or
         (C)   does not have a sign posted conspicuously at its entrance
notifying the vehicle owner of the right to challenge the legality of the tow
under Chapter 685, Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
   (b)   A licensee or a permittee commits an offense if he, either personally
or through an employee, subcontractor, or agent:
      (1)   fails to remove a vehicle from private property to a vehicle
storage facility by the most direct and expeditious route; or
      (2)   stops at another location while transporting a vehicle removed from
private property to a vehicle storage facility. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 23106;
24175)
ARTICLE VI.
VEHICLE TOW SERVICE FEES.
SEC. 48A-43.   MAXIMUM FEE SCHEDULE.
   (a)   The maximum fee that a licensee or permittee may charge for vehicle
tow service, regardless of whether a tilt-bed wrecker or a conventional wrecker
is used, is:
      (1)   $165 for towage of a vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating of not more than 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   $300 for towage of a vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds but not more than 24,999 pounds; and
      (3)   $489 per unit for towage of a vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross
vehicle weight rating of more than 25,000 pounds. Maximum tow amount is $978.
   (b)   No additional fee may be charged for linkage of a vehicle prior to a
tow or for the use of dollies or go-jacks.
   (c)   If a licensee or permittee tows a stolen vehicle, or a vehicle later
determined to be stolen, the licensee or permittee may charge the lawful owner
of the vehicle no more than the maximum fee for towage. A vehicle tow service
may not charge a fee to the police department if the police department takes
custody of a stolen vehicle.
   (d)   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee, subcontractor, or agent, charges:
      (1)   more than the maximum fee allowed by this section for the
particular vehicle towed; or
      (2)   any fee in addition to:
         (A)   a towage fee lawfully charged under this section; or
         (B)   a storage, preservation, or notification fee lawfully charged
under the Vehicle Storage Facility Act.
   (e)   A licensee or permittee shall provide a vehicle owner the option of
paying the fee for vehicle tow service by cash or a major credit card. (Ord.
Nos. 19099; 19300; 21435; 23106; 24175; 25812; 27721; 33232)
SEC. 48A-43.1.   TOWING FEE STUDIES.
   (a)   Upon the request of one or more vehicle tow service licensees that,
either alone or together, accounted for 50 percent or more of the nonconsent
tows performed in the city during the preceding license term as determined by
the director according to city records, the city shall, either through its
employees or a contractor, conduct a towing fee study for the purpose of
determining the fair market value of the services of a vehicle tow service
business performing nonconsent tows originating in the city. The fair market
value of such services must be reasonably related to any financial or
accounting information provided to the city relating to vehicle tow service.
   (b)   A request for a towing fee study must be in writing and filed with the
director by one of the following methods:
      (1)   Certified United States mail, return receipt requested.
      (2)   Certified electronic transmission.
      (3)   Hand delivery.
   (c)   After an initial request for a towing fee study is filed with the
director, other vehicle tow service licensees may join in that request by also
filing requests with the director in accordance with Subsection (b). If, within
90 days after the director receives the initial request for a towing fee study,
the director determines that all of the licensees joining in the request, when
considered together, account for less than 50 percent of the nonconsent tows
performed in the city during the preceding license term, then the city will not
conduct a towing fee study.
   (d)   Before the city will begin conducting a towing fee study, the vehicle
tow service licensee or licensees requesting the study shall deposit with the
director a fee of $5,000 to partially defray the city’s cost of conducting the
study. If the study is not conducted, the fee will be refunded to the licensee
or licensees paying the fee, less an administrative fee of $250 for processing
the request.
   (e)   Each vehicle tow service licensee requesting the towing fee study
shall cooperate with the city to conduct the study. Each licensee shall provide
to the city any reasonable information determined by the director to be needed
to conduct a meaningful fee study, including, but not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   An audited financial statement not more than one year old that
reflects the current financial status of the vehicle tow service business and
includes an itemized statement of revenues and expenses. The audited financial
statement must have been prepared by an independent certified public
accountant.
      (2)   The number of employees of the licensee, including drivers and
dispatchers, and each employee’s position and annual compensation with the
vehicle tow service business.
      (3)   Identification of all equipment owned or leased by the licensee
that is used for conducting the vehicle tow service business, including a
statement of the costs of acquiring or leasing the equipment.
      (4)   Copies of the past three years tax returns for the vehicle tow
service business.
   (f)   All information provided by the vehicle tow service licensees relating
to the towing fee study will be kept confidential to the maximum extent allowed
by law.
   (g)   The city shall complete a towing fee study within 120 calendar days
after receiving all information required under Subsections (e)(1), (2), (3),
and (4) from the vehicle tow service licensees requesting the fee study.
   (h)   Upon completion of the towing fee study, the city council
transportation and telecommunications committee shall receive the results of
the study and hold a public hearing on whether the maximum fees for nonconsent
tows originating in the city should be increased, decreased, or maintained at
the same rates. The director shall give written notice of the time, date, and
location of the public hearing to each vehicle tow service licensee. The notice
must be sent by United States regular mail to the licensee’s address listed in
the latest license application on file with the director.
   (i)   Based on the towing fee study, the public hearing, and other
information presented to it, the transportation and telecommunications
committee shall determine whether an adjustment in the nonconsent towing fees
is justified. The committee shall then recommend to the city council whether
the fees should be increased, decreased, or maintained at the same rates.
   (j)   Upon receiving the recommendation of the transportation and
telecommunication committee, the city council shall adopt an ordinance that
increases or decreases the maximum fees for nonconsent tows or that makes a
finding that an adjustment to nonconsent towing fees is not justified. The
maximum fees resulting from the city council’s action must represent the fair
market value of the services of a vehicle tow service business performing
nonconsent tows originating in the city and be reasonably related to any
financial or accounting information provided to the city relating to vehicle
tow service.
   (k)   No more than one towing fee study will be conducted within a four-year
time period measured from the last date the city council adopted an ordinance
that, based on a towing fee study, either adjusted the towing fees or found
that an adjustment in towing fees was not justified. (Ord. 25812)
ARTICLE VII.
VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
SEC. 48A-44.   VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   An applicant or licensee shall submit each wrecker to be used in the
vehicle tow service for inspection in a manner determined by the director. Each
wrecker must:
      (1)   if used for towing a vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating of not more than 10,000 pounds, meet the requirements for a light
duty wrecker;
      (2)   if used for towing a vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds but not more than 26,000 pounds, meet
the requirements for a medium duty wrecker;
      (3)   if used for towing a vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating of more than 26,000 pounds, meet the requirements for a heavy
duty wrecker;
      (4)   carry, as standard equipment, safety chains and a fire
extinguisher;
      (5)   be maintained in a safe and good working condition and contain
equipment that is maintained in a safe and good working condition; and
      (6)   have permanently affixed to each side of the power unit of the
wrecker legible letters and numbers, at least two inches high, in a color that
contrasts with the power unit, stating the trade name, address (including city
and state), and telephone number (including area code) of the vehicle tow
service and the motor carrier registration number of the wrecker.
   (b)   Upon inspection, approval, and a fee payment of $347, for each
vehicle, the director shall issue a decal to the applicant or licensee. The
decal must be affixed securely to the lower right corner of the windshield of
the inspected wrecker.
   (c)   The director or a peace officer may, at any time, inspect a wrecker
used by a licensee for vehicle tow service to determine whether the vehicle
complies with this section.
   (d)   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee, subcontractor, or agent, uses a light duty, medium duty,
or heavy duty wrecker to tow a vehicle that exceeds the manufacturer’s gross
vehicle weight rating allowed to be towed by the particular wrecker under
Subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3), whichever is applicable. (Ord. Nos. 19099;
21435; 23106; 24175; 33232
ARTICLE VIII.
ENFORCEMENT.
SEC. 48A-45.   AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   (a)   The director or a peace officer may inspect any vehicle tow service or
vehicle storage facility to determine whether the licensee or permittee
complies with this chapter, regulations established under this chapter, or
other applicable law.
   (b)   A licensee or permittee, either personally or through an employee,
subcontractor, or agent, shall not attempt to interfere or refuse to cooperate
with the director or a peace officer in the conduct of any investigation or
discharge of any duty pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-46.   ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Officers of the police department shall assist in the enforcement of this
chapter. A police officer upon observing a violation of this chapter, or of any
regulation established by the director pursuant to this chapter, shall take
necessary enforcement action to insure effective regulation of vehicle tow
service and vehicle storage facilities. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-47.   CORRECTION ORDER.
   (a)   If the director determines that a licensee, either personally or
through an employee, subcontractor, or agent, violates this code, the terms of
its license, a regulation established by the director, or other law, the
director may notify the licensee in writing of the violation and by written
order direct the licensee to correct the violation within a reasonable period
of time. In setting the time for correction, the director shall consider the
degree of danger to the public health or safety and the nature of the
violation. If the violation involves equipment that is unsafe or functioning
improperly, the director shall order the licensee to immediately cease use of
the equipment.
   (b)   If the director determines that a violation constitutes an imminent
and serious threat to the public health or safety, the director shall order the
licensee to correct the violation immediately, and, if the licensee fails to
comply, the director shall promptly take or cause to be taken such action as
the director considers necessary to enforce the order immediately.
   (c)   The director shall include in a notice issued under this section an
identification of the specific violation, the date of issuance of the notice
and the time period within which the violation must be corrected, a warning
that failure to comply with the order may result in suspension or revocation of
license or imposition of a fine or both, and a statement indicating that the
order may be appealed to the city manager. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-48.   SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (a)   A licensee shall designate and maintain a representative to receive
service of notice required under this chapter to be given a licensee.
   (b)   Notice required under this chapter to be given to:
      (1)   a licensee must be personally served by the director on the
licensee or the licensee’s designated representative; or
      (2)   a driver permitted by the city under
Article III must be personally served or sent by certified United States Mail,
five day return receipt requested, to the address, last known to the director,
of the person to be notified.
   (c)   Notice required under this chapter to be given a person other than a
driver permitted under
Article III or a licensee may be served in the manner prescribed by Subsection
(b)(2).
   (d)   Service executed in accordance with this section constitutes notice to
the person to whom the notice is addressed. The date of service for notice that
is mailed is the date received. (Ord. Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-49.   APPEAL.
   (a)   A licensee may appeal a correction order issued under Section
48A-47 if an appeal is requested in writing not more than 10 days after notice
of the order or action is received.
   (b)   The city manager or a designated representative shall act as the
appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing
officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and
make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing
under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling on the basis of
a preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or a part of
the order of the director. The decision of the hearing officer is final. (Ord.
Nos. 21435; 24175)
SEC. 48A-50.   OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he violates a provision of this chapter
applicable to him. A culpable mental state is not required for commission of an
offense under this chapter unless the provision defining the conduct expressly
requires a culpable mental state. A separate offense is committed each day in
which an offense occurs. An offense committed under this chapter is punishable
by a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 as provided by Section
643.253 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended. The minimum fine
established in this subsection shall be doubled for the second conviction of
the same offense within any 24-month period and trebled for the third and
subsequent convictions of the same offense within any 24-month period. At no
time shall the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine established in this
subsection.
   (b)   Prosecution for an offense under Subsection (a) does not prevent the
use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person
charged with the conduct or involved in the offense. (Ord. Nos. 19099; 19963;
21435; 24175; 25812)
CHAPTER 48B
VACANT BUILDINGS AND LOTS
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
48B-1.   Purpose of chapter.
Sec.
48B-2.   Definitions.
Sec.
48B-3.   Authority of director.
Sec.
48B-4.   Delivery of notices.
Sec.
48B-5.   Violations; penalty.
ARTICLE II.
REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF VACANT BUILDINGS IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT.
Sec.
48B-6.   Registration required; defenses.
Sec.
48B-7.   Registration application.
Sec.
48B-8.   Registration fee and inspection charge.
Sec.
48B-9.   Issuance, denial, and display of certificate of registration.
Sec.
48B-10.   Revocation of registration.
Sec.
48B-11.   Appeals.
Sec.
48B-12.   Expiration and renewal of registration.
Sec.
48B-13.   Nontransferability.
Sec.
48B-14.   Property inspections.
ARTICLE III.
MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS FOR VACANT BUILDINGS LOCATED IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT.
Sec.
48B-15.   Emergency response information.
Sec.
48B-16.   Insurance.
Sec.
48B-17.   Vacant building plan.
ARTICLE IV.
REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF VACANT LOTS AND BUILDINGS LOCATED OUTSIDE THE
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
Sec.
48B-18.   Scope.
Sec.
48B-19.   Registration required; defenses.
Sec.
48B-20.   Registration application.
Sec.
48B-21.   Registration fee and inspection charge.
Sec.
48B-22.   Issuance, denial, and display of certificate of registration.
Sec.
48B-23.    Revocation of registration.
Sec.
48B-24.   Appeals.
Sec.
48B-25.   Expiration and renewal of registration.
Sec.
48B-26.   Nontransferability.
Sec.
48B-27.   Property inspections.
Sec.
48B-28.   Emergency response information for problem properties.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 48B-1.   PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   There exists in the city of Dallas, Texas, many vacant properties that, if
left unoccupied and unmonitored, may fall into a state of disrepair, become a
haven for criminal activity, and create a blight on the area. The purpose of
this chapter is to protect the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the
citizens of the city of Dallas by establishing a registration program for
vacant buildings and lots in the city in order to monitor the vacant buildings
and lots and ensure that they are maintained in compliance with this code and
other applicable laws and to encourage their demolition, building development,
or return to occupancy in a timely manner. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 32145)
SEC. 48B-2.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   BASIC PROPERTY means a vacant building or vacant lot which has two
non-complied property maintenance violations within any six-month period.
      (2)   BUILDING means a structure for the support or shelter of any use or
occupancy.
      (3)   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT means the area of the city bounded by
Woodall Rodgers Freeway on the north, Central Expressway (elevated bypass) on
the east, R. L. Thornton Freeway on the south, and Stemmons Freeway on the
west.
      (4)   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION means a certificate of registration
issued by the director under this chapter to the owner or operator of a vacant
building.
      (5)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter and includes any
representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director.
      (6)    DWELLING UNIT means one or more rooms designed to be a single
housekeeping unit to accommodate one family and containing one or more
kitchens, one or more bathrooms, and one or more bedrooms.
      (7)   OCCUPIED means that one or more persons conduct business in or
reside in at least 50 percent of the total area of a building (excluding
stairwells, elevator shafts, and mechanical rooms) as the legal or equitable
owner, operator, lessee, or invitee on a permanent, nontransient basis pursuant
to and within the scope of a valid certificate of occupancy.
      (8)   OWNER means a person in whom is vested the ownership or title of
real property:
         (A)   including, but not limited to:
            (i)   the holder of fee simple title;
            (ii)   the holder of a life estate;
            (iii)   the holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of
five years or more;
            (iv)   the buyer in a contract for deed;
            (v)   a mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of
real property; and
            (vi)   the named grantee in the last recorded deed; and
         (B)   not including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an
initial term of less than five years.
      (9)   PERSON means any individual, corporation, organization,
partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
      (10)   PREMISES or PROPERTY means a lot, plot, or parcel of land,
including any structures on the land.
      (11)   PROBLEM PROPERTY means a vacant building or vacant lot which has
three or more non-complied property maintenance violations within any six-month
period.
      (12)   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE VIOLATION means any violation of the city
code involving high weeds; litter; obstructions of alleys, sidewalks, or
streets; signs on a public right of way; bulky trash; substandard structures;
junk motor vehicles; illegal dumping; illegal outside storage; and graffiti.
      (13)   REGISTRANT means a person issued a certificate of registration for
a vacant building or vacant lot under this chapter.
      (14)   STRUCTURE means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or
building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite manner.
      (15)   VACANT BUILDING means a building that, regardless of its
structural condition, is not occupied.
      (16)   VACANT LOT means any parcel of real property that is not improved
with a permitted structure. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 32145)
SEC. 48B-3.   AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this chapter and may by written
order establish such rules, regulations, or procedures, not inconsistent with
this chapter, as the director determines are necessary to discharge any duty
under or to effect the policy of this chapter. (Ord. 27248)
SEC. 48B-4.   DELIVERY OF NOTICES.
   Any written notice that the director is required to give an applicant or
registrant under this chapter is deemed to be delivered:
      (1)   on the date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or
registrant; or
      (2)   three days after the date the notice is placed in the United States
mail with proper postage and properly addressed to the applicant or registrant
at the address provided for the applicant or registrant in the most recent
registration application. (Ord. 27248)
SEC. 48B-5.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to
perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits an offense. A
person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a
violation is committed, permitted, or continued.
   (b)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$2,000.
      (2)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less
than $500 for a first conviction of a violation of Section
48B-6.
      (3)   The minimum fine established in Subsection (b)(2) will be doubled
for the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and
trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any
24-month period. At no time may the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine
established in Subsection (b)(1).
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (d)   As an alternative to imposing the criminal penalty prescribed in
Subsection (b), the city may impose administrative penalties, fees, and court
costs in accordance with
Article IV-b of
Chapter 27 of this code, as authorized by Section 54.044 of the Texas Local
Government Code, for an offense under this chapter. The alternative
administrative penalty range for an offense is the same as is prescribed for a
criminal offense in Subsection (b).
   (e)   The penalties provided for in Subsections (b) and (d) are in addition
to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under city ordinances
and state law. (Ord. 27248)
ARTICLE II.
REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF VACANT BUILDINGS IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT.
SEC. 48B-6.   REGISTRATION REQUIRED; DEFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a vacant
building in the central business district without a valid certificate of
registration. A separate certificate of registration is required for each
street address at which any vacant building is located in the central business
district, regardless of any separate occupied buildings that may also be
located at the same street address. If more than one vacant building in the
central business district is located at the same street address, only one
certificate of registration is required for all of the vacant buildings. Also,
only one certificate of registration is required for a single vacant building
in the central business district that has more than one street address. Suite
numbers and apartment unit numbers will not be considered in determining the
street address of a vacant building.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
      (1)   the building was occupied within the 45-day period preceding the
date of the alleged offense;
      (2)   at the time of the alleged offense, the building was in the process
of being renovated, rehabilitated, repaired, or demolished (pursuant to
appropriate and valid permits issued by the building official, if required) and
had been occupied within the 90-day period preceding the date of the alleged
offense;
      (3)   at the time of the alleged offense, the building was in the process
of being actively marketed and advertised for lease or sale and had been
occupied within the 90-day period preceding the date of the alleged offense;
      (4)   within the 90-day period preceding the date of the alleged offense,
the building suffered damage or destruction from a fire, flood, storm, or
similar event that rendered the building incapable of being occupied, except
that this defense does not apply if the building was rendered incapable of
being occupied by the intentional act of the owner, operator, lessee, or other
invitee or an agent of the owner, operator, lessee, or other invitee; or
      (5)   the building was owned by the city of Dallas, the State of Texas,
or the United States government. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 32145)
SEC. 48B-7.   REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a certificate of registration for a vacant building in the
central business district, a person must submit an application on a form
provided for that purpose to the director. The applicant must be the person who
will own, control, or operate the vacant building in the central business
district. The application must contain all of the following information:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, and telephone number of
the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent.
      (2)   The name, all street addresses, and the main telephone number, if
any, of the vacant building and a description of the type of property it is
(such as, but not limited to, a commercial building, a warehouse, an office, a
hotel, an apartment complex, a boarding home, a group home, a loft, a townhome,
a condominium, or a single-family residence).
      (3)   The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone
numbers of all owners of the vacant building and any lien holders and other
persons with a financial interest in the vacant building.
      (4)   The name, street address, mailing address, and telephone number of
a person or persons to contact in an emergency as required by Section
48B-15 of this chapter.
      (5)   The form of business of the applicant (and owner, if different from
the applicant); the name, street address, mailing address, and telephone number
of a high managerial agent of the business; and, if the business is a
corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business.
      (6)   Proof of insurance required by Section
48B-16 of this chapter.
      (7)   The number of buildings (including vacant and occupied buildings),
dwelling units, swimming pools, and spas located in or on the premises of the
vacant building.
      (8)   Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes owed in
connection with the vacant building and the premises on which it is located.
      (9)   The total area in square feet of the vacant building, the number of
stories contained in the vacant building, the area in square feet of each
story, and whether each story is above or below ground level.
      (10)   The date on which the vacant building was last occupied, a
description of the last use of the vacant building, and a description of any
hazardous materials, uses, or conditions that currently exist or previously
existed in the vacant building.
      (11)   Such additional information as the applicant desires to include or
that the director deems necessary to aid in the determination of whether the
requested certificate of registration should be granted.
   (b)   If the application for a certificate of registration is being made for
multiple vacant buildings located at the same address, then the information
required in Subsection (a) must be provided for each vacant building located at
that address.
   (c)   A registrant shall notify the director within 10 days after any
material change in the information contained in the application for a
certificate of registration for a vacant building, including any changes in
ownership of the property. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 32145)
SEC. 48B-8.   REGISTRATION FEE AND INSPECTION CHARGE.
   (a)   The fee for a certificate of registration for a vacant building in the
central business district is $79, plus an inspection charge in an amount equal
to $185.64 + ($0.009282 x total square feet of building area, excluding
stairwells, elevator shafts, and mechanical rooms.
   (b)   If one certificate of registration is issued for multiple vacant
structures located at the same address, the inspection charge will be
calculated using the aggregate area in square feet of all the vacant buildings.
   (c)   If a certificate of registration expires under Section
48B-12 and the registration term was less than six months, then the
registration fee (minus the inspection charge) may be prorated on the basis of
whole months and partially refunded to the registrant, if the director receives
a written request for the refund from the registrant within 90 days after
expiration of the certificate of registration. If a certificate of registration
expires under Section
48B-12 and no inspection was conducted by the city during the registration
term, then the full inspection charge may be refunded, if the director receives
a written request for the refund from the registrant within 90 days after
expiration of the certificate of registration. Otherwise, no refund of a
registration fee or inspection charge will be made. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 29879;
31332; 32145)
SEC. 48B-9.   ISSUANCE, DENIAL, AND DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Upon payment of all required fees, the director shall issue a
certificate of registration for a vacant building in the central business
district to the applicant if the director determines that:
      (1)   the applicant has complied with all requirements for issuance of
the certificate of registration;
      (2)   the applicant has not made a false statement as to a material
matter in an application for a certificate of registration; and
      (3)   the applicant has no outstanding fees assessed under this chapter.
   (b)   If the director determines that the requirements of Subsection (a)
have not been met, the director shall deny a certificate of registration to the
applicant.
   (c)   If the director determines that an applicant should be denied a
certificate of registration, the director shall deliver written notice to the
applicant that the application is denied and include in the notice the reason
for denial and a statement informing the applicant of the right of appeal.
   (d)   A certificate of registration issued under this section must be
displayed to the public in a manner and location approved by the director. The
certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the director or
to a peace officer for examination. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 32145)
SEC. 48B-10.   REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The director shall revoke a certificate of registration for a vacant
building in the central business district if the director determines that:
      (1)   the registrant failed to comply with any provision of this chapter
or any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to the building;
      (2)   the registrant intentionally made a false statement as to a
material matter in the application or in a hearing concerning the certificate
of registration; or
      (3)   the registrant failed to pay a fee required by this chapter at the
time it was due.
   (b)   Before revoking a certificate of registration under Subsection (a),
the director shall deliver written notice to the registrant that the
certificate of registration is being considered for revocation. The notice must
include the reason for the proposed revocation, action the registrant must take
to prevent the revocation, and a statement that the registrant has 10 days
after the date of delivery to comply with the notice.
   (c)   If, after 10 days from the date the notice required in Subsection (b)
is delivered, the registrant has not complied with the notice, the director
shall revoke the certificate of registration and deliver written notice of the
revocation to the registrant. The notice must include the reason for the
revocation, the date the director orders the revocation, and a statement
informing the registrant of the right of appeal. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 32145)
SEC. 48B-11.   APPEALS.
   If the director denies issuance or renewal of a certificate of registration
or revokes a certificate of registration, this action is final unless the
applicant or registrant files an appeal with a permit and license appeal board
in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. 27248)
SEC. 48B-12.   EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   A certificate of registration for a vacant building in the central
business district expires the earlier of:
      (1)   one year after the date of issuance;
      (2)   the date the vacant building changes controlling ownership, as
determined by the director;
      (3)   the date the vacant building becomes occupied, as determined by the
director; or
      (4)   the date the vacant building is demolished, as determined by the
director.
   (b)   A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in
accordance with Section
48B-7 and paying the registration fee and inspection charge required by Section
48B-8. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the certificate of registration. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 32145)
SEC. 48B-13.   NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   A certificate of registration for a vacant building in the central business
district is not transferable. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 32145)
SEC. 48B-14.   PROPERTY INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this chapter or
any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to the building
exist, the director is authorized at a reasonable time to inspect:
      (1)   the exterior of a vacant building; and
      (2)   the interior of a vacant building, if the permission of the owner,
operator, or other person in control is given or a search warrant is obtained.
   (b)   The director shall inspect a vacant building at least once during each
12-month period that the building is not occupied.
   (c)   An applicant or registrant shall permit representatives of the police
department, the fire department, the department of code compliance, and the
building official to inspect the interior and exterior of a vacant building,
for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at reasonable times upon
request. The applicant or registrant commits an offense if he, either
personally or through an agent or employee, refuses to permit a lawful
inspection of the vacant building as required by this subsection.
   (d)   Whenever a vacant building is inspected by the director and a
violation of this chapter or any other city ordinance or state or federal law
applicable to the building is found, the building or premises will, after the
expiration of any time limit for compliance given in a notice or order issued
because of the violation, be reinspected by the director to determine that the
violation has been eliminated. (Ord. 27248; 27697)
ARTICLE III.
MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS FOR VACANT BUILDINGS LOCATED IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT.
SEC. 48B-15.   EMERGENCY RESPONSE INFORMATION.
   (a)   An owner, operator, or other person in control of a vacant building in
the central business district shall provide the director with the name, street
address, mailing address, and telephone number of a person or persons who can
be contacted 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of an emergency
condition in or on the premises of the vacant building. An emergency condition
includes any fire, natural disaster, collapse hazard, burst pipe, serious
police incident, or other condition that requires an immediate response to
prevent harm to property or the public.
   (b)   The owner, operator, or other person in control of the vacant building
shall notify the director within five days after any change in the emergency
response information.
   (c)   The owner, operator, or other person in control of a vacant building,
or an authorized agent, must arrive at the premises within one hour after a
contact person named under this section is notified by the city or emergency
response personnel that an emergency condition has occurred on the premises.
   (d)   A sign containing the emergency contact information required in
Subsection (a) of this section must be attached in a conspicuous location on
the exterior of each facade of the vacant building that faces a public right-
of-way.
   (e)   The sign required by Subsection (d) must:
      (1)   comply with the city’s sign regulations;
      (2)   be 24 inches tall and 18 inches wide and constructed of a rigid
weather- resistant material;
      (3)   contain the words “VACANT BUILDING” in 2-3/8-inch-high and two-
inch-wide black letters on a bright yellow background followed by the
information required in Subsection (a) in one-inch-high black letters on a
bright yellow background;
      (4)   be in a format approved by the director; and
      (5)   be readable day and night.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if he removes or obstructs or allows the
removal or obstruction of a sign required to be posted on a vacant building
under this section. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that
the removal or obstruction was caused by:
      (1)   a city employee in the performance of official duties; or
      (2)   the owner, operator, or lessee of the vacant building for the
purpose of:
         (A)   repairing or maintaining the sign;
         (B)   complying with this chapter or a rule or regulation promulgated
under this chapter; or
         (C)   removing the sign when registration of the vacant building is no
longer required under this chapter.
    (g)   A minor variation of a required or minimum height or width of a sign
or lettering is not a violation of this section. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 32145)
SEC. 48B-16.   INSURANCE.
   (a)   The registrant shall procure, prior to the issuance of a certificate
of registration, and keep in full force and effect at all times during the
registration term, commercial general liability insurance coverage (including,
but not limited to, premises/operations and personal and advertising injury)
protecting the city of Dallas against any and all claims for damages to persons
or property as a result of, or arising out of, the registrant’s operation,
maintenance, or use of the vacant building, with minimum combined bodily injury
(including death) and property damage limits of not less than $1,000,000 for
each occurrence and $2,000,000 annual aggregate.
   (b)   The insurance policy must be written by an insurance company approved
by the State of Texas and acceptable to the city and issued in a standard form
approved by the Texas Department of Insurance. All provisions of the policy
must be acceptable to the city and must name the city and its officers and
employees as additional insureds and provide for 30 days written notice to the
director of cancellation, non-renewal, or material change to the insurance
policy.
   (c)   A registrant shall provide to the director an updated certificate of
insurance for the vacant building every six months that the building is
required to be registered under this chapter. (Ord. 27248, eff. 9-1-08)
SEC. 48B-17.   VACANT BUILDING PLAN.
   (a)   Within 30 days after the date a certificate of registration is issued
for a vacant building in the central business district, the registrant shall
submit to the director a vacant building plan complying with this section.
   (b)   The vacant building plan must contain the following:
      (1)   A plan of action and a time schedule for correcting all existing
violations of this chapter or any other city ordinance or state or federal law
applicable to the building or its premises.
      (2)   A plan of action for maintaining the building and its premises in
compliance with this chapter and all applicable city ordinances and state and
federal laws.
      (3)   A plan of action for maintaining the building and its premises in a
safe and secure manner, including but not limited to any provisions for
lighting, security patrols, alarm systems, fire suppression systems, and
securing the building from unauthorized entry.
      (4)   A plan of action for occupying or selling the building, including
but not limited to a time schedule for renovating or repairing the building and
a time schedule for marketing, advertising, or offering the building for sale
or lease.
      (5)   A plan of action and time schedule for any demolition of the
building.
   (c)   A registrant may update the vacant building plan at any time, but
shall provide the director with an updated vacant building plan at least once
every six months that the building is required to be registered under this
chapter. (Ord. Nos. 27248; 32145)
ARTICLE IV.
REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF VACANT LOTS AND BUILDINGS LOCATED OUTSIDE THE
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
SEC. 48B-18.   SCOPE.
   The provisions of this article apply to all vacant lots and buildings
located outside of the central business district. (Ord. 32145)
SEC. 48B-19.   REGISTRATION REQUIRED; DEFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a vacant
building or vacant lot located outside the central business district without a
valid certificate of registration and has at least two non-complied property
maintenance violations during any six-month period. A separate certificate of
registration is required for each street address at which any vacant building
or vacant lot is located, regardless of any separate occupied buildings or
vacant lots that may also be located at the same street address. If more than
one vacant building is located at the same street address, a certificate of
registration is required for each separate vacant building. Suite numbers and
apartment unit numbers will not be considered in determining the street address
of a vacant building or lot.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
      (1)   the building was occupied within the 45-day period preceding the
date of the alleged offense;
      (2)   at the time of the alleged offense, the building was in the process
of being renovated, rehabilitated, repaired, or demolished (pursuant to
appropriate and valid permits issued by the building official, if required) and
had been occupied within the 90-day period preceding the date of the alleged
offense;
      (3)   at the time of the alleged offense, the vacant building or vacant
lot was in the process of being actively marketed and advertised for lease or
sale and had been occupied within the 90-day period preceding the date of the
alleged offense;
      (4)   within the 90-day period preceding the date of the alleged offense,
the building suffered damage or destruction from a fire, flood, storm, or
similar event that rendered the building incapable of being occupied, except
that this defense does not apply if the building was rendered incapable of
being occupied by the intentional act of the owner, operator, lessee, or other
invitee or an agent of the owner, operator, lessee, or other invitee; or
      (5)   the vacant building or vacant lot is owned by the city of Dallas,
the State of Texas, or the United States government or is a site primarily
utilized as farm or agricultural land. (Ord. 32145)
SEC. 48B-20.   REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a certification of registration for a vacant building or
vacant lot under this article, a person must submit an application on a form
provided for that purpose to the director. The applicant must be the person who
will own, control, or operate the vacant building or vacant lot. The
application must contain all of the following information:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, email address, and
telephone number of the applicant and the applicant's authorized agent, if
applicable.
      (2)   The name, street address, email address, and telephone number of a
person or person to contact in an emergency as required by Section
48B-28 of this chapter.
      (3)   The number of buildings (including vacant and occupied buildings,
dwelling units, swimming pools, and spas located in or on the premises of the
vacant building). (Ord. 32145)
SEC. 48B-21.   REGISTRATION FEE AND INSPECTION CHARGE.
   (a)   The fee for a certificate of registration for a vacant building or
vacant lot is as follows:
      (1)   Basic property registration is $124.00
      (2)   Problem property registration is $196.00.
   (b)   When a vacant lot or vacant building is classified as a problem
property, the owner of the property may be subject to monthly monitoring and
inspections for the purpose of enforcing and ensuring compliance with this
section and other applicable regulations. A separate fee of $219 will be
assessed each time the property is inspected and a property maintenance
violation is present. The inspection fee will be assessed when:
      (1)   responding to a complaint received by code compliance and a
property maintenance violation is present;
      (2)   performing a 30-day monitoring inspection and a property
maintenance violation is present; or
      (3)   performing a reinspection of the property and the property
maintenance violation has not been corrected. (Ord. Nos. 32145; 32556)
SEC. 48B-22.   ISSUANCE, DENIAL, AND DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Upon payment of all required fees, the director shall issue a
certificate of registration for a vacant building or vacant lot to the
applicant if the director determines that:
      (1)   the applicant has complied with all requirements for issuance of
the certificate of registration;
      (2)   the applicant has not made a false statement as to a material
matter in an application of a certification of registration; and
      (3)   the applicant has no outstanding fees under this chapter.
   (b)   A certificate of registration issued under this section must be
displayed to the public in a manner and location approved by the director. The
certificate of registration must be presented upon request by the director or
to a peace officer for examination. (Ord. 32145)
SEC. 48B-23.   REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The director shall revoke a certificate of registration for a vacant
building or vacant lot issued under this article if the director determines
that:
      (1)   the registrant failed to comply with any provision of this chapter
or any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to the building;
      (2)   the registrant intentionally made a false statement as to a
material matter in the application or in a hearing concerning the certificate
of registration; or
      (3)   the registrant failed to pay a fee required by this chapter at the
time it was due.
   (b)   Before revoking a certificate of registration under Subsection (a),
the director shall deliver written notice to the registrant that the
certificate of registration is being considered for revocation. The notice must
include the reason for the proposed revocation, action the registrant must take
to prevent the revocation, and a statement that the registrant has 10 days
after the date of delivery to comply with the notice.
   (c)   If, after 10 days from the date the notice required in Subsection (b)
is delivered, the registrant has not complied with the notice, the director
shall revoke the certificate of registration and deliver written notice of the
revocation to the registrant. The notice must include the reason for the
revocation, the date the director orders the revocation, and a statement
informing the registrant of the right of appeal. (Ord. 32145)
SEC. 48B-24.   APPEALS.
   If the director denies issuance or renewal of a certificate of registration
or revokes a certificate of registration, this action is final unless the
applicant or registrant files an appeal with the permit and license appeal
board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. 32145)
SEC. 48B-25.   EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   A certificate of registration for a vacant building or vacant lot
expires the earlier of:
      (1)   one year after the date of issuance;
      (2)   the date the vacant building or vacant lot changes controlling
ownership, as determined by the director;
      (3)   the date the vacant building becomes occupied, as determined by the
director;
      (4)   the date the vacant building is demolished, as determined by the
director; or
      (5)   the date the owner of a vacant lot receives an approved building
permit from the city's building official to build, construct, or erect an
edifice or building that is intended to be legally occupied.
   (b)   A certificate of registration may be renewed by making an application
in accordance with Section
48B-20 and paying the registration fee and inspection charge required by
Section
48B-21. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the certificate of registration. (Ord. 32145)
SEC. 48B-26.   NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   A certificate of registration for a vacant building or vacant lot is not
transferable. (Ord. 32145)
SEC. 48B-27.   PROPERTY INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this chapter or
any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to the vacant
building or vacant lot exist, the director is authorized at a reasonable time
to inspect:
      (1)   the vacant lot;
      (2)   the exterior of a vacant building; and
      (3)   the interior of a vacant building, if the permission of the owner,
operator, or other person in control is given or a search warrant is obtained.
   (b)   The director shall inspect a vacant building located outside the
central business district or a vacant lot at least once during each 12-month
period that the building is not occupied or lot that does not have a permitted
structure.
   (c)   An applicant or registrant shall permit representatives of the police
department, the fire department, the department of code compliance, and the
building official to inspect the interior and exterior of a vacant building, or
vacant lot for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at reasonable
times upon request. The applicant or registrant commits an offense if he,
either personally or through an agent or employee, refuses to permit a lawful
inspection of the vacant building or vacant lot as required by this subsection.
   (d)   When a vacant building or vacant lot is inspected by the director and
a violation of this chapter or any other city ordinance or state or federal law
applicable to the building or lot is found, the building or premises will,
after the expiration of any time limit for compliance given in a notice or
order issued because of the violation, be reinspected by the director to
determine that the violation has been eliminated. (Ord. 32145)
SEC. 48B-28.    EMERGENCY RESPONSE INFORMATION FOR PROBLEM PROPERTIES.
   (a)   An owner, operator, or other person in control of a vacant building or
vacant lot that is required to register as a problem property shall provide the
director with the name, street address, mailing address, email address, and
telephone number of a person or persons who can be contacted 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, in the event of an emergency condition in or on the premises
of the vacant building or vacant lot. An emergency condition includes any fire,
natural disaster, collapse hazard, burst pipe, serious police incident, or
other condition that requires an immediate response to prevent harm to property
or the public.
   (b)   The owner, operator, or other person in control of the vacant building
or vacant lot shall notify the director within five days after any change in
the emergency response information.
   (c)   The owner, operator, or other person in control of a vacant building
or vacant lot, or an authorized agent, must arrive at the premises within one
hour after a contact person named under this section is notified by the city or
emergency response personnel that an emergency condition has occurred on the
premises.
   (d)   A sign containing the emergency contact information required in
Subsection (a) of this section must be attached in a conspicuous location on
the exterior of each facade of the vacant building or vacant lot that faces a
public right-of-way.
   (e)   The sign required by Subsection (d) must:
      (1)   comply with the city's sign regulations;
      (2)   be a minimum of four feet tall and four feet wide, not to exceed 20
square feet;
      (3)   be less than eight feet in height;
      (4)   have lettering not less than six inches high and six inches wide in
black font on a yellow background;
      (5)   be constructed of rigid weather-resistant material;
      (6)   be readable day and night; and
      (7)   be clearly visible from the public right-of-way.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if he removes or obstructs or allows the
removal or obstruction of a sign required to be posted on a vacant building or
vacant lot under this section. It is a defense to prosecution under this
subsection that the removal or obstruction was caused by:
      (1)   a city employee in the performance of official duties; or
      (2)   the owner, operator, or lessee of the vacant building for the
purpose of:
         (A)   repairing or maintaining the sign;
         (B)   complying with this chapter or a rule or regulation promulgated
under this chapter; or
         (C)   removing the sign when registration of the vacant building or
vacant lot is no longer required under this chapter.
   (g)   A minor variation of a required or minimum height or width of a sign
or lettering is not a violation of this section. (Ord. 32145)
CHAPTER 48C
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICE
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
48C-1.   Statement of policy.
Sec.
48C-2.   General authority and duty of director.
Sec.
48C-3.   Establishment of rules and regulations.
Sec.
48C-4.   Exceptions.
Sec.
48C-5.   Definitions.
ARTICLE II.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICE LICENSE.
Sec.
48C-6.   License required; application.
Sec.
48C-7.   License qualifications.
Sec.
48C-8.   License issuance; fee; display; transferability; expiration.
Sec.
48C-9.   Refusal to issue or renew license.
Sec.
48C-10.   Suspension of license.
Sec.
48C-11.   Revocation of license.
Sec.
48C-12.   Appeals.
ARTICLE III.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR’S PERMIT.
Sec.
48C-13.   Vehicle immobilization operator’s permit required.
Sec.
48C-14.   Qualifications for a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit.
Sec.
48C-15.   Application for vehicle immobilization operator’s permit; fee.
Sec.
48C-16.   Investigation of application.
Sec.
48C-17.   Issuance and denial of vehicle immobilization operator’s permit.
Sec.
48C-18.   Expiration of vehicle immobilization operator’s permit.
Sec.
48C-19.   Provisional permit.
Sec.
48C-20.   Probationary permit.
Sec.
48C-21.   Duplicate permit.
Sec.
48C-22.   Display of permit.
Sec.
48C-23.   Suspension by a designated representative.
Sec.
48C-24.   Suspension of vehicle immobilization operator’s permit.
Sec.
48C-25.   Revocation of vehicle immobilization operator’s permit.
Sec.
48C-26.   Immobilizing a vehicle after suspension or revocation.
Sec.
48C-27.   Appeal from denial, suspension, or revocation.
ARTICLE IV.
MISCELLANEOUS LICENSEE AND OPERATOR REGULATIONS.
Sec.
48C-28.   Licensee’s and operator’s duty to comply.
Sec.
48C-29.   Licensee’s duty to enforce compliance by operators.
Sec.
48C-30.   Insurance.
Sec.
48C-31.   Information to be supplied upon request of director.
Sec.
48C-32.   Vehicle immobilization service records.
Sec.
48C-33.   Failure to pay ad valorem taxes.
ARTICLE V.
SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Sec.
48C-34.   Apparel to be worn by vehicle immobilization operators.
Sec.
48C-35.   Immobilization of vehicles on public rights-of-way.
Sec.
48C-36.   Immobilization of authorized vehicles prohibited.
Sec.
48C-37.   Financial interests of parking lot owner and licensee prohibited.
Sec.
48C-38.   Requirement for parking fee receipt.
Sec.
48C-39.   Requirements for parking lot attendants.
Sec.
48C-40.   Requirements for posting signs.
Sec.
48C-41.   Requirements for immobilization.
Sec.
48C-42.   Requirements for installation and removal of a boot.
Sec.
48C-43.   Notification of vehicle owner.
ARTICLE VI.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICE FEES.
Sec.
48C-44.   Maximum fee schedule; receipt for payment of immobilization fee and
outstanding parking fees.
ARTICLE VII.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION EQUIPMENT.
Sec.
48C-45.   Vehicle immobilization equipment.
ARTICLE VIII.
ENFORCEMENT.
Sec.
48C-46.   Authority to inspect.
Sec.
48C-47.   Enforcement by police department.
Sec.
48C-48.   Correction order.
Sec.
48C-49.   Service of notice.
Sec.
48C-50.   Appeal.
Sec.
48C-51.   Offenses.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 48C-1.   STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide for the protection of the public
interest as it relates to the parking of vehicles on parking lots and to the
immobilization of those vehicles by applying a boot to a vehicle without the
consent of the vehicle owner or operator. To this end, this chapter provides
for the regulation of vehicle immobilization service, to be administered in a
manner that protects the public health and safety and promotes the public
convenience and necessity. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-2.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this chapter and may by written
order establish such rules and regulations, consistent with this chapter, as
may be determined necessary to discharge the director’s duty under, or to
effect the policy of, this chapter. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-3.   ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Before adopting, amending, or abolishing a rule or regulation, the
director shall hold a public hearing on the proposal.
   (b)   The director shall fix the time and place of the hearing and, in
addition to notice required under the Open Meetings Act (Chapter 551, Texas
Government Code), as amended, shall notify each licensee and such other persons
as the director determines are interested in the subject matter of the hearing.
   (c)   After the public hearing, the director shall notify the licensees and
other interested persons of the action taken and shall post an order adopting,
amending, or abolishing a rule or regulation on the official bulletin board in
the city hall for a period of not fewer than 10 days. The order becomes
effective immediately upon expiration of the posting period. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-4.   EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to the immobilization of a vehicle by the city
as authorized under Section
28-5.1 of this code. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-5.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   BOOT means a lockable vehicle wheel clamp or similar device that is
designed to be placed on a parked vehicle to prevent the operation of the
vehicle until the device is unlocked and removed.
      (2)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (3)   CONVICTION means a conviction in a federal court or court of any
state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation
that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned.
      (4)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this chapter, and includes
representatives, agents, and department employees designated by the director.
      (5)   IMMOBILIZE means to place a boot on a parked vehicle to prevent the
operation of the vehicle until the boot is unlocked and removed. The term
includes any installation, adjustment, or removal of a boot.
      (6)   LAWFUL ORDER means a verbal or written directive that:
         (A)   is issued by the director in the performance of official duties
in the enforcement of this chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated
under this chapter; and
         (B)   does not violate the United States Constitution or the Texas
Constitution.
      (7)   LICENSEE means a person licensed under this chapter to engage in
vehicle immobilization service. The term includes any owner or operator of the
licensed business.
      (8)   PARKING LOT means public or private property (other than public
right-of-way) that is used, wholly or in part, for paid motor vehicle parking
where payment for the parking is made:
         (A)   at the time of parking; and
         (B)   to a pay station or a uniformed parking lot attendant.
      (9)   PARKING LOT OWNER means a person, or the person’s agent or lessee,
who holds legal title, deed, or right of occupancy to a parking lot, but does
not include a vehicle immobilization service licensee or an employee or
representative of a vehicle immobilization service licensee.
      (10)   PERMITTEE means an individual who has been issued a vehicle
immobilization operator’s permit under this chapter.
      (11)   PERSON means an individual, assumed name entity, partnership,
joint-venture, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
      (12)   POLICE DEPARTMENT means the police department of the city of
Dallas.
      (13)   PROPERTY ENTRANCE means any point located on a parking lot that is
designed to provide access by a vehicle to the parking lot.
      (14)   RECEIPT means a decal, emblem, badge, sticker, ticket, or other
item given to a vehicle owner or operator as proof that the vehicle is
authorized to park on the parking lot.
      (15)   STREET means any public street, alley, road, right-of-way, or
other public way within the corporate limits of the city. The term includes all
paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way.
      (16)   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE means a vehicle that is parked, stored, or
located on a parking lot without having paid the parking fee required by the
parking lot owner for parking on the parking lot.
      (17)   VEHICLE means a device in, on, or by which a person or property
may be transported on a public street. The term includes, but is not limited
to, an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational
vehicle, or trailer, but does not include a device moved by human power or used
exclusively on a stationary rail or track.
      (18)   VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR means any individual who installs,
affixes, places, adjusts, or removes a boot on or from a vehicle.
      (19)   VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR’S PERMIT means a permit issued
under this chapter to an individual by the director authorizing that individual
to immobilize vehicles for a vehicle immobilization service in the city.
      (20)   VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICE means the business of immobilizing
an unauthorized vehicle on a parking lot.
      (21)   VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICE LICENSE means a license issued
under this chapter to a person by the director authorizing that person to
operate a vehicle immobilization service in the city.
      (22)   VEHICLE OWNER or OPERATOR means a person, or the designated agent
of a person, who:
         (A)   holds legal title to a vehicle, including any lienholder of
record; or
         (B)   has legal right of possession or legal control of a vehicle.
(Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
ARTICLE II.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICE LICENSE.
SEC. 48C-6.   LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, within the city, he, or his agent or
employee:
      (1)   engages in vehicle immobilization service on any property other
than a parking lot;
      (2)   engages in vehicle immobilization service without a valid vehicle
immobilization service license;
      (3)   causes a vehicle to be immobilized by a vehicle immobilization
service that does not hold a valid vehicle immobilization service license; or
      (4)   employs or contracts with a vehicle immobilization service not
licensed by the director under this article for the purpose of having a vehicle
immobilized.
   (b)   To obtain a vehicle immobilization service license, a person must make
written application to the director upon a form provided for that purpose. The
application must be signed by the person who will own, control, or operate the
proposed vehicle immobilization service. The application must be verified and
include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, the trade
name under which the applicant does business, and the street address and
telephone number of the vehicle immobilization service establishment.
      (2)   The number and type of boots utilized by the vehicle immobilization
service, including the make, model, and identification number.
      (3)   Documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating a
willingness to provide liability insurance as required by this chapter.
      (4)   A statement attesting that each boot and other vehicle
immobilization equipment used by the vehicle immobilization service has been
rendered for ad valorem taxation in the city and that the applicant is current
on payment of those taxes.
      (5)   A list, to be kept current, of the owners and management personnel
of the vehicle immobilization service, and of all employees who will
participate in vehicle immobilization service, including names, dates of birth,
state driver’s license numbers, social security numbers, and vehicle
immobilization operator’s permit numbers.
      (6)   A list of what methods of payment the applicant will accept from a
vehicle owner or operator for removal of a boot.
      (7)   Proof of a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the city in the
name of the company and for the location of the vehicle immobilization service
business.
      (8)   Any other information deemed necessary by the director.
      (9)   A nonrefundable application processing fee of $91.
   (c)   A person desiring to engage in vehicle immobilization service shall
register with the director a trade name that clearly differentiates the
person’s company from all other companies engaging in vehicle immobilization
service and shall use no other trade name for the vehicle immobilization
service. (Ord. Nos. 27629; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 48C-7.   LICENSE QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   To qualify for a vehicle immobilization service license, an applicant
must:
      (1)   be at least 19 years of age;
      (2)   be currently authorized to work full- time in the United States;
      (3)   be able to communicate in the English language;
      (4)   not have been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   criminal homicide as described in Chapter 19 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (ii)   kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal
Code;
            (iii)   a sexual offense as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (iv)   an assaultive offense as described in Chapter 22 of the
Texas Penal Code;
            (v)   robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (vi)   burglary as described in Chapter 30 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle immobilization service;
            (vii)   theft as described in Chapter 31 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle immobilization service;
            (viii)   fraud as described in Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle immobilization service;
            (ix)   tampering with a governmental record as described in Chapter
37 of the Texas Penal Code, but only if the offense was committed against a
person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in vehicle
immobilization service;
            (x)   public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in
Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (xi)   the transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in
violation of Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal Code, or of any comparable state or
federal law, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the
applicable law;
            (xii)   a violation of the Dangerous Drugs Act (Chapter 483, Texas
Health and Safety Code), or of any comparable state or federal law, but only if
the violation is punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xiii)   a violation of the Controlled Substances Act (Chapter 481,
Texas Health and Safety Code), or of any comparable state or federal law, but
only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xiv)   criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in
Subdivision (4)(A)(i) through (xiii) of this subsection; and
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony
offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the
applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination
of misdemeanor offenses;
      (5)   not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics;
      (6)   be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest; and
      (7)   not employ any person who is not qualified under this subsection.
   (b)   An applicant who has been convicted of, or who employs a person who
has been convicted of, an offense listed in Subsection (a)(4), for which the
required time period has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of
release from confinement imposed for the conviction, may qualify for a vehicle
immobilization service license only if the director determines that the
applicant, or the employee, is presently fit to engage in the business of a
vehicle immobilization service. In determining present fitness under this
section, the director shall consider the following:
      (1)   the extent and nature of the applicant’s, or employee’s, past
criminal activity;
      (2)   the age of the applicant, or employee, at the time of the
commission of the crime;
      (3)   the amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant’s, or
employee’s, last criminal activity;
      (4)   the conduct and work activity of the applicant, or employee, prior
to and following the criminal activity;
      (5)   evidence of the applicant’s, or employee’s, rehabilitation or
rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; and
      (6)   other evidence of the applicant’s, or employee’s, present fitness,
including letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and
correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility
for the applicant, or employee; the sheriff and chief of police in the
community where the applicant, or employee, resides; and any other persons in
contact with the applicant, or employee.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to
secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present
fitness under Subsection (b) of this section.
   (d)   A licensee shall maintain a permanent and established place of
business at a location within the city where a vehicle immobilization service
is not prohibited by the Dallas Development Code. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-8.   LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEE; DISPLAY; TRANSFERABILITY; EXPIRATION.
   (a)   The director shall, within 30 days after the date of application,
issue a vehicle immobilization service license to an applicant who complies
with the provisions of this article.
   (b)   A license issued to a vehicle immobilization service authorizes the
licensee and any bona fide employee to engage in vehicle immobilization
service.
   (c)   The annual fee for a vehicle immobilization service license is $109,
prorated on the basis of whole months. The fee for issuing a duplicate license
for one lost, destroyed, or mutilated is $22. The fee is payable to the
director upon issuance of a license. No refund of a license fee will be made.
   (d)   A vehicle immobilization service license issued pursuant to this
article must be conspicuously displayed in the vehicle immobilization service
establishment.
   (e)   A vehicle immobilization service license, or any accompanying permit,
badge, sticker, ticket, or emblem, is not assignable or transferable.
   (f)   A vehicle immobilization service license expires June 30 of each year
and may be renewed by applying in accordance with Section
48C-6. Application for renewal must be made not less than 30 days or more than
60 days before expiration of the license and must be accompanied by the annual
license fee. (Ord. Nos. 27629; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 48C-9.   REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW LICENSE.
   (a)   The director shall refuse to issue or renew a vehicle immobilization
service license if the applicant or licensee:
      (1)   intentionally or knowingly makes a false statement as to a material
matter in an application for a license or license renewal, or in a hearing
concerning the license;
      (2)   has been convicted twice within a 12- month period or three times
within a 24-month period for violation of this chapter or has had a vehicle
immobilization service license revoked within two years prior to the date of
application;
      (3)   uses a trade name for the vehicle immobilization service other than
the one registered with the director;
      (4)   has had a vehicle immobilization service license suspended on three
occasions within 12 months for more than three days on each occasion;
      (5)   has been finally convicted for violation of another city, state, or
federal law that indicates a lack of fitness of the applicant to perform
vehicle immobilization service.
      (6)   fails to meet the service standards in the rules and regulations
established by the director;
      (7)   is not qualified under Section
48C-7 of this article; or
      (8)   uses a subcontractor to provide vehicle immobilization service.
   (b)   If the director determines that a license should be denied the
applicant or licensee, the director shall notify the applicant or licensee in
writing that the application is denied and include in the notice the specific
reason or reasons for denial and a statement informing the applicant or
licensee of the right to, and process for, appeal of the decision. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-10.   SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The director may suspend a vehicle immobilization service license for
a definite period of time not to exceed 30 days or, if the deficiency is
detrimental to public safety, then for a period of time until the deficiency is
corrected, for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure of the licensee to maintain any vehicle immobilization
equipment in a good and safe working condition.
      (2)   Violation by the licensee or an employee of the licensee of a
provision of this chapter or of the rules and regulations established by the
director under this chapter.
      (3)   Failure of the licensee’s operator to arrive at a parking lot
within 30 minutes after the time the licensee is notified to do so by the
vehicle owner or operator or the owner or operator’s representative.
   (b)   Written notice of the suspension must be served on the licensee and
must include the reason for suspension, the date the suspension begins, the
duration of the suspension, and a statement informing the licensee of the right
of appeal.
   (c)   The period of suspension begins on the date specified in the notice of
suspension or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the permit and
license appeal board, whichever applies.
   (d)   A licensee whose vehicle immobilization service license is suspended
shall not operate a vehicle immobilization service inside the city during the
period of suspension. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-11.   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The director shall revoke a vehicle immobilization service license if the
director determines that the licensee has:
      (1)   intentionally or knowingly made a false statement as to a material
matter in the application or hearing concerning the license;
      (2)   intentionally or knowingly failed to comply with applicable
provisions of this chapter or with the conditions and limitations of the
license;
      (3)   operated a vehicle immobilization service not authorized by the
license or other applicable law;
      (4)   been finally convicted for violation of another city, state, or
federal law that indicates a lack of fitness of the licensee to perform vehicle
immobilization service;
      (5)   is under indictment for or has been convicted of any felony offense
while holding a license;
      (6)   does not qualify for a license under Section
48C-7 of this chapter;
      (7)   failed to pay a license fee required under this chapter; or
      (8)   violated Section
48C-44(c)(1) or (2) of this chapter. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-12.   APPEALS.
   Any person whose application for a license or license renewal is denied by
the director, or a licensee whose license has been revoked or suspended by the
director, may file an appeal with the permit and license appeal board in
accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
ARTICLE III.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR’S PERMIT.
SEC. 48C-13.   VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR’S PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he immobilizes a vehicle for a vehicle
immobilization service in the city without a valid vehicle immobilization
operator’s permit.
   (b)   A licensee commits an offense if he employs or otherwise allows a
person to immobilize a vehicle using a boot or other vehicle immobilization
equipment owned, controlled, or operated by the licensee unless the person has
a valid vehicle immobilization operator’s permit. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-14.   QUALIFICATIONS FOR A VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR’S PERMIT.
   (a)   To qualify for a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit, an
applicant must:
      (1)   be at least 19 years of age;
      (2)   be currently authorized to work full- time in the United States;
      (3)   be able to communicate in the English language;
      (4)   not have been convicted of a crime:
         (A)   involving:
            (i)   criminal homicide as described in Chapter 19 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (ii)   kidnapping as described in Chapter 20 of the Texas Penal
Code;
            (iii)   a sexual offense as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas
Penal Code;
            (iv)   an assaultive offense as described in Chapter 22 of the
Texas Penal Code;
            (v)   robbery as described in Chapter 29 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (vi)   burglary as described in Chapter 30 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle immobilization service;
            (vii)   theft as described in Chapter 31 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle immobilization service;
            (viii)   fraud as described in Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code,
but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant
came in contact while engaged in vehicle immobilization service;
            (ix)   tampering with a governmental record as described in Chapter
37 of the Texas Penal Code, but only if the offense was committed against a
person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in vehicle
immobilization service;
            (x)   public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in
Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code;
            (xi)   the transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in
violation of Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal Code, or of any comparable state or
federal law, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the
applicable law;
            (xii)   a violation of the Dangerous Drugs Act (Chapter 483, Texas
Health and Safety Code), or of any comparable state or federal law, that is
punishable as a felony under the applicable law;
            (xiii)   a violation of the Controlled Substances Act (Chapter 481,
Texas Health and Safety Code), or of any comparable state or federal law, that
is punishable as a felony under the applicable law; or
            (xiv)   criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in
Subdivision (4)(A)(i) through (xiii) of this subsection;
         (B)   for which:
            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense;
            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony
offense; or
            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the
applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination
of misdemeanor offenses;
      (5)   not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics;
      (6)   be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest;
      (7)   be sanitary and well-groomed in dress and person; and
      (8)   be employed by the licensee.
   (b)   An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in Subsection
(a)(4) for which the required time period has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
may qualify for a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit only if the director
determines that the applicant is presently fit to engage in the occupation of
vehicle immobilization. In determining present fitness under this section, the
director shall consider the following:
      (1)   the extent and nature of the applicant’s past criminal activity;
      (2)   the age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the
crime;
      (3)   the amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant’s last
criminal activity;
      (4)   the conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and
following the criminal activity;
      (5)   evidence of the applicant’s rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort
while incarcerated or following release; and
      (6)   other evidence of the applicant’s present fitness, including
letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional
officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the
applicant; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the applicant
resides; and any other persons in contact with the applicant.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to
secure and provide to the director the evidence required to determine present
fitness under Subsection (b) of this section and under Section
48C-20 of this article. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-15.   APPLICATION FOR VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR’S PERMIT; FEE.
   To obtain a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit, or renewal of a
vehicle immobilization operator’s permit, a person must file with the director
a completed written application on a form provided for the purpose and a
nonrefundable application fee of $68. The director shall require each
application to state such information as the director reasonably considers
necessary to determine whether an applicant is qualified. (Ord. Nos. 27629;
30215; 33232)
SEC. 48C-16.   INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.
   (a)   The director shall obtain a current official criminal history report
(issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety within the preceding 12
months) on each applicant to determine the applicant’s qualification under
Section
48C-14. The director shall obtain a list of any warrants of arrest for the
applicant that might be outstanding.
   (b)   The director may conduct such other investigation as the director
considers necessary to determine whether an applicant for a vehicle
immobilization operator’s permit is qualified.
   (c)   The director shall provide the applicant, upon written request, a copy
of all materials contained in the applicant’s file to the extent allowed under
the Public Information Act (Chapter 552, Texas Government Code), as amended.
(Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-17.   ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR’S PERMIT.
   (a)   The director shall issue a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit to
an applicant, unless the director determines that the applicant is not
qualified.
   (b)   The director shall delay until final adjudication the approval of the
application of any applicant who is under indictment for or has charges pending
for a felony offense involving a crime described in Section
48C-14(a)(4)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) or criminal attempt to commit any
of those offenses.
   (c)   The director shall deny the application for a vehicle immobilization
operator’s permit if the applicant:
      (1)   is not qualified under Section
48C-14; or
      (2)   intentionally or knowingly makes a false statement of a material
fact in an application for a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit.
   (d)   If the director determines that a permit should be denied the
applicant, the director shall notify the applicant in writing that the
application is denied and include in the notice the specific reason or reasons
for denial and a statement informing the applicant of the right to, and process
for, appeal of the decision. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-18.   EXPIRATION OF VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR’S PERMIT.
   Except in the case of a probationary or provisional permit, a vehicle
immobilization operator’s permit expires one year after the date of issuance.
(Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-19.   PROVISIONAL PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may issue a provisional vehicle immobilization operator’s
permit if the director determines that it is necessary pending completion of
investigation of an applicant for a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit.
   (b)   A provisional vehicle immobilization operator’s permit expires on the
date shown on the permit, which date shall not exceed 45 days after the date of
issuance, or on the date the applicant is denied a vehicle immobilization
operator’s permit, whichever occurs first.
   (c)   The director shall not issue a provisional permit to a person who has
been previously denied a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-20.   PROBATIONARY PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may issue a probationary vehicle immobilization
operator’s permit to an applicant who is not qualified for a vehicle
immobilization operator’s permit under Section
48C-14 if the applicant:
      (1)   could qualify under Section
48C-14 for a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit within one year after the
date of application; and
      (2)   is determined by the director, using the criteria listed in Section
48C-14(b) of this article, to be presently fit to engage in the occupation of a
vehicle immobilization operator.
   (b)   A probationary vehicle immobilization operator’s permit may be issued
for a period not to exceed one year.
   (c)   The director may prescribe appropriate terms and conditions for a
probationary vehicle immobilization operator’s permit as the director
determines are necessary. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-21.   DUPLICATE PERMIT.
   If a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit is lost or destroyed, the
director shall issue the permittee a duplicate permit upon payment to the city
of a duplicate permit fee of $20. (Ord. Nos. 27629; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 48C-22.   DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   A vehicle immobilization operator shall at all times conspicuously display a
vehicle immobilization operator’s permit on the clothing of the driver’s upper
body. A vehicle immobilization operator shall allow the director or a peace
officer to examine the vehicle immobilization operator’s permit upon request.
(Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-23.   SUSPENSION BY A DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE.
   (a)   If a duly authorized representative designated by the director to
enforce this chapter determines that a permittee has failed to comply with this
chapter (except Section
48C-14) or a regulation established under this chapter, the representative may
suspend the vehicle immobilization operator’s permit for a period of time not
to exceed three days by personally serving the permittee with a written notice
of the suspension. The written notice must include the reason for suspension,
the date the suspension begins, the duration of the suspension, and a statement
informing the permittee of the right of appeal.
   (b)   A suspension under this section may be appealed to the director or the
director’s assistant if the permittee requests an appeal at the time the
representative serves notice of suspension or within 10 days after the notice
of suspension is served. When an appeal is requested, the suspension may not
take effect until a hearing is provided by the director or the director’s
assistant.
   (c)   The director may order an expedited hearing under this section, to be
held as soon as possible after the permittee requests an appeal, but at least
10 days advance notice of the hearing must be given to the permittee. The
director may affirm, reverse, or modify the order of the representative. The
decision of the director is final. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-24.   SUSPENSION OF VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR’S PERMIT.
   (a)   If the director determines that a permittee has failed to comply with
this chapter (except Section
48C-14) or any regulation established under this chapter, the director shall
suspend the vehicle immobilization operator’s permit for a definite period of
time not to exceed 60 days.
   (b)   If at any time the director determines that a permittee is not
qualified under Section
48C-14 or is under indictment or has charges pending for a felony offense
involving a crime described in Section
48C-14(a)(4)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) or criminal attempt to commit any
of those offenses, the director shall suspend the vehicle immobilization
operator’s permit until such time as the director determines that the permittee
is qualified or that the charges against the permittee have been finally
adjudicated.
   (c)   A permittee whose vehicle immobilization operator’s permit is
suspended shall not immobilize a vehicle inside the city during the period of
suspension.
   (d)   The director shall notify the permittee in writing of a suspension
under this section and include in the notice:
      (1)   the reason for the suspension;
      (2)   the date the suspension is to begin;
      (3)   the duration of the suspension; and
      (4)   a statement informing the permittee of the right of appeal.
   (e)   The period of suspension begins on the date specified by the director
or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the appeal hearing
officer. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-25.   REVOCATION OF VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATOR’S PERMIT.
   (a)   The director shall revoke a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit
if the director determines that a permittee:
      (1)   immobilized a vehicle inside the city during a period when the
vehicle immobilization operator’s permit was suspended;
      (2)   intentionally or knowingly made a false statement of a material
fact in an application for a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit;
      (3)   engaged in conduct that constitutes a ground for suspension under
Section
48C-24(a), and, at least two times within the 12-month period preceding the
conduct or three times within the 24-month period preceding the conduct, had
received either a suspension in excess of three days or a conviction for
violation of this chapter;
      (4)   engaged in conduct that could reasonably be determined to be
detrimental to the public safety;
      (5)   failed to comply with a condition of a probationary permit; or
      (6)   is under indictment for or has been convicted of any felony offense
while holding a vehicle immobilization operator’s permit.
   (b)   A person whose vehicle immobilization operator’s permit is revoked
shall not:
      (1)   apply for another vehicle immobilization operator’s permit before
the expiration of 12 months after the date the director revokes the permit or,
in the case of an appeal, the date the appeal hearing officer affirms the
revocation; or
      (2)   immobilize a vehicle inside the city.
   (c)   The director shall notify the permittee and the licensee in writing of
a revocation and include in the notice:
      (1)   the specific reason or reasons for the revocation;
      (2)   the date the director orders the revocation; and
      (3)   a statement informing the permittee of the right to, and process
for, appeal of the decision. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-26.   IMMOBILIZING A VEHICLE AFTER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   After receipt of a notice of suspension, revocation, or denial of
permit renewal, the permittee shall, on the date specified in the notice,
surrender the vehicle immobilization operator’s permit to the director and
discontinue immobilizing vehicles inside the city.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Section
48C-24(c), Section
48C-25(b), and Subsection (a) of this section, if the permittee appeals a
suspension or revocation under this section, the permittee may continue to
immobilize vehicles for a vehicle immobilization service pending the appeal
unless:
      (1)   the permittee’s vehicle immobilization permit is suspended pursuant
to Section
48C-24(b) or revoked pursuant to Section
48C-25(a)(6) of this article; or
      (2)   the director determines that continued operation by the permittee
would impose a serious and imminent threat to the public safety. (Ord. 27629,
eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-27.   APPEAL FROM DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   If the director denies, suspends, or revokes a vehicle immobilization
operator’s permit, the action is final unless the permittee files an appeal, in
writing, with the city manager not more than 10 business days after notice of
the director’s action is received.
   (b)   The city manager or a designated representative shall act as the
appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing
officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and
make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing
under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling on the basis of
a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the
action of the director being appealed. The decision of the hearing officer is
final as to available administrative remedies. (Ord. 27629)
ARTICLE IV.
MISCELLANEOUS LICENSEE AND OPERATOR REGULATIONS.
SEC. 48C-28.   LICENSEE’S AND OPERATOR’S DUTY TO COMPLY.
   (a)   Licensee. In the operation of a vehicle immobilization service, a
licensee shall comply with the terms and conditions of the vehicle
immobilization service license and, except to the extent expressly provided
otherwise by the license, shall comply with this chapter, rules and regulations
established under this chapter, and other law applicable to the operation of a
vehicle immobilization service.
   (b)   Operator. While on duty, a vehicle immobilization operator shall
comply with this chapter, regulations established under this chapter, and
orders issued by the licensee employing the vehicle immobilization operator in
connection with the licensee’s discharging of its duty under its vehicle
immobilization service license and this chapter. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-29.   LICENSEE’S DUTY TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE BY OPERATORS.
   (a)   A licensee shall establish policy and take action to discourage,
prevent, or correct violations of this chapter by vehicle immobilization
operators who are employed by the licensee.
   (b)   A licensee shall not permit a vehicle immobilization operator who is
employed by the licensee to immobilize a vehicle if the licensee knows or has
reasonable cause to suspect that the operator has failed to comply with this
chapter, the rules and regulations established by the director, or other
applicable law. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-30.   INSURANCE.
   (a)   A licensee shall procure and keep in full force and effect commercial
general liability and business automobile liability insurance written by an
insurance company that:
      (1)   is approved, licensed, or authorized by the State of Texas;
      (2)   is acceptable to the city; and
      (3)   does not violate the ownership/ operational control prohibition
described in Subsection (i) of this section.
   (b)   The insurance must be issued in the standard form approved by the
Texas Department of Insurance, and all provisions of the policy must be
acceptable to the city. The insured provisions of the policy must name the city
and its officers and employees as additional insureds. The coverage provisions
must provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or
property by reason of the operation of a vehicle immobilization service by the
licensee, including but not limited to damage to an immobilized vehicle caused
directly or indirectly by improper installation or removal of a boot.
   (c)   The commercial general liability insurance must be on a broad form and
must provide coverage for, but is not limited to, premises/operations and
personal and advertising injury with minimum combined bodily injury (including
death) and property damage limits of not less than $500,000 per occurrence and
a general aggregate limit of not less than $1,000,000 for all occurrences for
each policy year.
   (d)   The business automobile liability insurance must provide a combined
single limit of liability for bodily injury (including death) and property
damage of not less than $500,000 for each occurrence for each vehicle owned,
hired, or otherwise used in the vehicle immobilization service by the licensee
or the licensee’s employees.
   (e)   Insurance required by this section may be obtained from an assigned
risk pool if:
      (1)   all of the policies and coverages are managed by one agent; and
      (2)   one certificate of insurance is issued to the city.
   (f)   The insurance required under this section must include:
      (1)   a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required
to notify the director in writing not fewer than 30 days before canceling,
failing to renew, or making a material change to the insurance policy;
      (2)   a provision to cover all boots and other immobilization equipment,
whether owned or not owned by the licensee, that are operated under the
license; and
      (3)   a provision requiring the insurance company to pay every claim on a
first-dollar basis.
   (g)   A license will not be granted or renewed unless the applicant or
licensee furnishes the director with such proof of insurance as the director
considers necessary to determine whether the applicant or licensee is
adequately insured under this section.
   (h)   If the insurance of a licensee lapses or is canceled and new insurance
is not obtained, the director shall suspend the license until the licensee
provides evidence that insurance coverage required by this section has been
obtained. A person shall not operate a vehicle immobilization service while a
license is suspended under this section whether or not the action is appealed.
A $38 fee must be paid before a license suspended under this section will be
reinstated.
   (i)   No person with any direct or indirect owner-ship interest in the
licensee’s vehicle immobilization service may have any operational control,
direct or indirect, in any insurance company that provides insurance required
by this section to the vehicle im-mobilization service. For purposes of this
subsection, “operational control” means holding any management position with
the insurance company (including, but not limited to, the chief executive
officer, the president, any vice-president, or any person in a decision-making
position with respect to insurance claims) or having the right to control the
actions or decisions of any person in such a management position in the
insurance company. (Ord. Nos. 27629; 30215; 33232)
SEC. 48C-31.   INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED UPON REQUEST OF DIRECTOR.
   Upon request of the director, a licensee shall submit to the director the
following information:
      (1)   A current consolidated list of vehicle immobilization equipment.
      (2)   A current financial statement that includes a balance sheet and
income statement.
      (3)   Names of current officers, owners, and managers.
      (4)   A list of current vehicle immobilization operators employed by the
licensee, with their vehicle immobilization operator’s permits indicated.
      (5)   The trade name of the vehicle immobilization service.
      (6)   A current list of parking lot owners with which the licensee has a
written agreement to immobilize vehicles and the parking lot locations where
vehicle immobilization is authorized to be performed under the written
agreement. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-32.   VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICE RECORDS.
   (a)   For each vehicle immobilized by a vehicle immobilization service, a
licensee shall retain records including, but not limited to, the following
information:
      (1)   A physical description of the immobilized vehicle, including the
make, model, color, state license plate number, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
      (2)   The location at which the vehicle was immobilized and the date and
time of immobilization.
      (3)   The reason for immobilization of the vehicle.
      (4)   Any photographs taken of the immobilized vehicle.
      (5)   A copy of the written authorization by the parking lot owner for
the vehicle to be immobilized by the licensee or a current written
immobilization agreement between the parking lot owner and the licensee, as
required by Section
48C-41.
      (6)   A copy of the receipt issued by the licensee or permittee to a
vehicle owner or operator upon removal of a boot in accordance with Section
48C-44 of this chapter.
   (b)   The licensee shall retain the records required under Subsection (a)
and any other records required by this chapter for not less than three years
after the date of immobilization of the vehicle. The licensee shall make the
records available for inspection by the director or a peace officer upon
reasonable notice and request. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-33.   FAILURE TO PAY AD VALOREM TAXES.
   A licensee or an applicant for a vehicle immobilization service license
shall not allow the payment of ad valorem taxes upon any vehicle, equipment, or
property used directly or indirectly in connection with the vehicle
immobilization service to become delinquent. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
ARTICLE V.
SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
SEC. 48C-34.   APPAREL TO BE WORN BY VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION OPERATORS.
   (a)   A licensee shall specify and require an item of apparel or an item
placed on the apparel to be worn by vehicle immobilization operators employed
by the licensee, which item must be of such distinctive and uniform design as
to readily identify the licensee’s vehicle immobilization service and must bear
the name of the licensee’s vehicle immobilization service. The item specified
by each licensee must be approved by the director to ensure that operators of
one licensee may be easily distinguished from operators of another.
   (b)   While on duty, a vehicle immobilization operator shall wear the item
specified by the licensee who employs the operator and shall comply with such
other identification regulations prescribed by the vehicle immobilization
service license.
   (c)   Every vehicle immobilization service shall have company dress
standards for vehicle immobilization operators employed by the licensee. These
standards must be kept on file with the director and must include the
following:
      (1)   While on duty, a driver may not wear:
         (A)   apparel with offensive or suggestive language;
         (B)   cut offs; or
         (C)   tank tops or halter tops.
      (2)   Shoes must be worn at all times in the manner for which they were
designed. A vehicle immobilization operator may not wear beach or shower
thongs.
      (3)   A vehicle immobilization operator and the operator’s clothing must
conform to basic standards of hygiene and be neat, clean, and sanitary at all
times. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-35.   IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (a)   A licensee commits an offense if he, either personally or through an
employee or agent, immobilizes a vehicle on:
      (1)   a public street; or
      (2)   any area between the property line of private property abutting a
public street and the center line of the street’s drainage way or the curb of
the street, whichever is farther from the property line of the private
property.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that:
      (1)   the vehicle was immobilized on a portion of public right-of-way
leased by the city to the person requesting immobilization of the vehicle, if
such immobilization was not prohibited by the lease and the immobilization was
done:
         (A)   by a vehicle immobilization service currently licensed under
this chapter; and
         (B)   in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and any
other applicable city ordinance or state or federal law; or
      (2)   the vehicle immobilization was authorized by a police officer or a
traffic and parking controller under Section
28-5.1 of this code. (Ord. 27629, eff. 10-1-09)
SEC. 48C-36.   IMMOBILIZATION OF AUTHORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly immobilizes or
causes the immobilization of a vehicle, other than an unauthorized vehicle, on
a parking lot. (Ord. 27629--)
SEC. 48C-37.   FINANCIAL INTERESTS OF PARKING LOT OWNER AND LICENSEE
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A licensee commits an offense if he, either personally or through an
employee or agent:
      (1)   directly or indirectly gives anything of value, other than a sign
or notice required to be posted under this chapter, to a parking lot owner in
connection with the immobilization of a vehicle on the parking lot; or
      (2)   has a direct or indirect monetary interest in a parking lot on
which the licensee, for compensation, immobilizes or causes the immobilization
of an unauthorized vehicle.
   (b)   A parking lot owner commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee or agent:
      (1)   accepts anything of value, other than a sign or notice required to
be posted under this chapter, from a vehicle immobilization service in
connection with the immobilization of a vehicle on the parking lot; or
      (2)   has a direct or indirect monetary interest in a vehicle
immobilization service that, for compensation, immobilizes or causes the
immobilization of an unauthorized vehicle on the parking lot.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(2) that:
      (1)   the licensee is an owner or employee of the parking lot on which
the vehicle is immobilized; and
      (2)   the licensee’s vehicle immobilization service does not charge any
vehicle immobilization fee authorized under Section
48C-44(a) of this chapter or any other fee, fine, or penalty to a vehicle owner
or operator for removal of a boot; except that, the licensee may collect any
outstanding parking fee, not including any fine or penalty, from the vehicle
owner or operator in accordance with Section
48C-44(b) of this chapter.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(2) that:
      (1)   the parking lot owner is an owner or employee of a licensed vehicle
immobilization service; and
      (2)   the vehicle immobilization service in which the parking lot owner
has a financial interest does not charge any vehicle immobilization fee
authorized under Section
48C-44(a) of this chapter or any other fee, fine, or penalty to a vehicle owner
or operator for removal of the boot; except that, the parking lot owner may
collect any outstanding parking fee, not including any fine or penalty, from
the vehicle owner or operator in accordance with Section
48C-44(b) of this chapter. (Ord. 27629--)
SEC. 48C-38.   REQUIREMENT FOR PARKING FEE RECEIPT.
   (a)   A parking lot owner commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee or agent, immobilizes or causes the immobilization of a
vehicle on a parking lot unless at the time a vehicle is parked on the parking
lot, the parking lot owner provides a receipt in accordance with Subsection (b)
of this section to a vehicle owner or operator in exchange for payment of the
parking fee.
   (b)   A parking lot owner shall provide the receipt required under
Subsection (a) of this section by either an electronic pay station or a
uniformed parking lot attendant, and the receipt must indicate:
      (1)   the amount paid to park the vehicle by the vehicle owner or
operator;
      (2)   the date and time the parking fee was received from the vehicle
owner or operator;
      (3)   the time when authorization for the vehicle to be parked on the
parking lot expires; and
      (4)   the location of the parking lot on which the vehicle is parked.
(Ord. Nos. 27629; 27803)
SEC. 48C-39.   REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING LOT ATTENDANTS.
   A parking lot owner that uses a parking lot attendant to collect the fee for
parking on the parking lot and to provide a vehicle owner or operator with the
parking fee receipt under Section
48C-38 shall specify and require an item of apparel to be worn by the parking
lot attendant that is of such distinctive and uniform design as to readily
identify the parking lot attendant as an employee or agent of the parking lot
owner authorized to receive payment. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-40.   REQUIREMENTS FOR POSTING SIGNS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he immobilizes or causes the
immobilization of a vehicle on a parking lot without signs being posted and
maintained on the parking lot in accordance with this section at the time of
immobilization and for at least 24 hours prior to immobilization of the
vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by Section
48C-41 of this chapter, at least one sign must be placed on the right or left
side of each driveway access or curb cut allowing access to the parking lot. If
curbs, access barriers, landscaping, or driveways do not establish definite
vehicle entrances onto the parking lot from a public roadway, other than an
alley, or if the width of an entrance exceeds 35 feet, signs must be placed at
intervals along the entrance so that no entrance is farther than 25 feet from a
sign. At least two signs must be placed on the interior of the parking lot. The
director may require one additional interior sign to be posted for each 50
parking spaces over 150 contained on the lot.
   (c)   Each sign required by Subsection (b) to be placed upon a parking lot
must:
      (1)   be approved by the director;
      (2)   contain:
         (A)   the following information in white letters at least two inches
high on a bright red background:
            (i)   the words “VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION ENFORCED”; and
            (ii)   a statement that payment for parking must be made to the pay
station or uniformed parking attendant;
         (B)   the following information on the next lower portion of the sign
in red letters at least one inch high on a white background:
            (i)   the words, “Unauthorized Vehicles Will Be Immobilized at
Owner’s or Operator’s Expense. Failure to Pay Parking Rate is Deemed Owner’s or
Operator’s Consent to Vehicle Immobilization”; and
            (ii)   the days and hours immobilization is enforced at the
location, which may be satisfied by a statement that immobilization is enforced
at all times; and
         (C)   the following information on the bottommost portion of the sign
in white letters at least one inch high on a bright red background:
            (i)   the name, street address, and current telephone number,
including area code, of the vehicle immobilization service; and
            (ii)   a telephone number answered 24 hours a day, seven days a
week, at which a vehicle owner or operator may obtain information to have the
boot removed from the vehicle, if different from the telephone number listed in
Subparagraph (C)(i);
      (3)   be at least 24 inches tall and 18 inches wide and constructed of a
rigid weather-resistant metal;
      (4)   be permanently mounted on a pole, post, permanent wall, or
permanent barrier;
      (5)   be readable day and night;
      (6)   be permanently installed on the parking lot in a manner and
location approved by the director so that the sign is facing and conspicuous to
any person entering the lot; and
      (7)   be posted so that the bottom edge of the sign is not lower than
five feet or higher than eight feet above ground level.
   (d)   In addition to the signs required to be posted under Subsection (b) of
this section, the following two signs must be posted and maintained on the
interior of the parking lot in a location and manner approved by the director:
      (1)   The first sign must meet all of the requirements of Subsection (c)
of this section, except that all wording must be in Spanish instead of English
and the translation must be approved by the director.
      (2)   The second sign must comply with form, size, color, and wording
requirements established by rule or regulation of the director and must include
the following information in both English and Spanish:
         (A)   the maximum vehicle immobilization fee that may be charged under
this chapter; and
         (B)   a statement of how and to whom a complaint concerning a
vehicle’s immobilization or a violation of this chapter can be made, which
information must be approved by the director.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if, on the same parking lot, he posts or
allows the posting of a sign or signs indicating the name of more than one
vehicle immobilization service.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if he removes or obstructs or allows the
removal or obstruction of a sign required by this section to be posted on a
parking lot. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the
removal or obstruction was caused by:
      (1)   a city employee in the performance of official duties; or
      (2)   the parking lot owner or vehicle immobilization service licensee or
operator authorized by the parking lot owner for the purpose of:
         (A)   repairing or maintaining the sign;
         (B)   complying with this chapter or a rule or regulation promulgated
under this chapter; or
         (C)   terminating a vehicle immobilization service agreement for the
parking lot.
   (g)   A minor variation of a required or minimum height of a sign or
lettering is not a violation of this chapter.
   (h)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section
that the vehicle was immobilized by or under the direction of a police officer
or traffic and parking controller of the city. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-41.   REQUIREMENTS FOR IMMOBILIZATION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he immobilizes or causes the
immobilization of a vehicle on a parking lot unless:
      (1)   at the time the vehicle is to be immobilized:
         (A)   the parking lot owner signs written authorization for
immobilization of the vehicle by the vehicle immobilization service, or
         (B)   a current written agreement exists between the parking lot owner
and the vehicle immobilization service authorizing immobilization of
unauthorized vehicles on the parking lot and a photograph is taken reasonably
showing that the immobilized vehicle was unauthorized on the parking lot; and
      (2)   at the time the vehicle is to be immobilized and for at least 24
hours prior to immobilization:
         (A)   a sign is posted and maintained on the parking lot that:
            (i)   is facing and conspicuous to any person entering the lot; and
            (ii)   displays all parking rates, including special event rates,
charged by the parking lot owner, along with any corresponding day, time, and
event for which the rates are charged;
         (B)   all numbered parking spaces in the parking lot are correctly
numbered and easily readable both day and night; and
         (C)   the parking lot:
            (i)   is in compliance with all city, state, and federal laws
applicable to parking lots; and
            (ii)   meets the requirements for surface parking lots set forth in
Section
51A-4.124(a)(9)(E) and (F) of the Dallas City Code, as amended, regardless of
where in the city the parking lot is located.
   (b)   The written authorization for immobilization required by Subsection
(a)(1)(A) must contain:
      (1)   a description of the vehicle to be immobilized including the make,
model, color, state license plate number, and vehicle identification number of
the vehicle;
      (2)   the date and time of the vehicle’s immobilization;
      (3)   the location at which the vehicle is immobilized;
      (4)   the reasons for immobilizing the vehicle; and
      (5)   the signature of the parking lot owner.
   (c)   The written agreement required by Subsection (a)(1)(B) must:
      (1)   contain a clear election, signed by the parking lot owner or the
parking lot owner’s duly authorized agent, as to whether the vehicle
immobilization service is authorized to immobilize unauthorized vehicles on the
parking lot 24 hours a day, seven days a week or only during the normal
business hours of the parking lot owner; and
      (2)   be renewed at least every two years and whenever there is a change
in ownership of the parking lot. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-42.   REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION AND REMOVAL OF A BOOT.
   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee or agent:
      (1)   immobilizes a vehicle and fails to install at least one boot on a
tire located on the driver’s side of the vehicle;
      (2)   immobilizes a vehicle on a parking lot for which the parking lot
owner does not provide a receipt to the vehicle owner or operator under Section
48C-38 of this article;
      (3)   fails to arrive at a parking lot within 30 minutes after the time
the licensee is notified to do so by the vehicle owner or operator or the owner
or operator’s representative; or
      (4)   fails to remove a boot without charge to the vehicle owner or
operator, or to the parking lot owner, if the removal is requested before the
boot is completely installed. (Ord. Nos. 27629; 27803)
SEC. 48C-43.   NOTIFICATION OF VEHICLE OWNER.
   (a)   A licensee or permittee shall provide the owner of any vehicle
immobilized on a parking lot by the licensee with written notice containing the
following information:
      (1)   The company name, address, telephone number, and vehicle
immobilization service license number of the licensee.
      (2)   A statement that the vehicle has been immobilized and damage may
occur if the vehicle is moved.
      (3)   The date and time the vehicle was immobilized.
      (4)   An explanation of how to request removal of the boot from the
vehicle, including a telephone number, answered 24 hours a day, at which a
vehicle owner or operator may obtain information to have the boot removed from
the vehicle.
      (5)   The amount of the immobilization fee and any outstanding parking
fees.
      (6)   A statement approved by the director explaining how and to whom a
complaint concerning the vehicle’s immobilization or a violation of this
chapter can be made.
      (7)   A statement that the vehicle owner or operator has a right to
request a hearing under Subchapter J, Chapter 2308 of the Texas Occupations
Code, as amended, regarding whether probable cause existed to immobilize the
vehicle.
   (b)   The notice must be adhered to the front windshield and driver’s side
window of the vehicle at the time of immobilization.
   (c)   The licensee shall include with the notice required under Subsection
(a) of this section a notice that complies with the content requirements of
Section 2308.455 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended. (Ord. 27629)
ARTICLE VI.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICE FEES.
SEC. 48C-44.   MAXIMUM FEE SCHEDULE; RECEIPT FOR PAYMENT OF IMMOBILIZATION FEE
AND OUTSTANDING PARKING FEES.
   (a)   The maximum fee that a licensee or permittee may charge is $100 for
immobilization of an unauthorized vehicle.
   (b)   A licensee or permittee may collect any outstanding parking fee, not
including any fine or penalty, from the vehicle owner or operator on behalf of
the parking lot owner.
   (c)   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee or agent, charges:
      (1)   more than the maximum fee allowed by this section for vehicle
immobilization; or
      (2)   any fee in addition to the fees authorized in this section,
including any fee to process a payment made by a vehicle owner or operator in
the form of an electronic check, debit card, or major credit card.
   (d)   A licensee or permittee shall provide a vehicle owner or operator the
option of paying the fee for vehicle immobilization by cash, electronic check,
debit card, or major credit card.
   (e)   Upon removal of a boot, a licensee or permittee shall provide to the
vehicle owner or operator:
      (1)   a receipt in exchange for payment of the vehicle immobilization fee
or any outstanding parking fees; and
      (2)   notice of the right of the vehicle owner or operator to request a
hearing regarding whether probable cause existed to immobilize the vehicle,
which notice shall comply with Section 2308.455 of the Texas Occupations Code,
as amended.
   (f)   The receipt required under Subsection (e)(1) must indicate:
      (1)   the name of the licensee or permittee that removed the boot;
      (2)   the date and time the boot was removed from the vehicle;
      (3)   the name of the vehicle owner or operator;
      (4)   the amount paid by the vehicle owner or operator for the vehicle
immobilization fee and any outstanding parking fees; and
      (5)   the right of the vehicle owner or operator to request a hearing
under Subchapter J, Chapter 2308 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended,
regarding whether probable cause existed to immobilize the vehicle.
   (g)   If a parking lot owner removes or causes the removal of a boot from a
vehicle that has been immobilized on a parking lot in order to have that
vehicle towed from the parking lot under
Chapter 48A of the Dallas City Code, the licensee or permittee who removes the
boot may not charge the vehicle owner or operator the vehicle immobilization
fee or any other fee, fine, or penalty for immobilization of the vehicle. The
vehicle tow service that tows the vehicle from the parking lot may charge the
vehicle owner or operator the vehicle tow service fee authorized under Section
48A-43 of this code. (Ord. 27629)
ARTICLE VII.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION EQUIPMENT.
SEC. 48C-45.   VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Each boot used by a vehicle immobilization service must:
      (1)   not be modified from the manufacturer’s design; and
      (2)   be maintained in a safe and good working condition.
   (b)   The director or a peace officer may, at any time, inspect a boot or
other equipment used by a licensee for vehicle immobilization service to
determine whether the equipment complies with this section.
   (c)   A licensee or permittee commits an offense if he, either personally or
through an employee or agent, immobilizes a vehicle with a boot that has not
been reported to the city under Section
48C-6(b) or
48C-31. (Ord. 27629)
ARTICLE VIII.
ENFORCEMENT.
SEC. 48C-46.   AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   (a)   The director or a peace officer may inspect any vehicle immobilization
service to determine whether the licensee or permittee complies with this
chapter, regulations established under this chapter, or other applicable law.
   (b)   A licensee or permittee, either personally or through an employee or
agent, shall not attempt to interfere or refuse to cooperate with the director
or a peace officer in the conduct of any investigation or discharge of any duty
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-47.   ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Officers of the police department shall assist in the enforcement of this
chapter. A police officer upon observing a violation of this chapter, or of any
regulation established by the director pursuant to this chapter, shall take
necessary enforcement action to ensure effective regulation of vehicle
immobilization service. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-48.   CORRECTION ORDER.
   (a)   If the director determines that a licensee, either personally or
through an employee or agent, violates this code, the terms of its license, a
regulation established by the director, or other law, the director may notify
the licensee in writing of the violation and by written order direct the
licensee to correct the violation within a reasonable period of time. In
setting the time for correction, the director shall consider the degree of
danger to the public health or safety and the nature of the violation. If the
violation involves equipment that is unsafe or functioning improperly, the
director shall order the licensee to immediately cease use of the equipment.
   (b)   If the director determines that a violation constitutes an imminent
and serious threat to the public health or safety, the director shall order the
licensee to correct the violation immediately, and, if the licensee fails to
comply, the director shall promptly take or cause to be taken such action as
the director considers necessary to enforce the order immediately.
   (c)   The director shall include in a notice issued under this section an
identification of the specific violation, the date of issuance of the notice
and the time period within which the violation must be corrected, a warning
that failure to comply with the order may result in suspension or revocation of
license or imposition of a fine or both, and a statement indicating that the
order may be appealed to the city manager. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-49.   SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (a)   A licensee shall designate and maintain a representative to receive
service of notice required under this chapter to be given a licensee.
   (b)   Notice required under this chapter to be given to:
      (1)   a licensee must be personally served by the director on the
licensee or the licensee’s designated representative; or
      (2)   a permittee must be personally served or sent by certified United
States Mail, five day return receipt requested, to the address, last known to
the director, of the person to be notified.
   (c)   Notice required under this chapter to be given to a person other than
a licensee or permittee may be served in the manner prescribed by Subsection
(b)(2).
   (d)   Service executed in accordance with this section constitutes notice to
the person to whom the notice is addressed. The date of service for notice that
is mailed is the date received. (Ord. 27629)
SEC. 48C-50.   APPEAL.
   (a)   A licensee may appeal a correction order issued under Section
48C-48 if an appeal is requested in writing not more than 10 days after notice
of the order or action is received.
   (b)   The city manager or a designated representative shall act as the
appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing
officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and
make argument. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing
under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling on the basis of
a preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or a part of
the order of the director. The decision of the hearing officer is final. (Ord.
27629)
SEC. 48C-51.   OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he violates a provision of this chapter
applicable to him. A separate offense is committed each day in which an offense
occurs.
   (b)   An offense committed under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not
less than $200 or more than $500. The minimum fine established in this
subsection will be doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within
any 24-month period and trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the
same offense within any 24-month period. At no time may the minimum fine exceed
the maximum fine established in this subsection.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (d)   Prosecution for an offense under Subsection (a) does not prevent the
use of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person
charged with the conduct or involved in the offense. (Ord. 27629)
CHAPTER 49
WATER AND WASTEWATER
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
Sec.
49-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
49-2.   Chapter enforcement.
ARTICLE II.
RATES, CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS.
Sec.
49-3.   Application for service; contents of application.
Sec.
49-4.   Security deposits; exemptions.
Sec.
49-5.   Use of security deposits.
Sec.
49-6.   Security deposit refunds.
Sec.
49-7.   Payments of fees for services; delinquency of charges; discontinuance
or refusal of service; notice of discontinuance.
Sec.
49-8.   New application for premises with delinquent charges.
Sec.
49-9.   Meters required; meters to be read monthly; estimated charge; water
leakage.
Sec.
49-10.   Collection regulations; payment substation and payment service
contracts.
Sec.
49-11.   Waiver of substation security requirement.
Sec.
49-12.   Joint owners or users; liability for charges; transfer of accounts.
Sec.
49-13.   Water lien procedure.
Sec.
49-14.   Notice of water lien.
Sec.
49-15.   Notice of vacancy or transfer of property.
Sec.
49-16.   Permission of owner or customer to be secured before using water; use
before filing application for service.
Sec.
49-17.   Director’s authority to contract; rates as consideration.
Sec.
49-18.1.   Rates for treated water service.
Sec.
49-18.2.   Rates for wastewater service.
Sec.
49-18.3.   General service: Separate billing.
Sec.
49-18.4.   Rates for wholesale water and wastewater service to governmental
entities.
Sec.
49-18.5.   Rate for untreated water.
Sec.
49-18.6.   Fees for inspection and testing of meters and backflow prevention
devices.
Sec.
49-18.7.   Service connection charges.
Sec.
49-18.8.   Security deposit amounts.
Sec.
49-18.9.   Charges for use of fire hydrants.
Sec.
49-18.10.   Special assessment rates; lot and acreage fees.
Sec.
49-18.11.   Evaluated cost tables for oversize, side, or off-site facilities.
Sec.
49-18.12.   Industrial surcharge rate formula for excessive concentrations.
Sec.
49-18.13.   Charges for transporters of septic tank waste.
Sec.
49-18.14.   Rates for development review activities.
Sec.
49-18.15.   Payment table.
Sec.
49-18.16.   Miscellaneous charges and provisions; rates where no charge
specified.
Sec.
49-18.17.   Hydrostatic testing of water mains.
ARTICLE III.
WATER AND WASTEWATER GENERALLY.
Sec.
49-19.   Control of and access to systems; interference with access generally.
Sec.
49-20.   Emergency authority.
Sec.
49-21.   Adequacy of supply.
Sec.
49-21.1.   Conservation measures relating to lawn and landscape irrigation.
Sec.
49-22.   Temporary discontinuance for construction, maintenance or emergency
reasons.
Sec.
49-23.   Authorized employees; right of access of employees for inspection and
maintenance; access of contractors.
Sec.
49-24.   Service connections.
Sec.
49-25.   Cross connections; location of water and sewer mains.
Sec.
49-26.   Fire protection systems.
Sec.
49-27.   Fire hydrants.
Sec.
49-28.   Water storage tanks and pumping equipment.
Sec.
49-29.   Backflow prevention devices.
Sec.
49-30.   Private water mains or systems.
Sec.
49-31.   Vending water.
Sec.
49-32.   Wastewater indemnity agreements.
Sec.
49-33.   Exposing meters or hydrants to damage; notice of work affecting
systems; moving meters or hydrants.
Sec.
49-34.   Communicating electricity to pipes.
Sec.
49-35.   Water used for construction work.
Sec.
49-36.   Reserved.
Sec.
49-37.   Tampering with or damaging systems; unlawful use of water; prima facie
evidence.
Sec.
49-38.   Rights as to certain facilities outside of the city; rights upon
annexation.
Sec.
49-39.   Right to construction mains outside the city.
Sec.
49-40.   Service outside the city.
ARTICLE IV.
WATER QUALITY.
Sec.
49-41.   Purpose and policy.
Sec.
49-42.   Enforcement.
Sec.
49-43.   Certain wastes prohibited in the wastewater system.
Sec.
49-44.   Waste disposal through vehicles, grease traps/interceptors, or other
means.
Sec.
49-45.   Right of entry of federal, state, and city employees.
Sec.
49-46.   Permits required for discharge of industrial waste; applications;
exemptions.
Sec.
49-47.   Denial, suspension, or revocation of permits; amending permits.
Sec.
49-48.   Pretreatment and disposal.
Sec.
49-49.   Industrial surcharge for excessive concentrations; sampling fees.
Sec.
49-50.   Estimated industrial surcharge for class group.
Sec.
49-51.   Reporting requirements.
Sec.
49-52.   Recordkeeping.
Sec.
49-53.   Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance.
Sec.
49-54.   Regulation of wastes from other jurisdictions.
Sec.
49-55.   Extrajurisdictional users.
Sec.
49-55.1.   Inspection chambers.
Sec.
49-55.2.   Measurement of waste volume.
Sec.
49-55.3.   Inspection and sampling.
Sec.
49-55.4.   Confidentiality.
Sec.
49-55.5.   Waste management operators.
Sec.
49-55.6.   Pollution of water in reservoirs.
Sec.
49-55.7.   Deposit or discharge of certain material into wastewater system or
storm-sewer.
ARTICLE V.
DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM EXTENSIONS.
Sec.
49-56.   Authority to make capital improvements; special assessments; lot and
acreage fees.
Sec.
49-57.   Reserved.
Sec.
49-58.   Reserved.
Sec.
49-59.   Replacement of substandard mains.
Sec.
49-60.   General rules for extensions by developers.
Sec.
49-61.   Construction of developer extensions.
Sec.
49-62.   Rules regarding the construction and cost of new mains in a
development.
Sec.
49-63.   Certain existing mains exempt.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL.
SEC. 49-1.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter:
      (1)   ACT means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.
      (2)   AMENABLE TO TREATMENT means that a substance:
         (A)   does not discharge or interfere with the operations of the
wastewater system;
         (B)   is acceptable for stream discharge and normal sludge disposal
methods used by the city; and
         (C)   does not pose a health or safety threat to city employees or
contractors performing work in the wastewater system.
      (3)   APPLICANT means a person who makes application to receive a service
from the department.
      (4)   APPROVAL AUTHORITY means the Director of the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
      (5)   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER means:
         (A)   if the industrial user is a corporation,
            (i)   the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of
the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person
who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation;
or
            (ii)   the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions governing the operation of the regulated facility (Examples of
management decisions or activities include, but are not limited to, having the
explicit or implicit duty to make major capital investment recommendations, and
initiate and direct these comprehensive measures to assure long-term compliance
with environmental laws and regulations; having the authority to establish a
system to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater
discharge permit requirements; and having the authority to sign documents and
bind the corporation in accordance with corporate procedures.);
         (B)   if the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship,
a general partner or proprietor, respectively;
         (C)   if the industrial user is the federal, state, or local
government, the director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
the operation and performance of the activities of the governmental facility
governed by these regulations, or the director’s or official’s designee; or
         (D)   any individual designated to act as the authorized
representative by an individual described in Paragraphs (5)(A) through (5)(C)
if the authorization is in writing, specifies the individual or the position
that is responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates (or position that has the overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the entity), and is submitted to the city.
      (6)   AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION SYSTEM means an irrigation system that will
automatically cycle water using landscape sprinklers according to a preset
program, whether used on a designated timer or through manual operation.
      (7)   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE means a device, including but not
limited to reduced pressure devices, double check valves and vacuum breakers,
approved by the director and used to prevent water of unknown quality in
private plumbing facilities from flowing back into the water system.
      (8)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) means a schedule of activities,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices that prevent the
unlawful discharge of pollutants, listed in Section
49-43(a) and (b), into the wastewater system. BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices that control plant site
runoff, spillage or leaks of chemicals, sludge or waste disposal, and drainage
from raw material storage.
      (9)   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed
as a concentration (e.g., mg/L).
      (10)   BUILDING DRAIN means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of
a drainage system that receives wastewater discharge from drainage pipes within
a building, and conveys it to the building lateral that begins two feet outside
the inner face of the building wall or foundation.
      (11)   BUILDING LATERAL means the conduit or pipe extending from the
building drain to the wastewater service line at the property line or other
lawful place of disposal.
      (12)   BUILDING WATER LINE means the water line on private premises that
acts as the main water service to the premises.
      (13)   BYPASS means the intentional diversion of industrial waste from
any portion of an industrial user’s treatment facility.
      (14)   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER means an industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard as defined in Title
40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.3(v)(1)(i), as amended.
      (15)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (16)   CITY ATTORNEY means the city attorney of the city, or the city
attorney’s authorized assistants.
      (17)   CITY COUNCIL means the governing body of the city.
      (18)   CITY ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICER means the environmental health
officer of the city appointed by the city manager pursuant to Section
19-1(b) of this code, or an authorized representative.
      (19)   CITY MANAGER means the city manager of the city, or the city
manager’s authorized assistants.
      (20)   CITY PLAN COMMISSION means the city plan and zoning commission of
the city. The city plan commission is the body authorized to give final
approval to plats of property within the city.
      (21)   CITY RESERVOIR means Lake Ray Hubbard, White Rock Lake, Bachman
Lake, and that portion of Joe Pool Lake located within the territorial
jurisdiction of the city.
      (22)   CITY SECRETARY means the city secretary of the city, or the city
secretary’s authorized assistants.
      (23)   CLOSED SPRINKLER SYSTEM means a fire protection system with
automatic water flow sprinklers from which no water may be taken manually
except from the test cock.
      (24)   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) means the measure of oxygen consuming
capacity, expressed in mg/L. The term is expressed as the amount of oxygen
consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. The term does not
differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and does not
necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand.
      (25)   COMPOSITE SAMPLES means samples collected during a period of time
exceeding 15 minutes and combined into one sample.
      (26)   CONTROL AUTHORITY means the city of Dallas.
      (27)   CORNER LOT means a lot that abuts upon not more than one pair of
intersecting public streets within a larger platted subdivision.
      (28)   CROSS CONNECTION means any physical connection or arrangement of
pipes or devices between two otherwise separate water supply systems, one of
which contains potable water and the other water of unknown or questionable
quality, whereby water may flow from one system to the other, the direction of
flow depending upon pressure differential between the two systems.
      (29)   CUSTOMER means a person who:
         (A)   is the customer of record;
         (B)   has made application for a service, and the service has been
provided or made available by the department at the location specified in the
application pending final approval of the application; or
         (C)   actually uses, receives, or benefits from a service, even though
no account for service may exist or no application for service may have been
made in that person’s name.
      (30)   CUSTOMER OF RECORD means a person who has an account in that
person’s name with the department for a service, based upon an application made
with and approved by the director.
      (31)   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT means the maximum allowable discharge limit of
a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in
units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course
of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
      (32)   DEPARTMENT means the water utilities department of the city,
except that for purposes of administering, implementing, and enforcing
provisions of this chapter relating to the construction of public
infrastructure improvements by private developers, "department" means the
department of development services.
      (33)   DESIGNATED OUTDOOR WATER USE DAYS means Sundays and Thursdays for
a customer with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, or 8) or
with no street address number, and Saturdays and Wednesdays for a customer with
a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7, or 9). An apartment
complex, office building complex, or other property containing multiple street
addresses must use the lowest street address number to determine the designated
outdoor water use days for the property.
      (34)   DEVELOPER means:
         (A)   the owner or agent of the owner platting, replatting, or
otherwise developing lots or tracts of property for further sale, lease,
development, or redevelopment for residential, commercial, or industrial uses;
or
         (B)   a person who does not otherwise qualify as an individual owner
under this chapter.
      (35)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated to
implement, administer, or enforce a particular provision of this chapter, or
the director’s authorized assistants and representatives.
      (36)   EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or,
where appropriate, the regional administrator or other duly authorized official
of the agency.
      (37)   EVALUATED COST means the cost of a water or wastewater main,
established by unit values for the size of main and appurtenances, as
prescribed in Section
49-18.11.
      (38)   FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM means any configuration of pipes connected
to a sprinkler system or other fire protection device on private premises that,
when connected to the water system, is used to extinguish fires.
      (39)   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT means any industrial user engaged
primarily or incidentally in the preparation of food for human or animal
consumption, except that the term does not include any user discharging
domestic wastewater from premises used exclusively for residential purposes.
The term includes but is not limited to restaurants, motels, hotels,
cafeterias, hospitals, schools, bars, delicatessens, meat processing
operations, bakeries, and similar operations.
      (40)   FOUR DAY AVERAGE LIMIT means the average value from four
consecutive sampling days.
      (41)   GARBAGE means animal and vegetable waste and residue from the
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage,
and sale of food products and produce.
      (42)   GENERAL SERVICE means service to premises that are not residential
service premises.
      (43)   GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY means the United States, the State of Texas,
any county, any municipal corporation, town, or village other than the city,
any school, college, or hospital district, any district or authority created
and existing under Article XVI, Section 59 or Article III, Section 52 of the
Texas Constitution, any other entity considered a political subdivision of the
State of Texas under state law, and any lawfully created and existing agencies
of these governmental entities.
      (44)   GRAB SAMPLE means a sample taken during a period of 15 minutes or
less.
      (45)   GREASE means oils, fats, cellulose, starch, proteins, wax, or
other types of grease, oil, or fat regardless of origin and whether or not
emulsified.
      (46)   GREASE TRAP/INTERCEPTOR means a device that:
         (A)   is designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate
and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to
the wastewater entering the wastewater system; and
         (B)   serves to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food
preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap/ interceptor and
entering the wastewater system.
      (47)   HOSE-END SPRINKLER means a device through which water flows from a
hose to a sprinkler to water any lawn or landscape.
      (48)   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE means the introduction of
pollutants into the wastewater system from any nondomestic source.
      (49)   INDIVIDUAL OWNER means:
         (A)   an owner requesting extension of an existing water or wastewater
main to property that is or will be used in the operation of the owner’s own
residence or in the operation of a business not requiring larger than a one-
inch water service connection, which property will not be further sold or
leased in connection with its intended function; or
         (B)   a governmental entity requesting the construction or extension
of a water or wastewater main to serve property the entity owns or leases for
its own use, regardless of the size of service connection utilized, except that
this term does not include a governmental entity that requires, among other
things, the construction or extension of an off-site water or wastewater main
in order to serve its proposed land use or development.
      (50)   INDUSTRIAL SURCHARGE means the additional charge made to a person
who discharges into the wastewater system industrial waste that is amenable to
treatment by the wastewater system but that exceeds the strength of normal
wastewater.
      (51)   INDUSTRIAL USER means a source of indirect discharge or the
nondomestic source of pollutants into the wastewater system.
      (52)   INDUSTRIAL WASTE means wastewater or other water-borne solids,
liquids, grease, sand, or gaseous substances resulting from an industrial,
manufacturing, or food processing operation, from the operation of a food
service establishment, from the development of a natural resource, or from any
other nondomestic source, or any mixture of these substances with water or
normal domestic wastewater.
      (53)   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT means the maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of
the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
      (54)   INTERFERENCE means a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
         (A)   inhibits or disrupts the publicly-owned treatment works (POTW),
its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use, or
disposal; and
         (B)   causes of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit (including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations):
            (i)   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended;
            (ii)   the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II,
more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA),
and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, as amended), as amended;
            (iii)   the Clean Air Act, as amended;
            (iv)   the Toxic Substances Control Act, as amended; and
            (v)   the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, as
amended.
      (55)   INTERRUPTIBLE SERVICE means the supply of untreated water provided
by contract specifically stating that the supply may be totally discontinued
for indefinite periods of time due to the need to conserve or have the
untreated water available for municipal use.
      (56)   MAYOR means the mayor of the city.
      (57)   MGD means million gallons per day.
      (58)   MGL (MILLIGRAMS PER LITER) (mg/L) is a weight per volume
concentration; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 is
equivalent to pounds of constituent per million gallons of water.
      (59)   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT means the highest allowable average of
"daily discharges” over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily
discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily
discharges” measured during that month.
      (60)   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS means the national
pretreatment standards promulgated by the EPA, pursuant to Sections 307(b) and
(c) of the Act, imposed upon existing or new industrial users in specific
industrial subcategories as specified in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations,
Parts 405 through 471, as amended.
      (61)   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS means any pretreatment regulations
containing pollutant discharge limits that have been established or will be
established for industrial users by the EPA, including but not limited to
prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to Title 40, Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 403.5, as amended.
      (62)   NEW SOURCE means any building, structure, facility, or
installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the
construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act, provided that all of the following
apply:
         (A)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located.
         (B)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source. If the construction only alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment, no new source is created.
         (C)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. To determine whether the production or
wastewater generating processes are substantially independent, the extent to
which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to
which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source, must be considered. If the construction only alters, replaces,
or adds to existing process or production equipment, no new source is created.
For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source has commenced if
the owner or operator has:
            (i)   begun, as part of a continuous onsite construction program,
any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment or
significant site preparation work, including the clearing or excavation of the
property, or the removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
            (ii)   entered into a binding contractual obligation for the
purchase of facilities or equipment that are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. An option to purchase, a contract that can
be terminated or modified without substantial loss, or a contract for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies does not constitute a contractual
obligation.
      (63)   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER means water used for cooling that does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
      (64)   NORMAL WASTEWATER means wastewater of the city for which the
average concentration of total suspended solids and five-day BOD is established
at and does not exceed 250 mg/L.
      (65)   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER means wastewater normally discharged
from the commodes or sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment
houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free from
storm or ground water and industrial waste.
      (66)   OBSTRUCT means to:
         (A)   make passage impossible or unreasonably inconvenient or
hazardous; or
         (B)   interfere or cause interference with a specific activity in
order to prevent the activity from starting, continuing, or concluding.
      (67)   OFF-SITE EXTENSION means a water or wastewater main extension
lying totally outside of the tract of land to be platted, replatted, developed,
or redeveloped, except that this term does not include a water or wastewater
main extension directly adjacent to or fronting on, and intended to serve or
capable of serving only, the tract of land to be platted, replatted, developed,
or redeveloped.
      (68)   ON-SITE EXTENSION means a water or wastewater main extension that:
         (A)   lies totally within a tract of land to be platted, replatted,
developed, or redeveloped; or
         (B)   lies directly adjacent to or fronting on the tract of land to be
platted, replatted, developed, or redeveloped and is intended to serve or is
capable of serving only that tract.
      (69)   OVERSIZE COST means the difference between the evaluated cost of a
water or wastewater main as built and the evaluated cost of the size of main
determined to be the minimum size required to serve the subdivision. The
minimum size used to determine oversize cost must never be less than the
standard size water and wastewater mains as defined in this section.
      (70)   OVERSIZE MAIN means a main that exceeds the minimum size of main
necessary to serve a particular subdivision, as determined by the director, in
order to allow the main to serve other property, as well as the subdivision.
      (71)   OWNER means the legal fee title holder of record of property.
      (72)   PASS THROUGH means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the POTW's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation).
      (73)   PAYMENT DEVICE means any check, item, paper or electronic payment,
or other payment device used as a medium for payment.
      (74)   PERMITTEE means a person granted a permit under this chapter.
      (75)   PERSON means an individual, private or public corporation,
partnership, association, limited liability company, governmental entity, firm,
industry, or other entity.
      (76)   pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen
ion concentration of a solution.
      (77)   POLLUTANT means any of the following:
         (A)   Dredged spoil.
         (B)   Solid waste.
         (C)   Incinerator residue.
         (D)   Filter backwash.
         (E)   Sewage and sewage sludge.
         (F)   Garbage.
         (G)   Munitions.
         (H)   Medical wastes.
         (I)   Chemical wastes.
         (J)   Biological or radioactive materials.
         (K)   Heat.
         (L)   Wrecked or discarded equipment.
         (M)   Rock, sand, or cellar dirt.
         (N)   Municipal, agricultural, and industrial wastes.
         (O)   Certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature,
total suspended solids, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
      (78)   PREMISES or PROPERTY means real property and includes
improvements.
      (79)   PRETREATMENT means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the wastewater system. Pretreatment does not include the dilution of
pollutant concentration unless allowed by applicable pretreatment standards.
      (80)   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS means any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
      (81)   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS means pollutant concentration discharge
limitation requirements established in this chapter and national pretreatment
standards, including but not limited to prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.5, as
amended.
      (82)   PROCESS WASTEWATER means any water that, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or
waste product.
      (83)   PROGRAMMED EXTENSION means the water or wastewater main extensions
included in or consistent with the master plan of the system, for which funds
have been currently budgeted and made available through a properly authorized
capital expenditure program.
      (84)   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE means garbage that has been shredded to
such an extent that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in wastewater mains, with no particle having
greater than a one-half inch cross-sectional dimension.
      (85)   PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) means that term as defined
in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.3(q), as amended.
      (86)   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE means service to premises that are single-
family or duplex dwelling units, or other premises containing dwelling units,
each of which units is individually metered.
      (87)   SATISFACTORY CREDIT HISTORY WITH THE DEPARTMENT means that service
has not been cut off within the past 12 months for nonpayment of charges.
      (88)   SERVICE means all water and water- related service provided for
the use and benefit of persons inside and outside the city through the
operations and facilities of the department, including but not limited to:
         (A)   supply of untreated water;
         (B)   supply of treated water;
         (C)   wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal;
         (D)   building and extension of service mains;
         (E)   providing of meters and service connections to property;
         (F)   discontinuance, restoration, or repair of service;
         (G)   issuance and use of permits;
         (H)   extension or replacement of service mains for which lot or
acreage fees or other assessments are charged;
         (I)   collections of rates or fees for service; and
         (J)   other department activities for the benefit of the general
public authorized under this chapter.
      (89)   SERVICE LINE means the pipe or conduit that extends from the water
or wastewater main and that connects with the meter or the building lateral to
provide a water or wastewater service connection.
      (90)   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER means:
         (A)   an industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.6, as amended,
and Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter I, Subchapter N, as amended,
and
         (B)   any other industrial user that:
            (i)   discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blowdown wastewater;
            (ii)   contributes a process wastestream that makes up five percent
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
            (iii)    is designated as a significant industrial user by the
control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement in accordance with Title 40, Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 403.8(f)(6), amended.
         (C)   An industrial user is not a significant industrial user if the
control authority determines, either on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an industrial user of POTW, that the industrial user is
not a significant industrial user in accordance with Title 40, Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 403.8(f)(6) as amended, upon a finding that an industrial
user meeting the criteria in Subparagraphs (A) or (B) has no reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any
pretreatment standards or requirements.
      (91)   SIGNIFICANT NONCOM-PLIANCE means any of the following:
         (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as
those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits,
as defined in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.3(1), as amended.
         (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in
which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six- month period equal or exceed the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.3(1), as
amended, multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, total suspended
solids, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
         (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.3(1), as amended
(daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard),
that the publicly-owned treatment works determines has caused (alone or in
combination with other discharges) interference or pass-through (including
endangering the health of the publicly-owned treatment works’ personnel or the
general public).
         (D)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment or has resulted in
the publicly- owned treatment works’ exercise of its emergency authority under
Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(b), as amended, to
halt or prevent such a discharge.
         (E)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance.
         (F)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and compliance reports with compliance
schedules.
         (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
         (H)   Any other violation or group of violations, including a
violation of best management practices, that the director determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
      (92)   SLUG LOAD OR SLUG DISCHARGE means any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in Section
49-43 of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine,
episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-
customary batch discharge, that has a reasonable potential to cause
interference or pass- through, or in any other way violates the wastewater
system’s regulations, local limits, or permit conditions.
      (93)   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE means a
classification scheme based on the type of manufacturing or commercial activity
at a facility. Some facilities, depending on the manufacturing and activities
occurring on site, may have more than one code number.
      (94)   STANDARD METHODS means the laboratory procedures or techniques for
the testing, sampling, or analysis of pollutants:
         (A)   established and approved by the EPA; or
         (B)   approved by the director with the concurrence of the EPA, where
the EPA has not established procedures or techniques for testing, sampling, or
analyzing a pollutant in question or determines that approved procedures or
techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question.
      (95)   STANDARD SIZE WASTEWATER MAIN means a wastewater main not less
than eight inches in diameter.
      (96)   STANDARD SIZE WATER MAIN means a water main that is:
         (A)   not less than eight inches in diameter, but also of a size
adequate to meet the hydraulic capacity of the water system; and
         (B)   used for standard fire protection purposes as recognized by the
Insurance Services Office, which is not less than six inches in diameter
adequately supported by mains not less than eight inches in diameter, but also
of a size adequate to meet the hydraulic capacity of the water system.
      (97)   STANDBY SERVICE means connections, not normally used, to
governmental entities contracting with the city for treated water.
      (98)   STORM SEWER means a conduit, drainage ditch, stream, or other
water course that may directly or indirectly carry storm or ground water to the
Trinity River.
      (99)   TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
      (100)   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) means solids that either float on
the surface of, or are suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquids and
that, in accordance with standard methods, are removable by a standard,
specific laboratory filtration device.
      (101)   WASTE MANAGEMENT OPERATOR means a person engaged in the private
business of receiving, storing, treating, or disposing of industrial waste.
      (102)   WASTEWATER means water-carried waste.
      (103)   WASTEWATER MAIN means a conduit or pipe of the wastewater system
that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes, or a combination of
both, and into which storm surface water, ground water, or unpolluted wastes
are not intentionally admitted. The term includes access structures, valves,
and other appurtenances that are incidental to use of the wastewater main.
      (104)   WASTEWATER SYSTEM means:
         (A)   all treatment plants, mains, conveyances, pumps, interceptors,
lift stations, connections, meters, sludge storage facilities, appurtenances,
and other facilities of the city employed in the collection, treatment, and
disposal of wastewater; or
         (B)   the publicly-owned treatment works of the city or of a
governmental entity receiving or treating wastewater of the city under a
contract with the city.
      (105)   WATER MAIN means a conduit or pipe of the water system that
conveys water. The term includes fire hydrants, access structures, valves, and
other appurtenances that are incidental to use of the water main.
      (106)   WATER SYSTEM means all treatment plants, mains, pumps, meters,
connections, supply reservoirs, storage tanks, appurtenances, and other
facilities of the city employed in the purification, transportation, and supply
of treated and untreated water.
      (107)   WATER YEAR means the period that begins on June 1 of a year and
ends on May 31 of the following year.
      (108)   WHOLESALE SERVICE means:
         (A)   the furnishing of untreated water to a customer, except for
untreated water furnished only for domestic use;
         (B)   the furnishing of treated water to a governmental entity for
resale to customers of that entity; or
         (C)   the collection and discharge of wastewater from the collection
facilities of a governmental entity into the wastewater system for purposes of
treatment. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19526; 19622; 20653; 21409; 25047; 25214; 25256;
26925; 26961; 27697; 28084; 28622; 31480; 32002)
SEC. 49-2.   CHAPTER ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Authority. The director is authorized to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
   (b)   Civil jurisdiction.
      (1)   As an alternative to imposing the applicable criminal penalty
prescribed in Section
49-2(d), the city may, as authorized by Section 54.044 of the Texas Local
Government Code, impose administrative penalties, fees, and court costs in
accordance with
Article IV-b of
Chapter 27 of this code for an offense under Section
49-21.1 of this chapter. The alternative administrative penalty range for an
offense is the same as is prescribed for an offense in Section
49-2(d). The provisions of
Article IV-b of
Chapter 27 of this code pertaining to financial inability to comply with an
administrative order do not apply to violations of this chapter.
      (2)   This chapter may be enforced by civil court action as provided by
state and federal law.
   (c)   Offenses. A person who violates Sections
49-3(e),
49-16,
49-19(c),
49-20(f),
49-21.1,
49-23(c),
49-25(c),
49-27(b),
49-31(a),
49-34 and
49-37 of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion
of a day during which the violation continues.
   (d)   Penalty.
      (1)   Each offense under Sections
49-20,
49-21.1,
49-25(c),
49-27(b),
49-31(a),
49-34, and
49-37(a)(3) is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000. Every other offense
under this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
      (2)   In addition to the maximum fine prescribed by Subsection (d)(1), an
offense under Section
49-20 or
49-21.1 is punishable by a fine of not less than $250. This minimum fine will
be doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within any 12-month
period and trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense
within any 12-month period. At no time may the minimum fine exceed the maximum
fine established in Subsection (d)(1).
   (e)   Culpability.
      (1)   A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this chapter
if the person:
         (A)   commits or assists in the commission of a violation; or
         (B)   is a customer, owner, tenant, permittee, or other person in
control of the premises determined to be the source of a violation.
      (2)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (f)   Exception. This section does not apply to
Article IV of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19682; 21606; 24745; 29618)
ARTICLE II.
RATES, CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS.
SEC. 49-3.   APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   (a)   Application required. A person shall not use a service without first
making the proper application for the service with the director. For general
service accounts, a written application will be required of those persons from
whom the director requires a security deposit. The application, when made in
writing, must be made on forms provided by the director. The director is
authorized to establish other procedures, not in conflict with this chapter or
state law, to process and accept customer applications and to collect and
process security deposits as necessary to secure customer accounts. The
application requirements of this section do not apply to wholesale service
contracts.
   (b)   Restriction of application. The person making the application shall
include that person’s spouse, if any, as an applicant on the application. If
unmarried or unrelated individuals or unrelated business entities who jointly
own or occupy premises desire service, the director may require application to
be made jointly in the names of those individuals or business entities. The
director may also require application for service to be made only by and in the
name of the owner of property if the director determines that substantial risk
of financial loss to the department would occur as a result of acceptance of an
application from a person other than the owner.
   (c)   Contract. The application constitutes a contract to pay all charges
for service and to abide by all provisions of this chapter, the provisions of
this code, and other local, state and federal laws relating to the service.
   (d)   Fee. An applicant must pay an application fee in accordance with
Section
49-18.16(a).
   (e)   Accurate information. An applicant shall furnish the names and
addresses of any other joint owners, regardless of whether or not they reside
at the premises, if this information is known to the applicant. An applicant
shall also furnish proper identification and shall correctly furnish any other
relevant information, including but not limited to proof of ownership or
agency, required by the department in order to properly provide the service. If
information is not furnished or is false, the application may be denied and
service, where provided, may be discontinued. A person commits an offense if he
knowingly makes a false statement on an application for service under this
chapter.
   (f)   Use without application. A person who occupies premises and uses
service without making application is responsible for all water used from the
date of the last meter reading previous to that person occupying the premises.
If the person is a tenant and the owner of the premises has failed to give the
notice required in Section
49-15, then the owner is jointly and severally responsible with the tenant for
the charges. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19622; 20653)
SEC. 49-4.   SECURITY DEPOSITS; EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   Form of security. Unless exempted under Subsection (f), when a
customer applies for service, he must also submit a security deposit in one of
the following forms:
      (1)   cash;
      (2)   guaranty bond;
      (3)   letter of credit drawn on a state or federally chartered lending
institution;
      (4)   guarantee letter from another person who has an account with the
department for service and has a satisfactory credit history with the
department; or
      (5)   other equivalent security approved by the director.
   (b)   Amount. The director shall establish the amount of a security deposit
in accordance with Section
49-18.8.
   (c)   Failure to provide security. The director may refuse or discontinue
service if a person fails to:
      (1)   make a required security deposit with his application; or
      (2)   increase the amount of his security deposit after being notified
that an increase is required.
   (d)   Form of noncash security. A customer must submit a noncash security
deposit on a form provided by the director or on a form approved by the
director and the city attorney.
   (e)   Hardship cases. In cases of hardship the director may allow
residential service customers to make cash deposits in installments.
   (f)   Exemptions from security deposit requirement. Any of the following
persons is not required to post a security deposit, provided he has a
satisfactory credit history with the department:
      (1)   A person seeking residential service who presents proof that he is
65 years of age or older.
      (2)   A person seeking residential service who presents proof that he
owns or is presently buying the residence to be served.
      (3)   A person seeking service who provides a current report from a
consumer credit reporting agency indicating a good credit standing.
      (4)   A person who has had at least 12 months continuous service within
the last 24 months and left no unpaid balance.
      (5)   A person who can provide proof that his account with another
utility is not delinquent and that timely payments have been made to that
utility for a minimum of 12 consecutive months within the past 24 months. A
letter from the utility indicating that the requirements of this exception have
been met, or monthly bills from the utility stamped paid (including a current
or final bill), constitutes acceptable proof that the requirements of this
exception have been met.
   (g)   Withdrawal of exemption. If a customer establishes an account without
a security deposit, but subsequently loses his satisfactory credit history with
the department, a security deposit may be required as a condition for continued
service.
   (h)   Exceptions to section. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   governmental entities;
      (2)   wholesale service contracts; or
      (3)   applications for permits required under this chapter. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-5.   USE OF SECURITY DEPOSITS.
   (a)   Accounting requirements. The director shall keep:
      (1)   accurate records of all security deposits, including, but not
limited to, the depositor’s name, amounts deposited, and deposits refunded; and
      (2)   separate accounts of all security deposits.
   (b)   Administration of deposits. The director shall administer cash
security deposits in accordance with the following rules:
      (1)   A deposit will be applied toward payment of the final bill amount
due the city when a service account is closed or becomes inactive due to
delinquency, transfer of ownership or other reasons. A deposit made to secure
service to premises may be transferred or applied toward payment of a final
bill due on any other premises within the city where service is provided in the
depositor’s name.
      (2)   Deposits earn simple interest at an annual percentage rate to be
fixed by the director each year, which rate shall approximate the average
interest rate earned by the department on its cash deposits for the previous
year, less two percent.
      (3)   Interest ceases to accrue on a deposit when service is
discontinued.
      (4)   A deposit and accrued interest, less amounts due for service, will
be returned to the customer when service is discontinued unless the deposit is
transferred to another address, either at the request of the customer or as
provided in Subsection (b)(1).
      (5)   Deposits may be invested or used for capital improvements, but
sufficient cash shall be accounted for and kept on hand to meet the normally
anticipated level of refunds. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-6.   SECURITY DEPOSIT REFUNDS.
   (a)   Refund requirements. The director may refund a security deposit to the
customer when the customer meets the requirements of Section
49-4(f) or meets all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The customer has been receiving service for 12 continuous months.
      (2)   The customer has acquired a satisfactory credit history with the
department.
      (3)   The customer has not made payment during the past 12 months with a
payment device returned due to insufficient funds.
      (4)   The customer has no delinquent bills outstanding.
   (b)   Refusal to refund. Notwithstanding Subsection (a), the director may
refuse to refund a security deposit where the director determines from the
circumstances of a customer’s account that there is a substantial risk of
financial loss to the department.
   (c)   Review for eligibility. Upon the request of a customer, the director
shall review the customer’s credit history to determine eligibility for a
refund. The director will make refunds in the following manner:
      (1)   A refund will normally be credited to a customer’s bill.
      (2)   If a refund is greater than the outstanding bill, the remaining
portion of the refund will be applied to subsequent bills.
      (3)   If a customer no longer has an account for service or in special
circumstances approved by the director, the director may authorize a refund by
check payable to the customer. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 26961)
SEC. 49-7.   PAYMENTS OF FEES FOR SERVICES; DELINQUENCY OF CHARGES;
DISCONTINUANCE OR REFUSAL OF SERVICE; NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE.
   (a)   When charges are delinquent; bill items. Except where otherwise
provided by written contract between the customer and the city, charges for
services furnished become delinquent if payment is not received by the
department on or before the due date, which is 15 days after bill rendering.
After the due date, the customer must pay all charges for service, plus a late
payment fee equal to five percent of the outstanding charges for service
(unless the late payment fee is prohibited, or otherwise provided for, in
another city ordinance or state or federal law). The director shall send the
customer a monthly bill indicating:
      (1)   the service date and the due date;
      (2)   the amount due for services rendered (including all previous
delinquent charges, plus interest, if any, still due and owing) if the bill is
paid by the due date; and
      (3)   the amount due for services rendered (including all previous
delinquent charges, plus interest, if any, still due and owing), plus a late
payment fee, if the customer fails to pay the bill by the due date.
   (b)   Bill not received. Failure to receive a bill from the director does
not relieve a customer or other person liable for charges under this chapter
from liability for service.
   (c)   Authority to discontinue service. The director may refuse application
for service, discontinue service, or refuse to restore service to:
      (1)   a customer who fails to pay any charges due under this chapter
within seven days after the sending of notice of discontinuance;
      (2)   a person who violates any provision of:
         (A)   Section
49-9;
         (B)   Section
49-16;
         (C)   
Article III or
Article IV of this chapter;
         (D)   
Article V or
Article VI of
Chapter 32 of this code;
         (E)   Chapter 51 or
51A of this code, upon request of the building official; or
         (F)   the Dallas Plumbing Code;
      (3)   a person making application for service to property at an address,
if the person has delinquent charges outstanding at another address; or
      (4)   a customer at any premises if the director determines that a
substantial waste of water, or a health hazard, is occurring as a result of
leaking, damaged, open or disconnected private laterals, pipes, or drains on
the premises.
   (d)   Cutting and plugging connections. The director’s authority to
discontinue service includes the right to cut and plug water or wastewater
connections to private property. The costs of cutting and plugging connections
will be charged to the customer in addition to the delinquent charges due.
   (e)   Restoration of service. Discontinued service will not be restored
until the customer or other person who has or accepts legal responsibility for
violations committed or charges unpaid either pays all charges due (including
the charges to restore connections), makes arrangements for payment
satisfactory to the director, or, where applicable, ceases violation of the
particular code provision in question. The decision to restore service while
delinquent charges or code violations still exist rests solely with the
director.
   (f)   Notice of discontinuance. The director must notify a customer in the
following manner before discontinuing service under Subsection (c):
      (1)   The director must send the customer at least seven days advance
written notice of pending discontinuance.
      (2)   The notice must provide a statement of reasons for cutoff and a
statement of delinquent charges due, where applicable. The notice must also
provide a time, place and means by which the customer may cure the delinquency
or violation, or dispute the validity of the reasons for discontinuance.
      (3)   The notice may be served either in person or by mail.
      (4)   Additionally, in cases of master-metered apartments or
condominiums, the director must cause a notice of pending discontinuance to be
posted on the door of each dwelling unit known to be occupied and in a
conspicuous place within the property manager’s office or the common areas of
the premises.
   (g)   Exceptions to notice requirement. Subsection (f) does not apply to
discontinuance of service resulting from a violation of this chapter if the
director determines that immediate discontinuance is necessary to prevent an
imminent threat or occurrence of:
      (1)   harm to the health or safety of persons;
      (2)   damage to city or private property; or
      (3)   contamination of the water system.
   (h)   Customer’s request to discontinue. Upon a customer’s written request,
the director may discontinue treated or untreated water service to the
customer. Upon receipt of the request, the director may remove the water meter
and service connections. However, the customer is liable for all charges
incurred prior to removal of the meter. Where service is furnished through more
than one meter, the customer may request discontinuance of one or more meters
and thereafter be billed on the basis of the remaining meter or meters.
   (i)   Cumulative remedies. Enforcement of this section does not waive any
additional remedies, civil or criminal, available to the city under law. (Ord.
Nos. 19201; 20215; 20653; 26961)
SEC. 49-8.   NEW APPLICATION FOR PREMISES WITH DELINQUENT CHARGES.
   (a)   When new application not accepted. Where service has been
discontinued, refused or posted for discontinuance at a premises due to
nonpayment of delinquent charges or a violation of this code, a new application
will not be accepted from another person to resume service in the same place
under another name so long as the previous customer continues to occupy or own
the premises as his residence or place of business until:
      (1)   all delinquent charges are paid;
      (2)   arrangements for payment satisfactory to the director are made; or
      (3)   the violation is abated.
   (b)   Avoidance. This section also applies to premises where service is
furnished to a tenant, and the premises are transferred to a person with notice
of discontinuance for the purpose of avoiding payment of charges or avoiding
enforcement of this section. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-9.   METERS REQUIRED; METERS TO BE READ MONTHLY; ESTIMATED CHARGE;
WATER LEAKAGE.
   (a)   Meters generally. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, or by
separate written wholesale service contract, a customer shall receive water
service only when measured through a meter. The director shall determine the
size, type, number, and location of meters and connections to meters to be
installed. Each meter shall be read, when possible, once a month and a bill
rendered accordingly.
   (b)   Estimated bill circumstances. The quantity of water delivered to a
premises will be estimated under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The meter reader is unable to procure a reading of the meter
because access to the meter is obstructed or made hazardous by an animal or
otherwise.
      (2)   The meter does not properly function, or the equipment used to read
the meter does not properly function.
      (3)   Adverse weather or an act of God prevents the reading of the meter.
      (4)   No meter is in place at the premises.
      (5)   For some other reason, a meter reading is not available to the
billing section of the department at the time of preparing a bill to the
customer.
   (c)   Basis for estimates. An estimate shall be based on past consumption
experience at the premises. If there is no past consumption experience, then an
estimate will be based on consumptions of the same class under similar
conditions using the best information available. If a customer demonstrates
that an estimated bill is excessive, then the department shall render a bill
based on a revised estimate or on an actual meter reading where possible.
   (d)   Meter reading verification. If the customer contends that a
discrepancy appears in a bill or meter reading, the director will inspect the
meter and verify the reading. The charge for the inspection is provided in
Section
49-18.6(c).
   (e)   Water leakage. When a customer experiences a substantial increase in
water or wastewater usage from a hidden water leak, the department will adjust
the amount and bill the customer in accordance with the rates prescribed in
Section
49-18.1(g). The department will adjust a bill only if a customer presents a
plumber’s statement, or the customer’s written statement, which indicates the
water leak was not reasonably detectable from the surface, the leak has been
repaired, and the type of repairs made. The director may request additional
information before determining if a water leak was reasonably detectable based
upon facts presented to the director. A customer may receive only one
adjustment during a 12 month period, unless the director determines that
extenuating circumstances justify allowing additional adjustments.
   (f)   Return of meters. All water meters furnished to customers are property
of the city and will be returned immediately upon request of the director.
Failure to return a meter when requested constitutes grounds for discontinuance
or refusal of service.
   (g)   Maintenance of meters. The department is responsible for maintenance,
inspection and repair of all water meters. When any act, neglect or
carelessness of the customer or owner of any premises causes damage to a meter
requiring adjustment, repair or replacement, the resulting expense will be
charged against the customer or owner. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 20737; 21334)
SEC. 49-10.   COLLECTION REGULATIONS; PAYMENT SUBSTATION AND PAYMENT SERVICE
CONTRACTS.
   (a)   Collection regulations. The director is authorized to promulgate
regulations and procedures, not in conflict with this code, the city charter,
or applicable state or federal laws or regulations, concerning the collection
of charges for service and the handling of customer accounts, receipts, and
reports.
   (b)   Authority for payment substations and payment service companies. The
director is authorized to provide substations operated by the department at
convenient locations for the general public to pay charges, or the director may
negotiate contracts with private persons for the operation of:
      (1)   payment substations; or
      (2)   payment service companies, including but not limited to, telephone
(interactive voice response) payment services, Internet (on-line) payment
services, and payment service agents.
   (c)   Terms of private contracts. A private substation contract or a payment
service contract must be for a fixed term and must contain conditions agreed
upon by the parties; except, that each contract must include the collection
regulations and procedures promulgated by the director as a part of the
conditions. A private substation contract or a payment service contract must be
executed by the city manager and approved as to form by the city attorney.
   (d)   Contract security. All substation contractors and payment service
contractors shall provide a surety or guaranty bond payable to the city in an
amount, not less than $1,000, that is satisfactory to the director. The bond
must secure against loss or disappearance, for whatever reason, of funds
collected by the contractor for payment of charges and must generally secure
performance under the contract. In lieu of a bond, the director may accept a
cash deposit, or an unconditional letter of credit drawn on a state or
federally-chartered lending institution.
   (e)   Convenience charge for payment substations. A private payment
substation is authorized to collect a convenience charge, not to exceed $1.00,
on each bill collected, which charge may be retained by the substation as a
cost of service.
   (f)   Convenience charge for payment services. The director may collect a
convenience charge to recover the cost of service associated with credit and
debit card transaction fees in accordance with Chapter 132 of the Texas Local
Government Code. The fee is designed to recover the actual costs incurred by
the water utilities department in providing the payment service, including but
not limited to credit and debit card transactions and interchange fees. The fee
may be retained by the water utilities department or paid directly to the
payment processor as a cost-of-service and must be clearly disclosed to the
customer at the time of payment.
   (g)   Convenience charge for payment service agents. A payment service agent
is authorized to collect a convenience charge, not to exceed $1.00, on each
bill collected, which charge may be retained by the payment service agent as a
cost of service.
   (h)   The collection and payment regulations and procedures provided for in
this section apply to:
      (1)   charges established under this chapter; and
      (2)   charges established under other city ordinances that the director
has been authorized to collect by the city manager or the city council. (Ord.
Nos. 19201; 25385; 26135; 33232)
SEC. 49-11.   WAIVER OF SUBSTATION SECURITY REQUIREMENT.
   (a)   Conditions. The director may waive the security requirement of Section
49-10(d) upon a finding that the requirement is not necessary to secure
performance. In order to so find, the director shall consider:
      (1)   any present deposits or security posted by the contractor with the
department;
      (2)   whether the contractor’s inventory consists of goods or
merchandise;
      (3)   the number of years the contractor has done business in Dallas
County;
      (4)   whether the contractor is a subsidiary of an existing authorized
substation;
      (5)   the contractor’s credit standing; and
      (6)   the contractor’s financial condition as shown by certified
financial statements or other data supplied by the contractor. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-12.   JOINT OWNERS OR USERS; LIABILITY FOR CHARGES; TRANSFER OF
ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   Charges a lien. When delinquent charges remain unpaid and the
procedures of Section
49-13 are followed, those delinquent charges shall constitute a lien against
the property served.
   (b)   Personal liability. The customer of record has the primary personal
liability for service rendered under this chapter. Nevertheless, if service is
provided to property owned by a person or entity jointly with the customer of
record, or if the customer of record is an agent or property manager for one or
more owners of property, the joint owners shall not be treated as new
customers, but shall remain jointly and severally liable with the customer of
record for unpaid delinquent charges. The director may refuse or discontinue
service in the same manner provided for in Section
49-7 until all delinquent charges are paid.
   (c)   Liability of spouses. Spouses receiving service to premises they
jointly own or occupy are deemed to be joint customers of record,
notwithstanding that only one spouse may have signed an application, and shall
be jointly and severally liable for unpaid delinquent charges.
   (d)   Liability of tenants. Where service is provided to a tenant in a
single-family residence, or to more than one residential or commercial tenant
through a master meter or single service connection, and the landlord is the
customer of record, a tenant or duly organized association of tenants may
establish a new service account without being held responsible for any previous
unpaid charges owed by the landlord if the appropriate facilities are in place
and the tenant or association of tenants otherwise meets the applicable
requirements of this chapter; however, the director may refuse service if it
appears that application is being made for the purpose of assisting the
landlord to avoid payment of delinquent charges or for the purpose of
defrauding the city. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require
the department to apportion charges or to provide individually-metered service
at a master-metered premises.
   (e)   Transfer of accounts. Where a person liable for delinquent charges at
one address is found to have an account in his name at another address, the
delinquent amounts due at the previous address may be transferred to the
account at the new address, and service discontinued at the new address until
the delinquent amounts are paid. (Ord. 19201; 20653)
SEC. 49-13.   WATER LIEN PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Authority. The city is authorized, in accordance with the provisions
of Article 402.0025, Texas Local Government Code, to perfect the lien upon
property which occurs as provided in Section
49-12, for the purpose of securing the payment of delinquent charges incurred
as a result of service to the property. This section shall not apply to
delinquent charges for service where a tenant is the customer of record, if the
owner of the property served has sent notice to the director that the property
is rental property.
   (b)   When lien is perfected. The lien may be perfected only when charges
incurred by a customer for service become delinquent and when the director
determines that other means for fully collecting the delinquency are inadequate
or unavailable.
   (c)   Form of the lien. Upon request of the director, the form of the lien
must be prepared by the city attorney. The form must contain:
      (1)   a statement indicating the purpose of the lien;
      (2)   the address of the property which is the subject of the lien, where
the address is ascertainable;
      (3)   a complete legal description of the property which is the subject
of the lien; and
      (4)   the amount of delinquent charges, including penalties, interest and
collection costs, if any, incurred upon the property as of the date of
execution of the lien.
   (d)   Execution and recording. The lien must be:
      (1)   executed by the city manager and acknowledged by a notary public of
the State of Texas;
      (2)   approved as to form by the city attorney; and
      (3)   filed in the deed or lien records of the county in which the
property is located.
   (e)   Priority of lien. The lien is superior to all other liens except a
bona fide mortgage lien recorded prior to the recording of the city’s lien in
the deed or lien records of the county in which the property is located.
   (f)   Additional charges; correction lien. Should additional delinquent
charges be incurred subsequent to the date of the original lien’s execution, a
correction lien may be executed and filed, in the form provided above, fixing
the additional delinquent charges. The correction lien, when filed of record,
shall relate back to the date of recording of the original lien and shall
become a part of the original lien.
   (g)   Suit to foreclose. The city attorney, at the request of the director,
may file suit to judicially foreclose the lien in a state court of competent
jurisdiction. The suit may not be filed earlier than 60 days after the
recording date of the lien.
   (h)   Release of lien. Upon certification by the director that all
delinquent charges which existed against the property have been fully paid, the
city manager is authorized to execute a release of the lien. The release shall
be prepared and approved as to form by the city attorney and shall be duly
acknowledged. After execution, the director must immediately file the release
in the deed or lien records of the county in which the property is located.
   (i)   Cumulative remedies. This section is cumulative of any other remedies,
methods of collection or security available to the director or the city under
the charter and ordinances of the city or under state law. This section does
not affect the director’s authority to refuse or to furnish service when
delinquent charges exist. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 20215; 20653)
SEC. 49-14.   NOTICE OF WATER LIEN.
   (a)   Form of notice. Prior to recording of the water lien, the director
shall send notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that a lien
will be fixed on the property in accordance with law. The notice must provide a
time, place and means by which the charges causing the lien may be paid or
disputed. The notice must be sent to:
      (1)   the customer in whose name the account for service to the property
exists; and
      (2)   the last known record owner of the property according to the tax
rolls of the city, if the customer is not the owner.
   (b)   Absence of notice. Absence of receipt of notice does not affect the
enforceability of a lien perfected under Section
49-13. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19622)
SEC. 49-15.   NOTICE OF VACANCY OR TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.
   (a)   When notice given. The customer, or the owner of property served, must
notify the director within three days after the occurrence of:
      (1)   any total vacancy in the property served;
      (2)   any change in ownership, whether by sale, foreclosure, business
reorganization or otherwise; or
      (3)   any occupancy of previously vacant property.
   (b)   Failure to notify. Failure to give notice in accordance with
Subsection (a) shall render the owner and the customer, if he is not the owner,
jointly and severally liable for all charges due against the property. Upon
receipt of notice under Subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2), the director shall prepare
a final bill for the account. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-16.   PERMISSION OF OWNER OR CUSTOMER TO BE SECURED BEFORE USING WATER;
USE BEFORE FILING APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (a)   Use without consent. A person commits an offense if, where water is
furnished to any premises, the person knowingly takes water from any faucet or
water connection on the premises without first securing the consent of, and
making arrangements with, the owner of the premises or the customer in whose
name the account exists. This section does not apply to a person employed by
the city who is engaged in work of an emergency nature in his official capacity
as a city employee.
   (b)   Use without application. A person commits an offense if he knowingly
diverts or uses water from any part of the water system without making
application and without receiving the director’s consent to use a service.
Absence of an account for service on file with the department constitutes prima
facie proof of the lack of the director’s consent to use a service.
   (c)   Defense. It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) of this
section if the person uses service pursuant to an approved application request
by telephone under Section
49-3. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 20215)
SEC. 49-17.   DIRECTOR’S AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT; RATES AS CONSIDERATION.
   (a)   General contract authority. The director is authorized to provide
service without the necessity of city council approval except for:
      (1)   a contract for noninterruptible untreated or treated water service
which is for a fixed term of longer than three years;
      (2)   a wholesale service contract involving a governmental entity;
      (3)   a contract by which the city receives water or wastewater service;
and
      (4)   any service contract otherwise required by state law, city charter,
or other provisions of this chapter, to be approved by city council.
   (b)   Consideration. The consideration received by the city for a service
contract must be based on the rates prescribed in this chapter. However, the
city council may approve a special-rate contract for wholesale water or
wastewater service where it determines rates in this chapter to be
discriminatory or unreasonable under the circumstances. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-18.1.   RATES FOR TREATED WATER SERVICE.
   (a)   Form of rate. The monthly rate for treated water service to a customer
consists of:
      (1)   a customer charge; and
      (2)   a usage charge.
   (b)   Billing cycle. In this section, water used per month is based upon the
billing cycle of the department.
   (c)   Rate tables. The director shall charge customers for treated water
service in accordance with the following tables:
      (1)   Water Service Customer Charges.
METER SIZE RATE PER METER
METER SIZE              RATE PER METER
5/8-inch meter          $5.93
3/4-inch meter          $8.37
1-inch meter            $12.28
1-1/2-inch meter        $22.61
2-inch meter            $38.50
3-inch meter            $89.60
4-inch meter            $146.00
6-inch meter            $288.00
8-inch meter            $480.00
10-inch meter or larger $731.00
 
      (2)   Usage Charge—Rate Per 1,000 Gallons.
   TYPE OF USAGE
(A) Residential:
   (i)   Up to 4,000 gallons                                       $2.17
   (ii)  4,001 to 10,000 gallons                                   $4.81
   (iii) 10,001 to 20,000 gallons                                  $7.98
   (iv)  20,001 to 30,000 gallons                                  $11.40
   (v)   Above 30,000 gallons                                      $13.20
(B) General service:
   (i)   Up to 10,000 gallons                                      $5.32
   (ii)  Above 10,000 gallons                                      $5.88
   (iii) Above 10,000 gallons and 1.4 times annual average monthly $8.59
          usage
 
   (d)   Applicability of rates to meters. The charges for water service in
Subsection (c) of this section apply to each meter that exists at a customer’s
premises. A customer may request removal of inactive meters to combine services
through a single meter. If, within one year, a customer requests removal and
restoration of a meter that is used for lawn sprinkling, air conditioning, or
other seasonal purposes, the customer shall pay a reconnection charge that is
equal to the monthly customer charge in Subsection (c) of this section
multiplied by the number of months the service was discontinued.
   (e)   Rates where no meter exists. If a customer is without a meter, the
minimum usage charge per month is based upon the average monthly usage for a
customer in the same service class at the rate specified in Subsection (c) of
this section. The customer charge is based upon the size of the service line at
the property.
   (f)   Election for certain general water service customers. A general water
service customer inside the city who uses at least 1,000,000 gallons of water
per month may elect, in writing, to be assessed the special charges under this
subsection instead of the regular general service rate, according to the
following conditions:
      (1)   The customer must agree to pay each year:
         (A)   the monthly customer charge as provided in Subsection (c);
         (B)   $3,240.60 per month as a usage charge on the first 1,000,000
gallons used in a billing period; and
         (C)   $5.11 per 1,000 gallons used in excess of 1,000,000 gallons per
month.
      (2)   The customer must agree that consumption billed during any billing
period ending in May, June, July, August, September, and October will not
exceed 1.5 times the average monthly consumption billed in the previous winter
months of December through March.
      (3)   To be eligible for the special rate, a customer’s maximum hourly
water usage during a seven-day period must not be greater than seven times the
average hourly usage rate for the same seven-day period.
      (4)   If a customer’s usage of water exceeds the amounts allowed under
Subsection (f)(2) or (f)(3), the customer will be notified that the customer
will be billed at the regular usage charge stated in Subsection (c) for a
minimum of 12 months, and such additional time until the customer can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the requirements of
Subsection (f)(2) and (f)(3) can be maintained.
      (5)   The director may grant a variance to Subsection (f)(4) where
special circumstances warrant.
   (g)   Adjusted rates for hidden water leaks. When a customer experiences a
substantial increase in water or wastewater usage from a hidden water leak and
the customer meets the requirements of Section 49-9(e), the director may adjust
the affected months based on usage from the previous year, or class average;
      (1)   an estimated amount of normal water usage for the period at the
regular rate; and
      (2)   the applicable wastewater rate prescribed in Section
49-18.2(c), based on an adjustment of wastewater volume to estimated normal
volume, where adjustment is appropriate.
   (h)   Billing based on full month. If a customer requests discontinuance of
service at an address where uninterrupted service was provided for a period of
time so short that the only bill for services rendered would be the final bill,
such billing will be computed as though service had been furnished for a full
billing month.
   (i)   Rates for municipal purpose water service. Water service to property
owned by the city of Dallas that is used solely for municipal purposes may be
charged $3.50 per 1,000 gallons of water used. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19300; 19682;
20077; 20449; 20737; 21061; 21430; 21824; 22208; 22564; 23289; 23670; 24050;
24744; 25385; 25755; 26135; 26479; 26961; 27355; 27698; 28025; 28426; 28795;
29150; 29479; 29879; 30215; 30653; 30993; 31332; 31657; 32003; 32310; 32556;
32863; 33232)
SEC. 49-18.2.   RATES FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE.
   (a)   Form of rate. The monthly rate for wastewater service to a customer
consists of:
      (1)   a customer charge;
      (2)   a usage charge; and
      (3)   a surcharge for excessive concentration of wastes, if applicable.
   (b)   Billing cycle. In this section, water used per month is based upon the
billing cycle of the department.
   (c)   Rate tables. The director shall charge a customer for wastewater
service in accordance with the following tables:
Wastewater Service Charges.
      (1)   Monthly customer charges.
METER SIZE RATE PER METER
METER SIZE              RATE PER METER
5/8-inch meter          $5.34
3/4-inch meter          $7.13
1-inch meter            $10.59
1-1/2-inch meter        $20.34
2-inch meter            $34.20
3-inch meter            $79.19
4-inch meter            $125.20
6-inch meter            $247.92
8-inch meter            $413.10
10-inch meter or larger $649.31
 
      (2)   Monthly residential use charge: $6.19 per 1,000 gallons of the
average water consumption billed in the months of December, January, February,
and March or the actual month’s water consumption, whichever is less, up to a
maximum charge of 40,000 gallons per month.
      (3)   Monthly general service usage charge: $5.55 per 1,000 gallons of
water used.
      (4)   Monthly usage charge for Section
49-18.1(f) customer: $5.15 per 1,000 gallons of water used.
      (5)   Monthly general service usage charge for wastewater separately
metered: $5.20 per 1,000 gallons of wastewater discharged.
      (6)   Monthly surcharge for excessive concentrations of waste: an amount
calculated in accordance with Sections
49-18.12,
49-48, and
49-49 of this chapter.
      (7)   Monthly surcharges for excessive concentrations of waste for
wastewater separately metered: An amount calculated in accordance with Sections
49-18.12,
49-48, and
49-49 of this chapter.
   (d)   Where residential water service is not used. If a residential customer
does not receive water service solely from the city, the director shall
estimate water used per month to determine the usage charge in Subsection (c).
   (e)   Where general water service is not used. If a general service customer
does not receive water service solely from the city, the customer must install
and maintain, at the customer's expense, adequate meters that measure total
water usage from other sources and that meet American Water Works Association
standards. The customer must pay an additional customer charge of $10.00 per
month for each meter, regardless of size, installed under this subsection. When
a meter is inaccurate, the director may estimate water usage.
   (f)   Rates for municipal purpose wastewater service. Wastewater service to
property owned by the city of Dallas that is used solely for municipal purposes
may be charged $3.68 per 1,000 gallons of water used. (Ord. Nos.19201; 19300;
19682; 20077; 20737; 21061; 21430; 21824; 22208; 22564; 23289; 23670; 24050;
25385; 25755; 26135; 26479; 26961; 27355; 27698; 28025; 28426; 28795; 29150;
29479; 29879; 30215; 30653; 30993; 31332; 31657; 32003; 32310; 32556; 32863;
33232)
SEC. 49-18.3.   GENERAL SERVICE: SEPARATE BILLING.
   (a)   Conditions of separate billing. A general service customer inside the
city may receive separate bills for water service and wastewater service if he
installs and maintains, at his expense, meters or other liquid measuring
devices that are accurate and approved by the director to measure:
      (1)   total wastewater discharged directly into the wastewater system
from the premises; or
      (2)   water losses from activities involving evaporation, irrigation or
water consumed in products, as illustrated by, but not limited to, cooling
towers, boilers, lawn watering systems, or food products.
   (b)   Customer charge. A customer who chooses to be billed under this
section must pay an additional customer charge of $60.00 per month for each
meter installed pursuant to this section, regardless of the size of the meter.
   (c)   Where meter is inaccurate. When a meter installed pursuant to this
subsection is inaccurate, the director may estimate usage or discharge. If a
customer fails to repair or replace an inaccurate meter, the director shall
bill the customer for the usage charge in Section
49-18.2(c)(3) or (4), whichever is applicable. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 21430; 25385;
26961; 28795; 32003)
SEC. 49-18.4.   RATES FOR WHOLESALE WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICE TO
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES.
   (a)   Form of rate. The director may provide wholesale water service to
governmental entities. The service will be furnished in accordance with a
written contract at the rates prescribed in this section and under such other
terms and conditions as the city council deems reasonable. The rate for
wholesale water service to a governmental entity will consist of:
      (1)   a volume charge and a demand charge; or
      (2)   a flat rate charge.
   (b)   Rate table. The director shall charge a governmental entity for
wholesale water service in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The volume charge for treated water is $0.6357 per 1,000 gallons of
water used, and the annual water year demand charge is $356,542 per each mgd,
as established by the highest rate of flow controller setting.
      (2)   If a flat rate charge for treated water is provided by contract, or
in the absence of a rate flow controller, the charge is $2.9099 per 1,000
gallons of treated water used.
      (3)   A monthly readiness-to- serve charge will be assessed for any
standby service point. The monthly fee, based on size of connection, is as
follows:
 
Size of Connection Monthly Standby Fee
3-inch             $89.60
4-inch             $146.00
6-inch             $288.00
8-inch             $480.00
10-inch or larger  $731.00
 
      (4)   The rate for regular untreated water service to a governmental
entity is $1.3369 per 1,000 gallons of untreated water used. The rate for
interruptible untreated water service to a governmental entity is $0.4554 per
1,000 gallons of untreated water used.
   (c)   Revisions. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, if the written
contract for wholesale service between the city and a governmental entity
provides for revision of rates, the charges under the written contract must
comply with the charges provided in this section.
   (d)   Emergency exchanges. The director may, in the interest of the city and
its customers, make connection agreements with other governmental entities for
emergency exchange of water.
   (e)   Wholesale wastewater rates. The director may provide wholesale
wastewater service to other governmental entities by contract, in accordance
with the following rules:
      (1)   The monthly rate for wholesale wastewater service is $3.3829 per
1,000 gallons of wastewater discharged. The director is authorized to
compensate those governmental entities located within the boundaries of the
city for the city's use of integrated facilities owned by those governmental
entities.
      (2)   An infiltration and inflow adjustment factor of 22.5 percent will
be added to the average water consumption for the months of December, January,
February, and March to determine billable volume for a governmental entity with
unmetered wholesale wastewater service.
      (3)   If the BOD or suspended solids concentration of waste discharged
exceeds 250 mg/L, the governmental entity must pay a surcharge calculated in
accordance with Section
49-18.12(1)(A) or (B), whichever applies.
   (f)   Treatment of water owned by another governmental entity. The director
may provide treatment services at the Elm Fork water treatment plant to water
owned by another governmental entity in accordance with a written contract. The
volume charge for treating water owned by another governmental entity is
$0.5981 per 1,000 gallons of water treated, and the annual water year demand
charge is $49,732.47 per each mgd, as established by the maximum demand
capacity set forth in the contract. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19300; 19682; 20077;
20449; 20636; 20737; 21061; 21430; 21824; 22208; 22564; 22907; 23289; 23670;
24050; 24414; 24744; 25049; 25385; 25755; 26135; 26479; 26961; 27355; 27698;
28025; 28426; 28795; 29150; 29479; 29879; 30215; 30653; 30993; 31332; 31657;
32003; 32310; 32556; 32863; 33232)
SEC. 49-18.5.   RATE FOR UNTREATED WATER.
   (a)   Regular rate. The charge for untreated water is $1.3369 per 1,000
gallons of water used.
   (b)   Interruptible rate. The charge for interruptible service is $0.4554
per 1,000 gallons of water used.
   (c)   Reservoir supply permits. The director may issue permits, without the
necessity of council approval, to owners of property abutting water supply
lakes or streams for the domestic use of untreated water. A charge for water
used will be made as provided in Subsection (a) or (b). The term of such
permits may not exceed three years, but the permits are renewable at the option
of the city. An application for a permit or permit renewable under this
subsection must be accompanied by a non- refundable processing fee of $336.
   (d)   Commercial contracts for untreated water.
      (1)   Short-term contracts. The director may authorize short-term
contracts, without the necessity of council approval, with owners of property
abutting water supply lakes or streams for the commercial use of untreated
water. A charge for water used will be made as provided in Subsection (a) or
(b). The term of such contracts may not exceed three years, but the contracts
are renewable at the option of the city. An application for a short-term
contract or contract renewable must be accompanied by a nonrefundable
processing fee of $846.
      (2)   Long-term contracts. The director may authorize long-term
contracts, with council approval, with owners of property abutting water supply
lakes or streams for the commercial use of untreated water. A charge for water
used will be made as provided in Subsection (a) or (b). The term of such
contracts may exceed three years, and are renewable at the option of the city.
An application for a long-term contract or contract renewal must be accompanied
by a nonrefundable processing fee of $876.
   (e)   Treatment plant effluent. Wastewater treatment plant effluent may be
purchased for one-half of the regular rate for untreated water. No distribution
facilities will be provided by the city. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19682; 20077; 20449;
20737; 21061; 21430; 21824; 22208; 22564; 22907; 23289; 23670; 24050; 24414;
24744; 25049; 25385; 25755; 26135; 26479; 26961; 27355; 27698; 28025; 28426;
28795; 29150; 29479; 29879; 30215; 30653; 30993; 30994; 31332; 31657; 32003;
32310; 32556; 32863; 33232)
SEC. 49-18.6.   FEES FOR INSPECTION AND TESTING OF METERS AND BACKFLOW
PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (a)   Meter inspection fees. No charge will be made for the first meter
change or meter test requested by a customer at a single service connection
within any 12-month period. For each additional meter change or meter test
requested by a customer within a 12 month period that does not result in a
finding that the meter over-registered in excess of 1-1/2 percent, the director
shall charge the customer a fee according to the following schedule:
 
Meter - Size       Fee
5/8 to 1-inch      $50.00
1-1/2 to 2-inch    $50.00
Larger than 2-inch Actual cost of change and test
 
   (b)   Meter replacement fees. A customer with an existing one-inch service
and a 5/8-inch or 3/4-inch meter, who requests that the meter be increased to
one inch, shall pay a fee of $243. Any other customer requesting an increase in
meter size up to but not greater than the size of the existing service shall
pay a connection charge for the requested size meter based on the actual cost
incurred by the utility.
   (c)   Inspection fee for meter verification. An inspection under Section 49-
9(d) is free if the director verifies a gross discrepancy or a customer
requests not more than one inspection during any six-month period, otherwise
the charge is $50 for an inspection.
   (d)   Backflow prevention device inspection fees. The owner or person in
control of premises on which a backflow prevention device is located must pay a
fee to the city for the periodic inspection and testing as follows:
 
(1) For any backflow prevention device                          $165.00 each
(2) For each additional backflow prevention device inspected at $165.00 each
    the same site, same time
 
   (e)   Exception. This section does not apply to a governmental entity that
receives wholesale water or wastewater service. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19300; 23289;
25049; 25385; 26135; 26479; 27355; 32863; 33232)
SEC. 49-18.7.   SERVICE CONNECTION CHARGES.
   (a)   Installation of large or commercial connections. In cases where the
service connection involved is a water service connection larger than two
inches or a wastewater service connection to a commercial, industrial, or other
non-residential service establishment, the following rules apply:
      (1)   If the director does not require the applicant to construct and
install the service connection pursuant to Section
49-24(c)(4), the applicant shall pay the city an amount equal to the
department’s cost of constructing and installing the service connection. This
amount is due prior to commencement of construction by the city.
      (2)   If the director requires the applicant to construct and install the
service connection pursuant to Section
49-24(c)(4), the applicant shall pay a connection inspection fee of $465.50 and
shall bear all costs of construction and installation and the cost of any
materials or appurtenances supplied by the department for construction or
installation purposes. The connection inspection fee and amounts payable to the
city for the cost of materials and appurtenances must be paid at the time of
permit issuance.
      (3)   Unpaid charges due and owed to the city and other unpaid costs of
construction incurred by the applicant under this subsection must be paid
before the department will activate water or wastewater service to the property
connected.
   (b)   Standard affordable housing refund. Whenever affordable housing units
are provided as a part of a project in accordance with Division 51A-4.900 of
the Dallas Development Code, as amended, the director shall authorize a refund
of a percentage of the total service connection fees paid by the permittee for
the project equal to the percentage of standard affordable housing units
provided in the project. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19300; 20215; 21663; 23289; 25049;
25385; 25755; 26479; 27698; 28795; 29150; 29879; 30215; 30993; 31657; 32003;
32556; 33232)
SEC. 49-18.8.   SECURITY DEPOSIT AMOUNTS.
   The amount of a security deposit is governed by the following:
      (1)   Standard deposit for residential service accounts.
 
5/8-inch and 3/4-inch meter $100.00
1-inch meter                $125.00
1 1/2-inch meter            $150.00
2-inch meter and larger     $200.00
 
      (2)   Standard deposit for other than residential service accounts. An
amount is required sufficient to cover two times the average bill in the past
12 months for the location served. In the case of a new account, the deposit is
two times the average estimated bill.
      (3)   A residential service customer who has service discontinued twice
within a 12-month period for nonpayment of charges shall make an additional
deposit equal to one-sixth of his total standard bill for the prior 12 months
or $100, whichever is greater. This increase in deposit is in addition to other
charges required for reinstatement of service. If information to determine the
total standard bill for the prior 12 months is unavailable or inapplicable, the
director may determine the amount of the required deposit based on bills to
similar property for those months for which the information is unavailable or
inapplicable.
      (4)   The director may require a higher security deposit, not to exceed
three times the average bill at the location served or to be served, for any
class of service, when the director determines that there is a substantial risk
of financial loss to the department. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 25385; 32863)
SEC. 49-18.9.   CHARGES FOR USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   A person requesting the use of water from a fire hydrant pursuant to Section
49-27 shall pay the following application charges:
      (1)   a deposit of $2,300 to be refunded when the service is discontinued
and the meter is returned to the city by the person or the person's authorized
representative, less any unpaid fees for services and any costs to repair
damage in excess of normal wear;
      (2)   a monthly fire hydrant service charge of $89.60; and
      (3)   a usage charge for water that will be billed at the general service
rate prescribed in Section
49-18.1(c)(2)(B). (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19300; 21430; 25385; 26135; 26961; 27698;
28025; 28426; 28795; 29150; 29479; 29879; 30215; 30653; 31657; 32003; 32310;
32556; 32863; 33232)
SEC. 49-18.10.   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT RATES; LOT AND ACREAGE FEES.
   (a)   Lot or acreage fee for individual owners. Individual owners required
to pay a lot or acreage fee pursuant to Section
49-56 (h) will be charged as follows:
      (1)   $0.018 per square foot of lot that is part of a subdivided tract
utilizing an existing water main;
      (2)   $785.00 per acre of any unsubdivided tract utilizing an existing
water main;
      (3)   $0.018 per square foot of lot that is part of a subdivided tract
utilizing an existing wastewater main;
      (4)   $785.00 per acre of any unsubdivided tract utilizing an existing
wastewater main.
   (b)   Acreage fee for developers. Developers required to pay an acreage fee
in accordance with Section
49-62  will be charged as follows:
      (1)   $785.00 per acre of land for an existing water main; and
      (2)   $785.00 per acre of land for an existing wastewater main. (Ord.
Nos. 19201; 19300; 20653; 22564)
SEC. 49-18.11.   EVALUATED COST TABLES FOR OVERSIZE, SIDE, OR OFF-SITE
FACILITIES.
   The director will use the following evaluated cost tables to calculate city
payments and to calculate fees due under Section 49-62. City payments will be
calculated by the director by using either the unit prices in the construction
contract submitted by the developer, or the unit prices in the evaluated cost
tables, whichever is less.
WATER MAINS AND APPURTENANCES
ITEM UNITS
WATER MAINS AND APPURTENANCES
ITEM                                                    UNITS
4-inch pipe                                             linear foot $128.00
6-inch pipe                                             linear foot $184.00
8-inch pipe                                             linear foot $207.00
12-inch pipe                                            linear foot $237.00
16-inch pipe                                            linear foot $380.00
20-inch pipe                                            linear foot $354.00
24-inch pipe                                            linear foot $404.00
30-inch pipe                                            linear foot $440.00
36-inch pipe                                            linear foot $476.00
42-inch pipe                                            linear foot $512.00
48-inch pipe                                            linear foot $548.00
4-inch valve                                            each        $2,240.00
6-inch valve                                            each        $2,880.00
8-inch valve                                            each        $3,845.00
12-inch valve                                           each        $7,050.00
16-inch valve                                           each        $21,000.00
20-inch valve                                           each        $34,376.00
24-inch valve                                           each        $47,752.00
30-inch valve                                           each        $67,816.00
36-inch valve                                           each        $87,880.00
42-inch valve                                           each        $107,994.00
48-inch valve                                           each        $128,008.00
Fire hydrant                                            each        $7,268.00
3/4-inch copper deadhead                                each        $2,490.00
1-inch copper deadhead                                  each        $2,460.00
1 1/2-inch copper deadhead                              each        $4,030.00
2-inch copper deadhead                                  each        $5,370.00
3/4-inch water service, meter box and transfer for      each        $3,315.00
others
1-inch water service, meter box and transfer for others each        $3,490.00
1 1/2-inch water service, meter box and transfer for    each        $4,720.00
others
2-inch water service, meter box and transfer for others each        $5,510.00
Cut and plug water main for others                      each        $2,290.00
Remove fire hydrant for others                          each        $952.00
Reconnect existing service for others                   each        $590.00
Disposal of heavily chlorinated water                   contract    $4,100.00
3/4-inch air relief                                     each        $4,000.00
1-inch air relief                                       each        $9,490.00
2-inch air relief                                       each        $11,960.00
Bore for 6-inch water                                   linear foot $780.00
Bore for 8-inch water                                   linear foot $805.00
Bore for 12-inch water                                  linear foot $830.00
Bore for 16-inch water                                  linear foot $855.00
Bore for 20-inch water                                  linear foot $880.00
Bore for 24-inch water                                  linear foot $905.00
Bore for 36-inch water                                  linear foot $930.00
Bore for 42-inch water                                  linear foot $980.00
Bore for 45-inch water                                  linear foot $1,005.00
Bore for 48-inch water                                  linear foot $1,030.00
 
SANITARY SEWER MAINS AND APPURTENANCES
ITEM UNITS
SANITARY SEWER MAINS AND APPURTENANCES
ITEM                                  UNITS
6-inch pipe                           linear foot $81.00
8-inch pipe                           linear foot $131.00
10-inch pipe                          linear foot $162.00
12-inch pipe                          linear foot $195.00
15-inch pipe                          linear foot $290.00
18-inch pipe                          linear foot $350.00
21-inch pipe                          linear foot $410.00
24-inch pipe                          linear foot $470.00
27-inch pipe                          linear foot $530.00
30-inch pipe                          linear foot $590.00
33-inch pipe                          linear foot $650.00
36-inch pipe                          linear foot $710.00
39-inch pipe                          linear foot $770.00
42-inch pipe                          linear foot $830.00
48-inch pipe                          linear foot $890.00
Lateral                               each        $2,550.00
Lateral for others                    each        $2,800.00
Reconnect existing lateral for others each        $1,925.00
Cleanout                              each        $2,100.00
Wastewater access device              each        $5,300.00
4-foot diameter manhole               each        $14,000.00
5-foot diameter manhole               each        $23,155.00
6-foot diameter manhole               each        $27,500.00
Type “S” manhole                  each        $30,500.00
Bore for 6-inch sewer                 linear foot $560.00
Bore for 8-inch sewer                 linear foot $585.00
Bore for 10-inch sewer                linear foot $610.00
Bore for 12-inch sewer                linear foot $635.00
Bore for 15-inch sewer                linear foot $660.00
Bore for 18-inch sewer                linear foot $685.00
Bore for 21-inch sewer                linear foot $710.00
Bore for 24-inch sewer                linear foot $735.00
Bore for 27-inch sewer                linear foot $760.00
Bore for 30-inch sewer                linear foot $785.00
Bore for 33-inch sewer                linear foot $810.00
Bore for 36-inch sewer                linear foot $835.00
Bore for 39-inch sewer                linear foot $860.00
Bore for 42-inch sewer                linear foot $885.00
Bore for 48-inch sewer                linear foot $910.00
Abandon existing manhole for others   each        $1,500.00
 
MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS
ITEM UNITS
MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS
ITEM                                                     UNITS
Crushed rock for paving repairs                          cubic yard  $80.00
Asphalt paving                                           square yard $247.00
Concrete paving                                          cubic yard  $430.00
Driveway                                                 cubic yard  $215.00
Sidewalk                                                 square yard $90.00
Curb and gutter                                          linear foot $69.00
Stabilized backfill                                      cubic yard  $119.00
Concrete backfill                                        cubic yard  $220.00
Rip rap                                                  square yard $60.00
Rock foundation                                          cubic yard  $75.00
Excavation: in excess of 10 feet in depth below approved             
street grade:
   in dirt                                            cubic yard  $25.00
   in rock                                            cubic yard  $45.00
 
NOTE:
A payment for an extra depth manhole shall be calculated by adding 10 percent
of the manhole unit price for each foot in excess of 10 feet below approved
street grade to the unit price. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19526; 20077; 20449; 20737;
21430; 21824; 22208; 24414; 27355; 31332; 31657; 32003; 32863; 33232)
SEC. 49-18.12.   INDUSTRIAL SURCHARGE RATE FORMULA FOR EXCESSIVE
CONCENTRATIONS.
   Surcharge rate formula. The person responsible for industrial waste
discharge in excessive concentrations of BOD and suspended solids shall pay an
industrial surcharge in addition to regular water and wastewater rates, either
under Section
49-49  or in accordance with the following cost factors and formula:
      (1)   The user's cost factors for excessive industrial waste are based on
the capital and operating cost of wastewater facilities to provide treatment
for the reduction of BOD and suspended solids. The formula is:
         (A)   Surcharge for excessive concentrations:
      Payment rate per 1,000 gallons:
         $2.51478(BOD-250) + $1.52689(SS-250)
            1,000         1,000
         (B)   Surcharge for excessive concentrations for wastewater metered
separately:
      Payment rate per 1,000 gallons:
         $2.79138(BOD-250) + $1.65590(SS-250)
            1,000         1,000
      BOD =   Average concentrations of BOD in mg/l, determined from sampling
the waste as described in Section 49-52
      SS =      Average concentrations of suspended solids in mg/l, as
determined from sampling the waste as described in Section 49-52
      (2)   The rate for each user may be calculated once every 12 months.
(Ord. Nos. 19201; 19300; 19682; 21061; 21430; 22564; 25755; 26135; 26479;
26961; 27355; 27698; 28795; 29150; 29479; 32003; 33232)
SEC. 49-18.13.   CHARGES FOR TRANSPORTERS OF SEPTIC TANK WASTE.
   Transporter rates and requirements. A person who transports or disposes of
septic tank or portable sanitation waste at the city’s wastewater treatment
facility must:
      (1)   obtain and maintain a liquid waste transport permit from the city
for each vehicle in accordance with
Chapter 19,
Article X of this code;
      (2)   deposit $500 with the director for each vehicle, the deposit to be
refunded when the vehicle is no longer used to dispose of waste at the city’s
wastewater treatment facility and all fees have been paid;
      (3)   pay a disposal fee of $0.051 per gallon for each load of septic
tank waste, with the fee calculated as if the permitted vehicle carrying the
load was at full capacity; and
      (4)   dispose of waste at the wastewater treatment facility specified by
the director. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19300; 22026; 22927; 26925; 27698; 33232)
SEC. 49-18.14.   RATES FOR DEVELOPMENT REVIEW ACTIVITIES.
   Design review fees. Refer to Section 303.13.3.6.2 in Chapter 52 of the
Dallas City Code. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 20215; 22208; 23289; 27355; 32676)
SEC. 49-18.15.   PAYMENT TABLE.
   (a)   Off-site rates. The developer will be paid not more than the total
evaluated cost of off-site mains which he constructs or for which he advances
money under Section
49-62(c), in accordance with the following tables:
      (1)   Programmed off-site extensions.
         By private development contract:
            $240.00   /   new residential connection
            $112.50   /   new apartment connection
            $ 7.50   /   each new fixture unit installed for commercial uses,
with the reimbursement rate per connection not to be less than $240.00
      (2)   Nonprogrammed off-site extensions.
         By private development contract:
            $160.00   /   new residential connection
            $ 75.00   /   new apartment connection
            $ 5.00   /   each new fixture unit installed for commercial uses,
with the reimbursement rate per connection not to be less than $160.00
   (b)   Additional rules. For purposes of this section, a fixture unit is
defined in Section 107(d) and Chapter 10 of the Dallas Plumbing Code. A payment
under Subsection (a) of this section will be made strictly in accordance with
the rules of Section
49-62. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19526; 20653)
SEC. 49-18.16.   MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES AND PROVISIONS; RATES WHERE NO CHARGE
SPECIFIED.
   (a)   Service application fees. Upon application for service under Section
49-3 , a fee of $15 will be assessed to establish or transfer a residential or
general service account, except that a fee of $56 will be assessed to establish
or transfer an account for a general service customer described in Section
49-18.1 (f) of this chapter.
   (b)   Discontinuance and restoration charges. For any discontinuance of
service under this chapter, except for a discontinuance under Section
49-22  or Subsection (d) of this section, a charge of $25 will be assessed for
each service call. An additional $45 charge will be assessed if the customer
pays delinquent charges and requests same day restoration of service, or a $35
charge for next day restoration of service. If a meter has to be unpadlocked,
set, or unplugged to restore discontinued service, a charge of $65 will be
assessed for request of same day restoration of service, or $55 for next day
restoration of service, in addition to all other charges.
   (c)   Returned payment device charge. A charge in an amount allowable under
Section 3.506 of the Texas Business and Commerce Code, as amended, will be
assessed when a customer pays a service bill with a payment device, and the
payment device is dishonored and returned to the city.
   (d)   Temporary discontinuance charge. The service charge for discontinuing
service temporarily at the request of the customer or an agent of the customer
is $25, except that the director may waive this charge where the necessity for
turning water off is created by an emergency.
   (e)   Multiple tenant notification for possible service discontinuance. When
it is necessary to notify tenants of possible service discontinuance due to the
delinquent payments of a customer having a master meter serving four or more
units, the customer will be assessed a charge of $2.75 per unit for posting the
cutoff alerts.
   (f)   Service connection permit processing fee. If for any reason, within
the term of a service connection permit, an applicant for a service connection
under Section
49-24 fails to make the connection or does not require the connection, a $25
processing fee will be retained from any service connection charges paid, with
any remainder being refunded to the applicant or property owner.
   (g)   Fire flow test. A charge of $200 will be assessed for each fire flow
test performed on existing city water lines at the request of a customer or
other person to determine water availability for fire protection systems.
   (h)   Where no charge specified. When charges for a service are not
specified in this chapter, the director shall establish charges which are based
on the cost of performing the services, including, but not limited to, such
services as the moving of meter locations, repair to damaged facilities, field
location of mains, fire hydrant relocation, installation of traffic lids on
meter boxes, replacement of a meter with a meter larger than one inch, water
and wastewater main abandonments, installation and removal of temporary
service, abandonment of manholes, and provision of printed materials.
   (i)   Where money credited. All sums of money collected as a charge or fee
authorized under this chapter, at the rates specified in this chapter, shall be
credited to the appropriate water and wastewater fund of the city. (Ord. Nos.
19201; 19300; 20737; 21824; 23289; 25049; 25385; 26961; 27355; 28426; 32863;
33232)
SEC. 49-18.17.   HYDROSTATIC TESTING OF WATER MAINS.
   No charge will be made for the hydrostatic testing or retesting of a water
main, except that a fee of $300.00 will be charged if an expedited test or
retest is requested. An expedited test or retest requires the department to
perform the hydrostatic testing or retesting on the water main within three
days after receipt of the request. (Ord. 26479)
ARTICLE III.
WATER AND WASTEWATER GENERALLY.
SEC. 49-19.   CONTROL OF AND ACCESS TO SYSTEMS; INTERFERENCE WITH ACCESS
GENERALLY.
   (a)   Systems as city property. All parts of the water and wastewater
systems, including but not limited to those parts defined in Section
49-1, are the property of the city. The director shall maintain and control
each system and keep detailed records concerning all aspects of department
operations.
   (b)   Who has access. Only a person who is authorized by the director
pursuant to Section
49-23 will have access to the water and wastewater systems for operation,
construction, maintenance, repair and other service-related purposes.
   (c)   Obstruction of authorized persons. A person commits an offense if he
knowingly obstructs a person authorized in accordance with Section
49-23 from:
      (1)   gaining access to a part of the water or wastewater system for
purposes of operation, inspection, construction, maintenance or repair; or
      (2)   performing actual operation, inspection, construction, maintenance
or repair of a part of the water or wastewater system. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-20.   EMERGENCY AUTHORITY.
   (a)   Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to establish the
city’s policy in the event of shortages or delivery limitations in the city’s
water supply. This section applies to:
      (1)   all persons and premises within the city using water from the water
system;
      (2)   all retail customers who live in unincorporated areas within the
city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction and are served by the water system; and
      (3)   all wholesale service customers outside the city to the extent
provided in Subsection (i).
   (b)   Emergency water management plan. The director shall promulgate and
submit an emergency water management plan to the city council for approval, the
guidelines of which should include:
      (1)   the conditions under which a particular stage of emergency will be
implemented or terminated; and
      (2)   provisions defining specific events that will trigger an emergency.
   (c)   Authority. The city manager is authorized to implement measures
prescribed when required by this section and by the emergency water management
plan approved by the city council. The director is authorized to enforce the
measures implemented and to promulgate regulations, not in conflict with this
section or state and federal laws, in aid of enforcement.
   (d)   Implementation of emergency order. The director, upon determination
that the conditions of a water emergency exist, shall advise the city manager.
The city manager may order that the appropriate stage of emergency response, as
detailed in the emergency water management plan, be implemented. To be
effective, the order must be:
      (1)   made by public announcement; and
      (2)   published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within
24 hours after the public announcement, which order becomes immediately
effective upon publication.
   (e)   Duration of order; change; extension. The order can be made effective
for up to, but not more than, 60 days from the date of publication. Upon
recommendation of the director, the city manager may upgrade or downgrade the
stage of emergency when the conditions triggering that stage occur. Any change
in the order must be made in the same manner prescribed in Subsection (d) for
implementing an emergency order. The city council may, upon the recommendation
of the city manager and the director, extend the duration of the emergency
order for additional time periods, not to exceed 120 days each. The city
manager shall terminate the order in the manner prescribed in Subsection (d)
for implementing an emergency order when the director determines that the
conditions creating the emergency no longer exist.
   (f)   Violation of section. A person commits an offense if he knowingly
makes, causes or permits a use of water contrary to the measures implemented by
the city manager as prescribed in the emergency water management plan. For
purposes of this subsection, it is presumed that a person has knowingly made,
caused or permitted a use of water contrary to the measures implemented if the
mandatory measures have been formally ordered consistent with the terms of
Subsection (d) and:
      (1)   the manner of use has been prohibited by the emergency water
management plan;
      (2)   the amount of water used exceeds that allowed by the emergency
water management plan; or
      (3)   the manner or amount used violates the terms and conditions of a
compliance agreement made pursuant to a variance granted by the director under
Subsection (g).
   (g)   Variances. During the times the emergency order is operative, the
director may grant variances in special cases to persons demonstrating extreme
hardship and need. The director may grant variances only under the following
circumstances and conditions:
      (1)   the applicant must sign a compliance agreement on forms provided by
the director, and approved by the city attorney, agreeing to use the water only
in the amount and manner permitted by the variance;
      (2)   granting of a variance must not cause an immediate significant
reduction in the city’s water supply;
      (3)   the extreme hardship or need requiring the variance must relate to
the health, safety or welfare of the person requesting it; and
      (4)   the health, safety and welfare of other persons must not be
adversely affected by granting of the variance.
   (h)   Revocation of variances. The director may revoke a variance granted
when he determines that:
      (1)    the conditions of Subsection (g) are not being met or are no
longer applicable;
      (2)   the terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or
      (3)   the health, safety or welfare of other persons requires revocation.
   (i)   Wholesale service to customers outside the city. The director shall
advise customers receiving wholesale water service from the city of actions
taken under the emergency water management plan. The director may restrict
service to customers outside the city as permitted under the contract and state
law.
   (j)   Authority under other laws. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to limit the authority of the mayor, the city council or the city manager to
seek emergency relief under the provisions of any state or federal disaster
relief act. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-21.   ADEQUACY OF SUPPLY.
   (a)   City supply must be adequate. Under no circumstances shall water be
furnished by the city to any applicant or customer unless the supply of the
city is adequate. In cases of emergency, priority of users of the city’s water
supply shall be determined by the director, subject to the requirements of
state law and Section
49-20.
   (b)   Revisions. The city council may from time to time, upon recommendation
of the city manager and the director, make revisions in the emergency water
management plan approved under Section
49-20(b) if prudent conservation requires the revisions. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-21.1.   CONSERVATION MEASURES RELATING TO LAWN AND LANDSCAPE
IRRIGATION.
   (a)   Purpose. Lawn and landscape irrigation practices within the city,
especially during the summer months, can cause a waste of valuable water
resources. The purpose of this section is to mandate that water be used for
lawn and landscape irrigation in a manner that prevents waste, conserves water
resources for their most beneficial and vital uses, and protects the public
health.
   (b)   Lawn and landscape irrigation restrictions.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if, during the period from April 1
through October 31 of any year and between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on any day during that period, the person irrigates, waters, or causes or
permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on premises
owned, leased, or managed by the person. It is a defense to prosecution under
this paragraph that the person was only using water from a source other the
city’s water or wastewater system.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if, at any time during the year, the
person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of
any lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased, or managed by the
person with a hose-end sprinkler or automatic irrigation system on a day other
than a designated outdoor water use day for the property address. It is a
defense to prosecution under this paragraph that the person was:
         (A)   using a hand-held hose, drip irrigation device, soaker hose, or
hand-held bucket;
         (B)   irrigating during the repair or testing of a new or existing
automatic irrigation system;
         (C)   irrigating nursery stock at a commercial plant nursery; or
         (D)   only using water from a source other than the city’s water or
wastewater system.
      (3)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly or recklessly
irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of a lawn or
landscape located on premises owned, leased, or managed by the person in a
manner that causes:
         (A)   a substantial amount of water to fall upon impervious areas
instead of upon the lawn or landscape, such that a constant stream of water
overflows from the lawn or landscape onto a street or other drainage area; or
         (B)   an automatic irrigation system or other lawn or landscape
watering device to operate during any form of precipitation.
      (4)   A person commits an offense if, on premises owned, leased, or
managed by the person, the person operates a lawn or landscape automatic
irrigation system or device that:
         (A)   has any broken or missing sprinkler head; or
         (B)   has not been properly maintained in a manner that prevents the
waste of water.
   (c)   Rain and freeze sensing devices.
      (1)   Any automatic irrigation system installed or operated within the
city must be equipped with a working rain and freeze sensing device.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if, on premises owned, leased, or
managed by the person, the person:
         (A)   installs, or causes or permits the installation of, an automatic
irrigation system in violation of Subsection (c)(1); or
         (B)   operates, or causes or permits the operation of, an automatic
irrigation system that does not comply with Subsection (c)(1).
   (d)   Variances. The director may, in special cases, grant variances from
the provisions of Subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), or (c) to persons demonstrating
extreme hardship and need. The director may grant variances only under all of
the following circumstances and conditions:
      (1)   The applicant must sign a compliance agreement on forms provided by
the director, and approved by the city attorney, agreeing to irrigate or water
a lawn or landscape only in the amount and manner permitted by the variance.
      (2)   Granting of a variance must not cause an immediate significant
reduction in the city’s water supply.
      (3)   The extreme hardship or need requiring the variance must relate to
the health, safety, or welfare of the person requesting it.
      (4)   The health, safety, and welfare of other persons must not be
adversely affected by granting the variance.
   (e)   Revocation of variances. The director may revoke a variance granted
when the director determines that:
      (1)   the conditions of Subsection (d) are not being met or are no longer
applicable;
      (2)   the terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or
      (3)   the health, safety, or welfare of other persons requires
revocation. (Ord. Nos. 24745; 26518; 28622)
SEC. 49-22.   TEMPORARY DISCONTINUANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE OR
EMERGENCY REASONS.
   (a)   Reasons for temporary discontinuance. The director is authorized to
temporarily discontinue service to premises for the following reasons:
      (1)   when a main break or other failure in the water or wastewater
systems could injure persons, private or city property, or other parts of the
systems;
      (2)   to perform routine maintenance or repair to any part of the water
or wastewater systems;
      (3)   to perform emergency maintenance or repair to any part of the water
or wastewater systems;
      (4)   in other cases of emergency, when necessary to protect the general
health, safety or welfare of persons; or
      (5)   to make a connection to a newly constructed or relocated water or
wastewater main.
   (b)   Responsibilities upon temporary discontinuance. In all cases of
temporary discontinuance, the director must restore service as soon as is
practical and must take all reasonable steps necessary to protect the public
health and safety under the circumstances. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-23.   AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES; RIGHT OF ACCESS OF EMPLOYEES FOR INSPECTION
AND MAINTENANCE; ACCESS OF CONTRACTORS.
   (a)   Authorized employees. The director shall designate those individuals
who are employed by the department and authorized to carry a credential of the
department. No person other than an authorized employee shall have or use any
credential of the department. An employee must surrender credentials to the
director upon termination of employment or at the request of the director.
   (b)   Right to access. An authorized employee shall carry a credential when
dealing with the general public. Upon presentation of the credential, an
authorized employee shall have free access, at reasonable hours, to private
premises receiving service, for the purpose of reading or inspecting a water
meter, a backflow prevention device or for other service- related activities.
Only an authorized employee may have free access to parts of the water and
wastewater systems for purposes of operation, construction, repair or
maintenance.
   (c)   Access by non authorized persons. A person commits an offense if he is
not an authorized employee under this section and he knowingly:
      (1)   uses a department credential to obtain access to private property
or to a part of the water or wastewater system; or
      (2)   falsely represents, by other than the display of a credential, that
he is an authorized employee of the department to obtain access to private
property or to a part of the water or wastewater system.
   (d)   Private contractors. A person performing construction or repair work
for the department pursuant to a contract with the city, or a private
development contract under Section
49-60(f), has a right of access to those parts of the water or wastewater
systems as is reasonably necessary to fulfill performance of the contract;
provided, that no person shall have the right under this subsection to open or
operate any valve in these systems. Access is subject to the express directions
of the director, the terms of the contract documents, and all requirements of
this code concerning permits. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-24.   SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   Maintaining service connections. The director is authorized to
maintain service connections from the mains in public rights-of-way to building
laterals or building water lines on premises, pursuant to the following rules:
      (1)   The city is responsible for maintenance of a service connection
from the main to the meter, or from the main to the property line where the
connection is unmetered, in the case of water service and from the main to the
property line in the case of wastewater service.
      (2)   The city will maintain a service connection at its original size as
long as the customer continues use of a service.
      (3)   The city’s obligation to continue maintenance of a service
connection ceases when the customer abandons use of a service.
      (4)   The city will remove, at the property owner’s expense, a service
connection made in violation of this code.
      (5)   The director is authorized to charge a fee in accordance with
Section
49-18.7 to an applicant or property owner for construction, installation, or
maintenance of a service connection.
   (b)   Connection permits. The following rules govern the issuance of a
service connection permit:
      (1)   The plumber must submit a copy of the plumbing permit, obtained
from the city’s building inspection division, with the connection permit
application. The connection permit application must specify:
         (A)   the address of the work;
         (B)   the name of the applicant;
         (C)   the name of the property owner; and
         (D)   the names of other plumbing subcontractors employed to do the
work.
      (2)   The director may revoke a permit at any time before work is
completed and connection is made if the director determines that the terms and
conditions of the permit are being violated, and no interested party will have
a claim for damages or refunds as a result of revocation.
      (3)   A connection permit must be issued in the name of the applicant and
the property owner. A permit is nontransferable and expires one year from the
date of issuance. In the event of failure to connect within the term of the
permit, a processing fee will be retained in accordance with Section
49-18.16(f) from any service connection charges paid, with any remainder being
refunded to the applicant or property owner.
   (c)   Construction and installation rules. The following rules govern
construction and installation of service connections:
      (1)   A building lateral, building water line, drain and other private
plumbing must be constructed in strict accordance with the provisions of the
city’s plumbing and building codes. The director may, as a condition of the
connection permit, impose additional construction requirements not in conflict
with the plumbing and building codes, this chapter, or other applicable state
or federal laws and regulations in order to protect the system from damage or
contamination, to facilitate connection, or where extraordinary circumstances
may require.
      (2)   A building lateral and building water line must be laid up to the
property line and the end left exposed. The permittee or his agent shall
provide a ditch safe for entry in accordance with state and federal safety
standards. A building lateral and building water line must be stubbed out to
meet the service line both as to horizontal location and vertical depth.
Location of the service line will be furnished upon request, or upon issuance
of a connection permit, but the permittee or the permittee’s agent is
responsible for uncovering and confirming the location of the service line
before construction of the building lateral or building water line.
      (3)   For a water service connection two inches or smaller, the
department will install the service line and meter and connect them to the
building water line when the building water line is properly laid in place. For
a residential wastewater service connection, the department will complete the
connection from the service line to the building lateral at the property line.
      (4)   For a water or wastewater service connection other than described
in Subsection (c)(3) of this section, the director may require the permittee to
construct and install the entire service connection including line connection
and meter hookup, if any. In the case of a water service connection under this
Subsection (c)(4), the department will inspect the water main tap and all
connections from that point to the building water line. In the case of a
wastewater service connection under this Subsection (c)(4), the department will
inspect the wastewater line tap and the building lateral. Upon inspection and
final acceptance of the service connection by the city, that portion of the
service connection that is the city’s responsibility to maintain under
Subsection (a) of this section becomes the property of the city free and clear
of all liens and encumbrances. If the director does not require the permittee
to construct and install the entire service connection, the department shall
construct and install the service connection in the same manner as described
for the connections done under Subsection (c)(3) of this section, at the
permittee’s cost.
      (5)   If the director requires the permittee to construct the service
connection, the permittee shall enter into a contract for the purpose pursuant
to the format prescribed in Section
49-60(f)(1), (f)(3), and (f)(4). The contract and bonds must be approved by the
director before any construction can commence. The permittee shall meet the
applicable requirements of the Dallas Plumbing Code, the connection permit and
this chapter, and shall pay the applicable charges and costs prescribed in
Section
49-18.7. In addition to compliance with the rules set out in this section, the
permittee shall obtain and follow the applicable department utility
appurtenance sheets to be used in completing the connection.
      (6)   All service connections must be made only by persons authorized by
the director, and the private plumbing must meet the construction requirements
of the Dallas Plumbing Code. Any ditch dug for the purpose of constructing or
installing a connection must be backfilled by the permittee or his agent upon
completion of the connection, following inspection and approval by the city.
      (7)   Nothing in this Subsection (c) shall be construed to limit the
city’s right to construct and install any service connection where the director
may deem it appropriate.
   (d)   Nuisance. Every commode, wastewater drain, privy or other wastewater
receptacle used on premises which is neither connected to the wastewater system
nor to a septic tank or receptacle approved under this code is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and a public health hazard.
   (e)   Enforcement authority. The director is authorized to promulgate
regulations not in conflict with this code, the city charter or state laws and
regulations to aid in implementing the provisions of this section. (Ord. Nos.
19201; 19622; 20215; 20653; 20737)
SEC. 49-25.   CROSS CONNECTIONS; LOCATION OF WATER AND SEWER MAINS.
   (a)   Cross connection prohibited. A person shall not make or permit a cross
connection between a system of piping supplied by the water system and the
following sources of supply, unless properly protected by an approved backflow
prevention device:
      (1)   a public or private source of primary supply other than the water
system; or
      (2)   any secondary supply known or suspected to be unsafe for drinking
water, including but not limited to shallow wells, reused industrial supplies,
raw surface water or swimming pools.
   (b)   Return flow prohibited. A person shall not make or permit a connection
or cross connection that causes the discharge or return of water to the water
system, including, but not limited to, water used as process water in or
passing through a boiler, heat exchanger, air conditioner, cooling equipment,
or other device, appliance, machine, mechanical system or process, in any
industrial, commercial, or residential application.
   (c)   Nuisance. A person commits an offense if he makes or permits a cross
connection or connection in violation of Subsection (a) or Subsection (b). The
making of a cross connection or connection in violation of Subsection (a) or
Subsection (b) is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a public health hazard.
   (d)   Proximity of water and wastewater mains. The director shall regulate
the relative proximity of water mains to wastewater mains, both existing and
under construction, in accordance with the Design Criteria for Public Sewerage
Systems and the Rules and Regulations for Public Water Supply of the State
Department of Health, in order to prevent contamination of the water system.
(Ord. Nos. 19201; 21606)
SEC. 49-26.   FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (a)   Application required. A person shall not connect a fire protection
system to the water system until application is made to the director, and then
approved by the director and the city fire marshal.
   (b)   General requirements. A fire protection system is subject to the
following regulations:
      (1)   The director shall not permit a fire protection system without an
approved meter or detector check device with a bypass meter.
      (2)   A fire protection service line must be no larger than one size
smaller than the water main serving the fire protection system, unless the
director approves a size on size connection in writing; provided that, in every
case, the water system must be capable of providing, at the point of delivery,
the delivery rate specified by the city fire marshal for the customer’s fire
protection system.
      (3)   A fire protection service line must not be larger than eight inches
without the director’s written approval.
      (4)   A fire protection system must conform to the standards and
regulations promulgated by the city fire marshal and other applicable
provisions of this code.
      (5)   A fire protection system installed by the customer shall be
inspected by the department at the time of installation.
   (c)   Installation of service connections. On service connections two inches
or smaller, the city will perform installation and maintenance of the necessary
meters and service lines connecting the fire protection system to the water
system, which installation will be done at the sole expense of the customer. On
service connections larger than two inches, the customer shall install the
service connection in accordance with the rules prescribed for water service
connections in Section
49-24(c)(4).
   (d)   Grounds for discontinuance. The director may, upon 10 days advance
notice to the city fire marshal, discontinue treated water service to a fire
protection system if:
      (1)   the director discovers an unauthorized connection has been made;
      (2)   water has been used from a fire protection system for a purpose
other than extinguishing a fire;
      (3)   a fire protection system has been installed or used without a
meter, where a meter is required;
      (4)   a waste of water is permitted from a fire protection system through
pipes or fixtures;
      (5)   charges for service are delinquent under Section
49-7; or
      (6)   the director discovers a non-potable contaminant or pollutant in
the fire protection system, where the fire protection system and the potable
private water system are not separated by a backflow protection device.
   (e)   Restoration of service. Upon discontinuance under Subsection (d)(3),
the director shall not restore the service until the customer remedies the
problem causing discontinuance, or makes application for the kind and size of
meter prescribed by the director for the particular system. The meter will be
installed at the customer’s expense.
   (f)   Availability of service. Availability of treated water will depend
upon water main sizes and normal operating pressures in the area where the
applicant’s property is located. The applicant must construct adequate storage
facilities on his premises or additional mains, pursuant to a private
development contract under Section
49-60(f), to meet the necessary fire flow demand in the event his demand causes
inadequate water pressure to other customers in the area for a sustained
period.
   (g)   Storage facilities. The construction and maintenance of water storage
facilities for fire protection purposes, as required by Subsection (f), are
subject to the following standards:
      (1)   A storage facility, including pumps installed by an applicant, must
discharge into the applicant’s fire protection system. The storage facility,
whether or not pumps are used, must not be of the pressure type unless the
applicant installs an approved backflow prevention device between the point
where the facility discharges into the fire protection system and the point of
its connection to the water system so as to prevent backflow into the water
system.
      (2)   A constructed storage facility must be maintained in accordance
with the applicable standards of the city and the State Department of Health.
Water in the storage facility must be maintained in a potable condition and
subject to periodic inspection by the director.
      (3)   Every storage facility must have an approved air gap, except for a
facility of the pressure type permitted in Subsection (g)(1). Quick acting
valves must not be used to control the supply line to the storage facility, if
such valves cause water hammer in the water system.
      (4)   A storage facility, if not of the pressure type permitted in
Subsection (g)(1), must be equipped with an overflow pipe at least eight inches
below the supply line from the water system. The overflow pipe must be
protected in order to prevent access of insects, birds or other animals. The
overflow pipe must be at least two inches in diameter larger than the supply
line from the water system.
      (5)   A storage facility must be provided with a drain pipe and valve for
easy discharge purposes. The drain pipe must not be connected to the wastewater
system.
   (h)   Nonconforming systems. Any person modifying, changing or adding to his
premises or his existing fire protection system must at that time come into
compliance with the requirements of this section, if his fire protection system
did not previously conform to the requirements of this section. (Ord. Nos.
19201; 19622; 20215)
SEC. 49-27.   FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (a)   Permission to use. Fire hydrants are used in extinguishing fires and
are to be opened only by authorized employees of the department and the city's
fire department, department of transportation and public works, and department
of sanitation services. Any other person who wishes to use a fire hydrant must
seek written permission from the director under the following conditions:
      (1)   A person requesting use of a fire hydrant must make written
application for a permit and must pay charges in accordance with Section
49-18.9.
      (2)   The permittee must:
         (A)   use a water meter furnished by the department;
         (B)   connect the meter directly to the fire hydrant and include in
the connection an approved reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device
provided by the department;
         (C)   make the meter readily available for reading by the department
each month it is used; and
         (D)   return the meter immediately after finishing use of the hydrant
or upon request of the director.
      (3)   If water is to be hauled from the hydrant, the permittee must
display a decal issued by the department on each vehicle used in hauling water
from the hydrant.
      (4)   A permittee authorized to open a fire hydrant must only use an
approved spanner wrench and must replace the caps on the outlets when not in
use.
   (b)   Improper use. Failure to abide by the conditions of Subsection (a) is
sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the fire hydrant and to refuse to
grant subsequent permits for use of a fire hydrant. A person commits an offense
if he knowingly:
      (1)   uses water from a fire hydrant without a permit from the director;
      (2)   violates Subsection (a)(2), (a)(3), or (a)(4) of this section or
any of the terms and conditions of a permit granted under this section.
   (c)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   a city employee engaged in work in an official capacity; or
      (2)   a person using water from a fire hydrant without charge for
department construction work under Section
49-35. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 22026; 23694; 26479; 30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 49-28.   WATER STORAGE TANKS AND PUMPING EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Tanks supplied by water system. A water storage tank supplied solely
by the water system must be satisfactorily built and covered to prevent the
entrance of contamination. Every storage tank supplied solely by the water
system must have an approved air gap and overflow pipe; except, that a tank of
the pressure type will be permitted if an approved backflow prevention device
is installed. The delivery of treated water must be controlled by a slow acting
automatic valve which does not cause water hammer in the water system. A
storage tank must be maintained in a manner satisfactory to the State
Department of Health and the director and is subject to periodic inspection by
the director.
   (b)   Tanks with other water sources. Where treated water service is used as
a primary or secondary supply to a roof or suction tank which is also supplied
by another source of water, the rules of Subsection (a) apply, except that a
storage tank under this subsection must not be of the pressure type, but must
have an approved air gap and overflow pipe; no backflow prevention devices will
be allowed.
   (c)   Water pumps. Pumps taking suction from the water system and serving
water storage tanks, plus other pumping equipment installed by a customer for
any other purpose except dewatering, may be installed and operated only upon
approval from the director as to size, delivery rate and valving arrangements.
(Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-29.   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (a)   Authority to require. The director is authorized to:
      (1)   give notice and require a customer to install an approved backflow
prevention device at the customer’s own expense, where the director determines
that the device is necessary for protection of private plumbing on the premises
or the water system;
      (2)   give notice and require a customer to correct a defective backflow
prevention device at the customer’s own expense;
      (3)   refuse or discontinue service if a backflow prevention device is
not installed or corrected as provided in this section; and
      (4)   inspect backflow prevention devices and charge fees for the
inspection in accordance with Section
49-18.6(d).
   (b)   Maintenance responsibility. The customer is responsible for general
maintenance and upkeep of an approved backflow prevention device. The city and
the director are not responsible for damage done during inspection that is a
result of corrosion or improper maintenance of a backflow prevention device.
(Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-30.   PRIVATE WATER MAINS OR SYSTEMS.
   (a)   Mains are property of city. Water and wastewater mains, pipes and
appurtenances laid in streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way within the
city immediately become property of the city upon their acceptance, except for
mains, pipes and appurtenances laid within the city by a governmental entity
pursuant to a license granted by the city. Water and wastewater mains, pipes
and appurtenances laid within the city and connected to the water or wastewater
systems must be constructed under department supervision and in accordance with
plans and specifications approved by the director.
   (b)   Nonconforming mains. The director may refuse application for service
to premises inside or outside of the city if, upon examination, the mains,
private water lines or laterals, valves, appurtenances, fire hydrants or other
equipment serving the premises are of such quality, size or installation as
will not comply with the general standards and specifications of the
department.
   (c)   Substandard laterals or water lines. The director may require the
customer, as a precondition of continued service, to replace or repair private
plumbing found to be in a substandard condition according to the Dallas
Plumbing Code, if the substandard plumbing may cause:
      (1)   a hazard to public health;
      (2)   damage or contamination to the water or wastewater systems;
      (3)   a substantial waste of water; or
      (4)   introduction of extraneous water into the wastewater system. (Ord.
Nos. 19201; 20653)
SEC. 49-31.   VENDING WATER.
   (a)   Permit required. A person commits an offense if he sells treated water
inside the city, from a source of supply inside or outside the city, without a
permit from the director granted subject to the conditions of Subsection (b).
   (b)   Conditions of permit. No person may sell treated water inside the city
from any source of supply without a permit from the director subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   The application for permit must be reviewed and approved by the
city environmental health officer prior to its issuance.
      (2)   The production, processing, treatment and distribution of the water
is at all times under the supervision of the department or another competent
water works operator holding a valid certificate of competency issued by the
State Department of Health.
      (3)   The permittee must abide by the applicable state laws and the
rules, regulations and other conditions set forth by the State Department of
Health, the director and the city environmental health officer regarding the
sale of drinking water.
   (c)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to the retail sale of
commercially bottled water by a grocery store, drug store, restaurant or other
similar business establishment.
   (d)   Enforcement authority. The director is authorized to promulgate
additional regulations, not in conflict with state laws, rules and regulations
or other applicable provisions of this code, to aid implementation of this
section. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-32.   WASTEWATER INDEMNITY AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   Grounds for denial of wastewater service. Wastewater service to
premises inside or outside the city must be denied if:
      (1)   the premises are subject to frequent, severe flooding;
      (2)   the wastewater main serving the premises surcharges or overflows
due to infiltration of ground water from the premises; or
      (3)   the premises are subject to being flooded by a surcharged
wastewater main due to the elevation of the premises in relation to the actual
or proposed wastewater main.
   (b)   Indemnity agreement. Notwithstanding Subsection (a), the director may
provide wastewater service where these conditions exist if the owner agrees in
writing to defend and indemnify the city and save it whole and harmless against
all damages, costs and expenses caused by the surcharging, backflow or overflow
of the wastewater main serving the premises.
   (c)   Effect of agreement. The indemnity agreement, when executed by the
owner, constitutes a covenant running with the land binding upon the owner, his
heirs, successors and assigns. The agreement must be approved as to form by the
city attorney and must be filed in the deed records of the county in which the
premises is located. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-33.   EXPOSING METERS OR HYDRANTS TO DAMAGE; NOTICE OF WORK AFFECTING
SYSTEMS; MOVING METERS OR HYDRANTS.
   (a)   Exposure to damage. A person shall not build a driveway, sidewalk or
other improvement that:
      (1)   exposes a meter, fire hydrant, air valve, tap, pressure recording
instrument, cleanout or other appurtenance to damage from vehicular traffic; or
      (2)   causes obstruction of access to a meter, fire hydrant, air valve,
tap, pressure recording instrument, cleanout or other appurtenance for
operation, repair, inspection or maintenance purposes.
   (b)   Notice of work affecting systems. A person who does work of any nature
on a street, alley or sidewalk within the city must notify the director at
least 10 days in advance of the removal, raising or lowering of any part of the
water or wastewater system that may interfere with the work. Where the director
is not notified, damage to any part of the systems resulting from the work will
be charged against the person or that person’s agents or contractors performing
the work.
   (c)   Request to move appurtenance. The owner or occupant of premises
adversely affected by the location of a meter, fire hydrant, air valve, tap,
pressure recording instrument or other appurtenance may make written
application to the director to have the device moved, under the following
conditions:
      (1)   The director may approve the application if he determines that the
move will not interfere with normal department operations and will not cause
damage to the water or wastewater system. The decision of the director in such
matters is final.
      (2)   Upon approval of the application, the director will furnish the
applicant an estimate of costs to move the device. The applicant shall bear all
estimated moving costs.
      (3)   Upon deposit of the estimated costs by the applicant, the
department will make the agreed-to change in location. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 20653)
SEC. 49-34.   COMMUNICATING ELECTRICITY TO PIPES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he makes, causes or permits:
      (1)   a direct or indirect metallic connection, through which electric
current can be transmitted, with a part of the water or wastewater system, or
to private pipes, laterals or other private facilities which are connected to
either system; or
      (2)   the transmission of electric current through a part of the water or
wastewater system, or through a metal conductor of electricity that is bonded
or joined to either system. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-35.   WATER USED FOR CONSTRUCTION WORK.
   (a)   When water is free. The director may furnish water free of charge to:
      (1)   a contractor or other person performing construction work for the
department; or
      (2)   a licensed plumber performing a pressure test of a private plumbing
system, which test has been authorized in advance by the director.
   (b)   Other construction work. For any construction work other than that
described in Subsection (a), the charge for water used will be in accordance
with the general service rates specified in Section
49-18.1(c)(2) and will be charged against the person using the water.
   (c)   Conditions when charged. If water to be used for construction is
subject to charge, the water must not be turned on until all applicable pre-use
charges are paid. Water service may be discontinued, or application refused, in
the same manner as provided under Sections
49-3 or
49-7. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 21430; 26961)
SEC. 49-36.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 20653)
SEC. 49-37.   TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING SYSTEMS; UNLAWFUL USE OF WATER; PRIMA
FACIE EVIDENCE.
   (a)   Tampering with or damaging system. A person commits an offense if,
without the written permission of the city manager or the director, he
knowingly:
      (1)   damages or destroys part of the water or wastewater system;
      (2)   tampers with part of the water or wastewater system; or
      (3)   damages, destroys or tampers with a fire hydrant within the city.
   (b)   Certain conditions creating prima facie evidence of tampering. For
purposes of this section, it is prima facie evidence that a person has tampered
under Subsections (a)(2) or (a)(3) if the person is a customer, owner or person
in control of the premises and:
      (1)   water is prevented from passing through a meter used or furnished
by the department to supply water to the premises;
      (2)   a meter used or furnished by the department is prevented from
correctly registering the quantity of water supplied to the premises;
      (3)   water is diverted or bypassed by the use of a device, from or
around a pipe, main, meter, hydrant or other connection of the department;
      (4)   a meter or service connection of the department used for service to
premises is removed; or
      (5)   wastewater is prevented or diverted from flowing from premises into
the wastewater system.
   (c)   Prima facie evidence of knowledge. The existence on premises of a
device used for any of the unlawful purposes stated in this section shall
constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge of the unlawful purpose on the
part of the customer, owner or person in control of the premises. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-38.   RIGHTS AS TO CERTAIN FACILITIES OUTSIDE OF THE CITY; RIGHTS UPON
ANNEXATION.
   (a)   Agreements as to facilities. The director may negotiate agreements
with governmental entities defining ownership and maintenance responsibilities
of facilities used or installed for service outside the city.
   (b)   Assumption of service. Where a governmental entity agrees to assume
primary service responsibility over an area previously served by the city,
because of annexation or other reasons, facilities installed will, upon agreed
payment, become the property of the governmental entity, except for:
      (1)   a meter or other appurtenance belonging to and installed by the
city to connect service; or
      (2)   a facility designated by agreement to be the property of the city.
   (c)   City’s rights upon annexation. The following rules apply regarding
mains, appurtenances and other facilities located within property annexed by
the city:
      (1)   Facilities within annexed property immediately become property of
the city.
      (2)   The city will assume those benefits and obligations required to be
assumed under state law, but otherwise must take the facilities free from all
liens or encumbrances.
      (3)   The city may enforce its right to possession of annexed facilities
by an action filed in a state court of competent jurisdiction.
   (d)   Private facilities. Private laterals or building water lines connected
to facilities affected under this section remain, to the extent they are not
located within public property, the property of the person owning the premises
within which the laterals or water lines are located. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-39.   RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT MAINS OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   (a)   Authority to negotiate. The director is authorized to negotiate
agreements, to be approved by the city council, with another governmental
entity to use the streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way of that
governmental entity in order to lay mains, pipes, meters or other facilities of
the water or wastewater systems for service inside or outside the city.
   (b)   Form of agreement. The agreement may take the form of a license,
easement or deed. Notwithstanding the form, ownership of the facilities laid
must remain with the city, and right-of-way adequate to protect the city’s
interest in its facilities must be secured.
   (c)   Rights to connect and maintain. The city reserves the right to
maintain its facilities and must have free access for those purposes. The city
also reserves the right to make any connections or extensions it desires for
public purposes inside or outside the city. (Ord. 19201)
SEC. 49-40.   SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   (a)   Authority to regulate wholesale service. The director is authorized to
promulgate policies and regulations, not in conflict with this chapter or other
laws, regarding the service of new and existing wholesale service customers
outside of the city.
   (b)   Reciprocal service agreements. The director is authorized to negotiate
reciprocal service agreements with other governmental entities covering retail
service to limited areas outside of the city, at rates and under such terms and
conditions as the parties agree upon, subject to the approval of the city
council.
   (c)   Existing service outside the city. The director is authorized to
continue retail service to those areas outside of the city for which the city
has previously assumed the obligation to serve pursuant to written agreement
authorized under city charter, city ordinances or state law. The director is
not required to serve new retail customers outside the city, but the director
may serve such customers if he determines that service is within the reasonable
service area and capability of the city, subject to the following additional
rules:
      (1)   The applicant shall sign a service contract, on a form prescribed
by the director and approved by the city attorney, agreeing to:
         (A)   build facilities at his cost;
         (B)   abide by the terms of this chapter; and
         (C)   fully indemnify the city against all damages of any character
that may arise out of the construction, operation or maintenance of facilities
used to connect to the water or wastewater system.
      (2)   The applicant shall provide for the laying of all facilities and
appurtenances necessary to reach a connection point designated by the director,
and the facilities must be built in strict accordance with the requirements and
specifications of the department.
      (3)   The meter at the designated connection point must be located
inside, or as near as practicable to, the city limits. The meter must be
operated and maintained by the city.
      (4)   The director may revoke permission to serve at any time if he
determines that the terms and provisions of this chapter, or any additional
conditions of service, are being violated.
      (5)   The director may promulgate reasonable rules, not in conflict with
this chapter or other laws, as additional conditions of providing retail
service outside of the city and in aid of administration of this subsection.
   (d)   Applicability of chapter. Except in the case of a reciprocal service
agreement, a retail customer outside the city will be subject to the same
applicable provisions of this chapter as is a customer inside the city, which
provisions must be made a part of any agreement entered into for the service.
(Ord. 19201)
ARTICLE IV.
WATER QUALITY.
SEC. 49-41.   PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (a)   In general. This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of
the wastewater system, to enable the city of Dallas to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws, including the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 USC §§1251 et
seq.), and the general pretreatment regulations (Title 40, Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 403). The objectives of this article are:
      (1)   to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system that will interfere with its operation, including interference with its
use or disposal of municipal sludge;
      (2)   to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system that will pass, inadequately treated, through the wastewater system and
into receiving waters, or that will otherwise be incompatible with the
wastewater system;
      (3)   to protect the health and safety of both the wastewater system’s
personnel and the general public;
      (4)   to promote the reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge within the wastewater system;
      (5)   to provide for wastewater contracts between the city and other
municipalities or extra- jurisdictional users who discharge to the wastewater
system; and
      (6)   to enable the city to comply with its Texas Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and
any other federal or state laws to which the wastewater system is subject.
   (b)   Incorporation of EPA or TCEQ standards. All categorical pretreatment
standards, sewage pretreatment rules, lists of toxic pollutants, industrial
categories, and other applicable regulations promulgated by the EPA or TCEQ,
including all future amendments of those standards, rules, and regulations, are
incorporated into this article. (Ord. Nos. 28084; 31480)
SEC. 49-42.   ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Authority to enforce. The director and the city environmental health
officer shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this article,
including the right to make inspections and take enforcement action against
violators. For purposes of this article, state law, and federal law, the
wastewater system is a publicly-owned treatment works.
   (b)   Enforcement response plan.
      (1)   For the purpose of promoting consistency of enforcement throughout
the city’s jurisdiction and service area, the director shall promulgate and
enforce an enforcement response plan.
      (2)   The plan must contain detailed procedures indicating how the city
will investigate and respond to instances of industrial user noncompliance. The
plan, at a minimum, must:
         (A)   describe how the city will investigate instances of
noncompliance;
         (B)   describe the types of escalating enforcement responses the city
will take in response to all anticipated types of industrial user violations
and the time periods within which responses will take place;
         (C)   identify, by title, the official or officials responsible for
each type of response; and
         (D)   adequately reflect the city’s primary responsibility to enforce
all applicable pretreatment requirements and standards, as detailed in Title
40, Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 403.8 (f)(1) and (f)(2), as amended,
and Sections
49-43 and
49-50 of this article.
   (c)   Administrative search warrants. The municipal court shall have the
power to issue to the director or city environmental health officer
administrative search warrants, or other process allowed by law, where
necessary to aid in enforcing this article.
   (d)   Penalties. A person who violates any provision of this article or any
term or condition of an industrial waste discharge permit granted pursuant to
this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day
during which the violation is continued. Each offense is punishable by a fine
of not less than $1,000 or more than $2,000.
   (e)   Criminal responsibility. A person is criminally responsible for a
violation of this article if the person knowingly, recklessly, intentionally,
or with criminal negligence:
      (1)   commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or
permits another person to commit a violation; or
      (2)   owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the
cause of the illegal discharge under Section
49-43,
49-44,
49-46,
49-55.6, or
49-55.7.
   (f)   Civil actions. This article or the terms and conditions of a discharge
permit granted pursuant to this article may be enforced by civil court action
as provided by state or federal law. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19682; 21409; 26925;
28084)
SEC. 49-43.   CERTAIN WASTES PROHIBITED IN THE WASTEWATER SYSTEM.
   (a)   General prohibitions. A person shall not discharge into the wastewater
system, or cause or permit to be discharged into the wastewater system, any
pollutant that causes a pass through or interference. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW, whether or not they are subject to
categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (b)   Specific prohibitions. A person shall not discharge, or cause or
permit to be discharged, any of the following pollutants into the wastewater
system:
      (1)   Inflows or infiltration, as illustrated by, but not limited to,
storm water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, a downspout, a
yard drain, a yard fountain or pond, or lawn spray.
      (2)   Wastewater or industrial waste generated or produced outside the
city, unless approval in writing from the director has been given to the person
discharging the waste.
      (3)   A liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit (65 degrees Centigrade).
      (4)   Gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, fuel oil, vapors, or any other
pollutant that creates a fire or explosion hazard in the wastewater system,
including but not limited to industrial waste with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Centigrade).
      (5)   A pollutant that will cause corrosive structural damage to the
wastewater system, unless the portion of the wastewater system directly or
indirectly receiving the discharge is specifically designed to accommodate the
corrosive discharge.
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
      (7)   A solid or viscous pollutant in amounts that will cause obstruction
to the flow in the wastewater system, resulting in interference.
      (8)   Heat in quantities that will cause the temperature to exceed 104
degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) at any point in the wastewater system
or will otherwise inhibit biological activity in the wastewater system, unless
the director expressly approves alternate temperature limits in the
discharger’s industrial waste discharge permit.
      (9)   Solid or liquid substances in quantities capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in wastewater mains or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater system as illustrated by, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails,
lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, and paint residues or
bulk solids, except when such items as lime slurry or lime residues are used in
the treatment of combined storm and wastewater during storm runoff.
      (10)   A pollutant capable of forming a toxic gas, vapor, or fume in a
quantity that may cause, either by itself or by interaction with other waste,
hazard to life or acute employee health or safety problems.
      (11)   Garbage that is not properly shredded as defined in Section
49-1(81).
      (12)   Except where the director has determined that different limits
under an industrial waste discharge permit are appropriate, wastewater
exceeding 200 mg/L of oils, fats, and grease (measured as total oil and
grease).
      (13)   A substance having a pH value lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.5.
      (14)   Unusual taste or odor producing substances, unless pretreated to a
concentration acceptable to the director so that the material does not:
         (A)   cause damage to collection facilities;
         (B)   impair the city’s treatment processes;
         (C)   incur treatment costs exceeding those of normal wastewater;
         (D)   render the water unfit for stream disposal or industrial use; or
         (E)   create a public nuisance.
      (15)   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference with the POTW.
      (16)   Without the approval of the director, a substance or pollutant
other than industrial waste, normal domestic wastewater, septic tank waste, or
chemical toilet waste that is of a toxic or hazardous nature, regardless of
whether or not it is amenable to treatment, including but not limited to bulk
or packaged chemical products.
      (17)   Except at discharge points authorized by this chapter, or by
regulations promulgated by the director that are not in conflict with this
chapter or other laws, wastewater or a pollutant that is trucked or hauled.
      (18)   Any other pollutant, substance, or material not amenable to
treatment, or of a concentration or quantity sufficient to harm the wastewater
system, as determined by the director.
   (c)   Local limits. The following effluent limits, including best management
practices, general pretreatment standards in Title 40, Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 403, categorical pretreatment standards, and state and local
law, are established to protect against pass through and interference. The
limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the wastewater
system. The director may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place
of, the concentration-based limitations. All concentrations for metallic
substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. No person may
discharge wastewater containing pollutants in the form of compounds or elements
with total concentrations exceeding the following uniform concentration and
contributory flow limits:
      (1)   Uniform concentration limits for all wastewater except for
wastewater discharged to the Trinity River Authority Central Regional
Wastewater Treatment Plant.
          Central Wastewater Treatment Plant Southside Wastewater Treatment
Pollutant Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit, Plant Maximum Allowable Discharge
          mg/L                               Limit, mg/L
          Central Wastewater Treatment Plant Southside Wastewater Treatment
Pollutant Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit, Plant Maximum Allowable Discharge
          mg/L                               Limit, mg/L
Arsenic   0.07                               0.50
Cadmium   0.34                               1.00
Chromium  3.62                               5.00
Copper    4.00                               4.00
Cyanide   0.71                               1.60
Lead      1.60                               1.60
Mercury   0.0006                             0.01
Nickel    See Paragraph (2) of this          5.58
          subsection
Selenium  0.20                               0.20
Silver    0.36                               3.04
Sulfide   10.00                              10.00
Zinc      3.06                               5.00
 
      (2)   Contributory flow limits at the Central Wastewater Treatment Plant.
         (A)   For contributing industrial users, the contributory flow
pollutant limitation for nickel is 3.14 mg/L.
         (B)   For non- contributing industrial users, the contributory flow
pollutant limitation for nickel is 0.0028 mg/L.
         (C)   For purposes of this paragraph, a contributing industrial user
is an industrial user found by the city to discharge nickel above the
industrial contributory screening limits at the Central Wastewater Treatment
Plant.
      (3)   Uniform concentration limits for wastewater discharged to the
Trinity River Authority Central Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Pollutant TRA Central Wastewater Treatment Plant
          Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit, mg/L
Pollutant      TRA Central Wastewater Treatment Plant
               Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit, mg/L
Arsenic        0.20
Cadmium        0.10
Chromium       2.90
Copper         2.30
Cyanide        0.50
Lead           0.90
Mercury        0.0004
Molybdenum     0.80
Nickel         4.60
Selenium       0.10
Silver         0.80
TTO            2.13
Sulfide        NA
Zinc           8.00
Oil and grease 200.00
pH             5.5 to 11.0 Standard Units
 
      (4)   Uniform concentration limits for wastewater discharged to the City
of Garland Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Pollutant Garland Duck Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant 
          Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit, mg/L
Pollutant Garland Duck Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant 
          Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit, mg/L
Arsenic   1.1
Cadmium   0.2
Chromium  17
Copper    0.5
Lead      2.3
Mercury   0.005
Nickel    5.8
Selenium  0.7
Silver    0.7
Zinc      15
 
   (d)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this
section and to a civil court action enforcing Subsection (a) of this section if
a person can demonstrate that:
      (1)   a specific numeric local discharge limit to prevent pass through or
interference exists under this section for each pollutant in the person’s
wastewater discharge that caused pass through or interference and the person’s
wastewater discharge was in compliance with the applicable specific local
discharge limit for each pollutant directly prior to and during the pass
through or interference; or
      (2)   if a specific numeric local discharge limit does not exist under
this section for the pollutant in question, the person’s wastewater discharge
did not change substantially in nature or in constituent parts from the
person’s prior wastewater discharges when the city was regularly in compliance
with its Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit and, in the case
of interference, with applicable federal requirements for wastewater sludge use
or disposal.
   (e)   Enforcement actions. If a person discharges a substance into the
wastewater system in violation of this section, fails to comply with the
reporting requirements of this article, or falsifies or improperly alters
pretreatment records required under Section
49-51, the director may take any of the following actions:
      (1)   Suspend discharge. After informal notice, immediately suspend or
halt an industrial user’s discharge.
      (2)   Terminate service. Terminate water and wastewater service to the
premises from which the substance was discharged.
      (3)   Suspend or revoke permit. If the person was discharging wastewater
pursuant to an industrial waste discharge permit issued under Section
49-46, revoke or suspend the permit.
      (4)   Require pretreatment. By administrative order, where applicable, or
by other authorized means, require pretreatment or control of the quantities
and rates of discharge of wastewater to bring the discharge within the limits
established by this section.
      (5)   Criminal or civil enforcement.
         (A)   Request a court of competent jurisdiction to assess a civil fine
against the industrial user in an amount of not less than $1,000. The fine will
be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other
long-term average discharge limit violations, the fine will be assessed for
each day during the period of violation. In addition, the city may seek to
recover the remediation and clean-up costs from the industrial user, and the
costs of preparing and bringing the enforcement action. In determining the
amount of the fine, the court may consider the following:
            (i)   The extent of the harm caused by the violation.
            (ii)   The magnitude and duration of the violation.
            (iii)   Any economic benefit gained by the industrial user as a
result of the violation.
            (iv)   The timing and nature of any corrective actions taken by the
industrial user.
            (v)   The compliance history of the industrial user.
            (vi)   The provisions of the enforcement response plan.
            (vii)   Any other information deemed relevant by the court.
         (B)   Bring a criminal or any other civil enforcement action as
authorized in Section
49-42.
   (f)   Administrative authority of director. The director has the authority
to do any of the following to ensure compliance with this chapter:
      (1)   Notice of violation. The director may serve a written notice of
violation. This does not prevent the director from taking any action, including
an emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of violation.
      (2)   Consent or administrative orders. The director may enter into
consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with an industrial user responsible for
noncompliance. The agreement must include specific action to be taken by the
industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified in
the agreement. The agreement has the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to Section
49-43(e)(4) and is judicially enforceable.
      (3)   Show cause hearing. The director may order an industrial user that
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an
individual wastewater discharge permit, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice must be served on the industrial
user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the industrial user
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A show
cause hearing is not a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the industrial user.
      (4)   Compliance orders. When the director finds that an industrial user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to
the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that the industrial
user come into compliance within a specified time. If the industrial user does
not come into compliance within the time provided, wastewater service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Issuance of a compliance
order is not a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the industrial user.
      (5)   Cease and desist orders. When the director finds that an industrial
user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the industrial user’s
past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the
industrial user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the industrial user to:
         (A)   immediately comply with all requirements; and
         (B)   take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and
desist order is not a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the industrial user.
      (6)   Injunctive relief. When the director finds that an industrial user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition a court
of competent jurisdiction through the city attorney for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on the activities of the industrial user.
The director may also seek any other relief, including environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief is not a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against an industrial user.
   (g)   No waiver of other enforcement; remedies nonexclusive.
      (1)   Action taken by the director under Subsection (e) or (f) does not
prevent the use of other enforcement methods available to the city.
      (2)   The remedies provided for in Subsections (e) and (f) are not
exclusive. The director may take any combination of these actions against an
industrial user.
   (h)   Applicability of more stringent pretreatment standards.
      (1)   National pretreatment standards. If the EPA adopts national
pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise, that are more stringent than
the discharge limits prescribed in Subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this
section, the more stringent national pretreatment standards will apply. A
violation of the more stringent national pretreatment standards will be
considered a violation of this article.
      (2)   Combined wastestream formula. When wastewaters subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard (regulated, unregulated, and diluted
wastestreams) are mixed prior to effluent sampling, the director shall impose
an alternative limit in accordance with Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations,
Section 403.6, as amended.
   (i)   Applicability of more stringent instantaneous discharge limits. An
industrial user within the city who discharges industrial waste ultimately
received and treated by a publicly-owned treatment works owned by a
governmental entity pursuant to a wholesale wastewater contract or a reciprocal
agreement with the city is subject to the following additional rules:
      (1)   If the governmental entity has more stringent instantaneous maximum
allowable discharge limits than those prescribed by this section, or by a
discharge permit issued under Section
49-46, because the EPA or the TCEQ requires the more stringent instantaneous
maximum allowable discharge limits as a part of the governmental entity’s
wastewater pretreatment program, the more stringent discharge limits will
prevail. The director shall furnish to all industrial users affected by this
subsection a copy of the more stringent discharge limits in effect under the
contract. If a permit is issued to an industrial user under this subsection, a
copy of the more stringent discharge limits must be included with the permit.
      (2)   The director shall issue a discharge permit in accordance with
Section
49-46 to an industrial user affected by Paragraph (1) of this subsection, to
ensure notice of and compliance with the more stringent instantaneous maximum
allowable discharge limits. If the industrial user already has a discharge
permit, the director shall amend the permit to apply and enforce the more
stringent instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits. An industrial user
permitted under this subsection shall submit to the director an expected
compliance date and an installation schedule if the more stringent
instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits necessitate technological or
mechanical adjustments to discharge facilities or plant processes.
      (3)   If the director receives notice from the governmental entity of a
change to the instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits or to other
applicable requirements, the director shall notify the affected industrial user
in writing of the change and of the effective date of the change, amend the
permit to apply and enforce the change, and furnish a copy of the change with
the amended permit. If the change results in more stringent instantaneous
maximum allowable discharge limits or other applicable requirements, an
industrial user shall be given a reasonable opportunity to comply with the more
stringent limits or requirements.
      (4)   The more stringent instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits
cease to apply upon termination of the city’s wholesale wastewater contract or
reciprocal agreement with the governmental entity, or upon modification or
elimination of the limits by the governmental entity, the EPA, or the TCEQ. The
director shall take the appropriate action to notify the affected industrial
user of an occurrence under this paragraph.
   (j)   Variances in compliance dates. The director may grant a variance in
compliance dates to an industrial user when, in the director’s opinion, such
action is necessary to achieve pretreatment or corrective measures. In no case
may the director grant a variance in compliance dates to an industrial user
affected by national categorical pretreatment standards beyond the compliance
dates established by the EPA.
   (k)   Authority to regulate. The director may establish regulations, not in
conflict with this chapter or other laws, to control the disposal and discharge
of industrial waste into the wastewater system and to ensure compliance of the
city’s pretreatment enforcement program with all applicable pretreatment
regulations promulgated by the EPA. The regulations established must, where
applicable, be made a part of any discharge permit issued to an industrial user
by the director under Section
49-46 . (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19622; 20215; 21409; 21862; 25214; 25256; 26925;
28084; 31480; 32971)
SEC. 49-44.   WASTE DISPOSAL THROUGH VEHICLES, GREASE TRAPS/INTERCEPTORS, OR
OTHER MEANS.
   (a)   Illegal waste disposal. A person commits an offense if:
      (1)   from a vehicle, portable tank, or other container used for
transporting water, normal domestic wastewater, or industrial waste, the person
discharges or causes the discharge of water, normal domestic wastewater, or
industrial waste into the wastewater system or a private sewer facility
directly or indirectly connected to the wastewater system;
      (2)   by any means, the person discharges or causes the discharge of
water, normal domestic wastewater, or industrial waste into a part of the
wastewater system generally used for maintenance or monitoring, including but
not limited to manholes, cleanouts, or sampling chambers; or
      (3)   by means of a mechanical device or extraneous water, the person
forces normal domestic wastewater or industrial waste collected in a grease
trap/interceptor, sand trap/interceptor, or other waste collection device into
the wastewater system or a private sewer facility directly or indirectly
connected to the wastewater system.
   (b)   Defense. It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) if the
discharge of water, normal domestic wastewater, or industrial waste into the
wastewater system, or into a private sewer facility directly or indirectly
connected to the wastewater system, is from a motor vehicle:
      (1)   that is specially designed and adapted to treat water, normal
domestic wastewater, or industrial waste to concentrations meeting the
requirements of this article prior to discharge into the wastewater system; and
      (2)   the operator of which has written permission from the director to
operate the vehicle within the city. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 26925; 28084)
SEC. 49-45.   RIGHT OF ENTRY OF FEDERAL, STATE, AND CITY EMPLOYEES.
   The following officials, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to gain access to properties as may be necessary for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this article:
      (1)   Authorized representatives of the EPA and TCEQ.
      (2)   The director, the city environmental health officer, and other duly
authorized employees of the city. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 26925; 28084)
SEC. 49-46.   PERMITS REQUIRED FOR DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE; APPLICATIONS;
EXEMPTIONS. 
   (a)   Permit required. A significant industrial user commits an offense if
he discharges, or allows the discharge of, industrial waste into the wastewater
system without obtaining and maintaining a valid significant industrial user
permit from the director, except that a significant industrial user that has
filed a timely application pursuant to Subsection (e) may continue to discharge
for the time period specified in that application.
   (b)   Application procedures.
      (1)   Application for a permit required under Subsection (a) must be made
to the director upon a form provided for the purpose.
      (2)   The application must contain:
         (A)   a description of the activities, structures, equipment, and
plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility that are, or could be, discharged into
the wastewater system;
         (B)   the site plans, floor plans, and mechanical and plumbing plans
of the facility with sufficient detail to show all sewers, floor drains, and
appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
         (C)   the number and type of employees and proposed or actual hours of
operation of the facility;
         (D)   a list of each product produced by type, the amount of the
product produced, the process or processes used to produce the product, and the
rate of production;
         (E)   the type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
         (F)   the time and duration of discharges;
         (G)   a certification statement complying with the requirements of
Section
49-51(m) and signed by a designated authorized representative of the applicant;
         (H)   self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be
monitored, sampling location and frequency, and sample type, based on the
applicable general pretreatment standards in Title 40, Code of Federal
Regulations, Chapter 403, as amended, categorical pretreatment standards, local
limits, and the regulations of state law and this chapter;
         (I)   best management practices if required by the pretreatment
standards; and
         (J)   any other information deemed necessary by the director to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
      (3)   The director may establish further regulations and procedures not
in conflict with this chapter or other laws regarding the granting and
enforcement of permits, including but not limited to administrative orders
issued for the purpose of bringing a violator back into compliance with a
permit.
   (c)   Terms and conditions of permit, in general. The director shall
prescribe such terms and conditions of the permit as are required and
authorized by the EPA and TCEQ, as necessary to ensure full compliance with
this article and all national pretreatment standards and regulations. In
addition, the permit must incorporate all applicable national pretreatment
standards and all other pretreatment regulations promulgated by the EPA and
TCEQ applicable to significant industrial users. These terms and conditions
include but are not limited to:
      (1)   effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable general pretreatment standards in Section 49-48(b), categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law;
      (2)   self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be
monitored (including the process for seeking a waiver for a pollutant neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with Title
40, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 403.12(e)(2), as amended, or a
specific waived pollutant in the case of an individual control mechanism),
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable
general pretreatment standards in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations,
Chapter 403, as amended, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and
state and local law; and
      (3)    a statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond
applicable federal deadlines; and requirements to control slug discharges, if
determined by the POTW to be necessary.
A person commits an offense if the person violates or allows a violation of any
term or condition of a permit issued under this section. The director may
enforce the terms and conditions of the permit as authorized under this chapter
in accordance with Section 49-42(b).
   (d)   Limitation on permit term. The term of a permit may never be longer
than five years.
   (e)   Permit renewal. An industrial user wishing to renew a permit must file
a complete application with the director at least 30 days prior to the
expiration of the industrial user’s existing permit. Failure to submit a
complete application with the director at least 30 days prior to expiration of
the existing permit may subject the industrial user to enforcement actions.
   (f)   Issuance of permits. Any user required to obtain an individual
wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging
into the POTW must obtain the permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of
any discharge. An application for this individual wastewater discharge permit,
in accordance with Subsection (b), must be filed at least 90 days prior to the
date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. The director shall
issue a permit under Subsection (a) if:
      (1)   the director determines that pretreatment facilities are adequate
for efficient treatment of discharged waste and comply with the waste
concentration level requirement of Section
49-43 or with national pretreatment standards, whichever is applicable;
      (2)   the applicant has submitted:
         (A)   an expected compliance date;
         (B)   an installation schedule of approved pretreatment devices; and
         (C)   a self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping plan, including an identification of the pollutants to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the
applicable general pretreatment standards in Title 40, Code of Federal
Regulations, Chapter 403, as amended, categorical pretreatment standards, local
limits, and state and local law; or
      (3)   the applicant is not discharging wastewater in violation of Section
49-43.
   (g)   Nontransferability. A permit granted under this section is not
transferable or assignable.
   (h)   Changes in authorized representative designation. If the designation
of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a
new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be
submitted to the director prior to, or together with, any reports to be signed
by an authorized representative.
   (i)   Defense to enforcement actions. It is a defense to prosecution or to
civil court action brought under this article for a violation of pretreatment
standards that the person held a valid permit issued under this section and the
person discharged industrial waste in violation of national categorical
pretreatment standards as the result of any of the following:
      (1)   Any act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe.
         (A)   The act of God defense constitutes a statutory affirmative
defense contained in Section 7.251 of the Texas Water Code in an action brought
in municipal or state court. If a person can establish that an event that would
otherwise be a violation of this article, or a permit issued pursuant to this
article, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other
catastrophe, the event is not a violation of this article or the permit.
         (B)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the act of God
affirmative defense must:
            (i)   demonstrate through relevant evidence that the sole cause of
the violation was an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe; and
            (ii)   submit the following information to the city within 24 hours
of becoming aware of the violation (if this information is provided orally, a
written submission must be provided to the director within five days):
               (aa)   A description of the event, and the nature and cause of
the event.
               (bb)   The time period of the violation, including exact dates
and times or, if still continuing, the anticipated time the violation is
expected to continue.
               (cc)   The steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the violation.
         (C)   The industrial user seeking to establish the act of God
affirmative defense has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
evidence that the violation of this article, or a permit issued pursuant to
this article, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other
catastrophe.
      (2)   A bypass authorized by the director in accordance with Title 40,
Code of Federal Regulations, Section 403.17(c), as amended.
      (3)   An upset authorized by the director in accordance with Title 40,
Code of Federal Regulations, Section 403.16(c), as amended. (Ord. Nos. 19201;
21409; 21862; 25256; 26925; 28084; 31480)
SEC. 49-47.   DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS; AMENDING PERMITS.
   (a)   Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation. The director may deny a
permit required by Section
49-46(a) if the director determines that an applicant is not qualified under
Section
49-46(f). The director may suspend or revoke a permit if the director
determines that a permittee:
      (1)   is not qualified under Section
49-46(f);
      (2)   has violated a provision of this article, the permit, or any
administrative order;
      (3)   has failed to pay a fee required by this chapter;
      (4)   has failed to comply with applicable federal pretreatment standards
and requirements;
      (5)   has failed to comply with the compliance schedule submitted
pursuant to Section
49-46(f)(2);
      (6)   has failed to comply with procedures for developing, maintaining,
or delivering manifest records required to be developed, maintained, or
delivered pursuant to this article,
Chapter 19,
Article X of this code, or state or federal laws or regulations for the
transfer, transportation, or disposal of industrial waste; or
      (7)   has falsified or improperly altered manifest records required to be
developed, maintained, or delivered pursuant to this article,
Chapter 19,
Article X of this code, or state or federal laws or regulations for the
transfer, transportation, or disposal of industrial waste.
   (b)   Reinstatement. After suspension under this section, a permittee may
file a request for reinstatement of the permit. The director shall reinstate
the permit if the director determines that:
      (1)   the permittee is again qualified under Section
49-46(f);
      (2)   all violations of this article and applicable federal pretreatment
standards and requirements have been corrected;
      (3)   precautions have been taken by the permittee to prevent future
violations; and
      (4)   all fees required by this chapter have been paid.
   (c)   New permit after revocation. If the director revokes a permit, the
permittee may not apply for or be issued a new permit for the same facility
earlier than 180 days after the date of revocation of the old permit, except
that, if, subsequent to the revocation, the director determines that all of the
conditions prescribed in Section
49-46(c) and (f) and Section
49-47(b) are completely satisfied, the permittee may apply for and the director
may issue a new permit before the 180-day period expires.
   (d)   Discharge without permit. A permittee whose permit is suspended or
revoked shall not discharge industrial waste into the wastewater system.
   (e)   Amending a permit. The director may amend a permit with additional
requirements to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. (Ord.
Nos. 19201; 21409; 26925; 28084)
SEC. 49-48.   PRETREATMENT AND DISPOSAL.
   (a)   Operation and maintenance of pretreatment facilities. When
pretreatment of industrial waste is required by the director as a condition for
acceptance of the waste into the wastewater system, the owner of the premises
from which the waste is discharged must operate and maintain treatment
facilities in a manner capable of complying with applicable discharge
standards.
   (b)   Best management practices. The director may develop BMPs and require a
person discharging to the wastewater system to adopt and implement such BMPs,
source reduction, and pollution prevention practices if necessary to protect
the wastewater system.
   (c)   Septage and chemical toilet waste.
      (1)   No transported septage or chemical toilet waste may be discharged
into the wastewater system except at such locations and at such times as are
established by the director.
      (2)   The director may collect samples of each transported load to ensure
compliance with applicable standards. The director may also require the
transporter to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
      (3)   
Article X of
Chapter 19 of this code provides additional regulations for the production,
transportation, and disposal of liquid waste.
   (d)   Disposal of trucked industrial solid waste.
      (1)   In order to ensure that trucked industrial solid waste is not being
discharged into the wastewater system, the director may require an industrial
user who generates such waste to report the type and amount of the waste, and
the location and manner of its disposal as specified in Section
49-51(i).
      (2)   An industrial user commits an offense if the user fails to provide
the reports requested by the director pursuant to Subsection (d)(1) of this
section.
   (e)   Dilution. No owner, operator, or permittee of premises shall ever
increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge,
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on industrial users who
are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (f)   Bypass.
      (1)   Bypasses that do not violate pretreatment standards. An industrial
user may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause pretreatment standards
or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to
ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of
Subsection (f)(2) of this section.
      (2)   Bypasses that violate pretreatment standards.
         (A)   If the need for a bypass is known in advance, the industrial
user shall provide notice to the director 10 days prior to the bypass. In the
event of an unanticipated bypass, oral notice must be provided to the director
within 24 hours after the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. In
addition to the oral notice, written notice must be provided to the director
within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass,
unless waived by the director. The written notice must contain the following:
            (i)   A description of the bypass and its cause.
            (ii)   The duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times.
            (iii)   If the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time
it is expected to continue.
            (iv)   Steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the bypass.
         (B)   The director may take an enforcement action against an
industrial user for a bypass that violates pretreatment standards, unless all
of the following apply:
            (i)   The bypass was necessary in order to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage.
            (ii)   There was no feasible alternative to the bypass. The
director shall find that a feasible alternative existed if, in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment, adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed to prevent the bypass.
            (iii)   The industrial user submitted notices as required under
Paragraph (2)(A) of this subsection.
         (C)   The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the director finds that all three
conditions listed in Paragraph (2)(B) of this subsection have been satisfied.
(Ord. Nos. 19201; 19622; 20215; 20335; 22927; 26925; 27698; 28084; 31480)
SEC. 49-49.   INDUSTRIAL SURCHARGE FOR EXCESSIVE CONCENTRATIONS; SAMPLING FEES.
   (a)   Excessive BOD/TSS concentrations. A person discharging into the
wastewater system industrial waste that exhibits none of the characteristics of
wastewater prohibited in Section
49-43(b), but that has a concentration for a duration of 15 minutes that is
greater than four times that of normal wastewater as measured by total
suspended solids, BOD, or both or a concentration during a 24 hour period
average of total suspended solids, BOD, or both in excess of normal wastewater,
shall pretreat the industrial waste to meet the concentrations of normal
wastewater; except, that the industrial waste may be accepted in the wastewater
system for treatment by the city if all the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The industrial waste will not cause damage to the wastewater
system.
      (2)   The industrial waste will not impair the city’s treatment
processes.
      (3)   The BOD or total suspended solids concentration of industrial waste
discharged does not cause the average BOD or total suspended solids of
wastewater received at the wastewater treatment plant to increase above 250 mg/
L.
      (4)   The person discharging the industrial waste pays an industrial
surcharge in addition to the regular water and sewer rates, in accordance with
the formula prescribed in Section
49-18.12(a)(1) or in accordance with Section
49-50.
   (b)   Sampling fees for determining compliance. A person determined to be
discharging industrial waste must compensate the city for the cost of sampling
and laboratory service expense required for monitoring the discharges for
compliance with this article and applicable standards of the EPA. The director
shall determine the number of samples and the frequency of sampling necessary
to maintain surveillance of the discharges, provided that at least two sampling
events will be conducted each calendar year. The following fees are charged for
sampling and laboratory analysis to determine compliance with Chapter 49.
SAMPLING FEES FOR DETERMINING COMPLIANCE
ITEM  UNITS
SAMPLING FEES FOR DETERMINING COMPLIANCE
ITEM                                   UNITS
Composite                             each                        $154.39
Grab                                  each                        $107.30
Ph                                    SU - Standard Units         $4.00
Antimony                              Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.50
Arsenic                               Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.50
Barium                                Mg/L - milligrams per liter $7.00
Boron                                 Mg/L - milligrams per liter $7.00
Cadmium                               Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.50
Chromium, Total                       Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.50
Chromium VI                           Mg/L - milligrams per liter $15.00
Copper                                Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.50
Lead                                  Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.50
Manganese                             Mg/L - milligrams per liter $7.00
Mercury                               Mg/L - milligrams per liter $16.00
Molybdenum                            Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.50
Nickel                                Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.50
Selenium                              Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.50
Silver                                Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.50
Zinc                                  Mg/L - milligrams per liter $7.00
Vanadium                              Mg/L - milligrams per liter $7.00
Titanium                              Mg/L - milligrams per liter $7.00
Group A - Metals                      Mg/L - milligrams per liter $25.00
Group B - Metals                      Mg/L - milligrams per liter $45.00
Group C                               Mg/L - milligrams per liter $50.00
Fluoride                              Mg/L - milligrams per liter $10.00
Cyanide, Total                        Mg/L - milligrams per liter $18.00
Cyanide, Amenable                     Mg/L - milligrams per liter $30.00
Group - F - Metals & Organics         Mg/L - milligrams per liter $145.00
Group F - Metals                      Mg/L - milligrams per liter $50.00
Group F - Organics                    Mg/L - milligrams per liter $95.00
Group G - OTTO all                    Mg/L - milligrams per liter $310.00
Group H - TTO                         Mg/L - milligrams per liter $170.00
Cobalt                                Mg/L - milligrams per liter $7.00
Tin                                   Mg/L - milligrams per liter $7.00
EPA Priority Pollutant scan           Mg/L - milligrams per liter $775.00
MBAS Surfactants                      Mg/L - milligrams per liter $30.00
Sulfide, Total                        Mg/L - milligrams per liter $12.00
Total Oil and Grease                  Mg/L - milligrams per liter $30.00
Total Petroleum Hydrocarbon (SGT-HEM) Mg/L - milligrams per liter $32.00
Total suspended solids (TSS)          Mg/L - milligrams per liter $8.00
Chemical Oxygen Demand                Mg/L - milligrams per liter $12.00
BOD, 7 day                            Mg/L - milligrams per liter $20.00
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)       Mg/L - milligrams per liter $18.00
Pharmaceuticals                       Mg/L - milligrams per liter $250.00
Turbidity                             Mg/L - milligrams per liter $9.00
Nitrate                               Mg/L - milligrams per liter $10.00
Fecal Coliforms                       Mg/L - milligrams per liter $25.00
 
   (c)   Sampling fees for industrial surcharge. A person discharging
concentrations of BOD or total suspended solids in excess of 250 mg/L shall
compensate the city for the cost of sample collections and laboratory service
necessary when an industrial surcharge rate is established each year. This
subsection does not apply to a waste management operator, or to a discharger
who is billed under Section 49-50. The following fees are charged for sampling
and laboratory analysis to determine compliance with Chapter 49.
 
SAMPLING FEES FOR DETERMINING COMPLIANCE
ITEM                            UNITS
Composite sample                each                        $154.39
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) Mg/L - milligrams per liter $18.00
Total Suspended Solids (TSS)    Mg/L - milligrams per liter $8.00
 
(Ord. Nos. 19201; 21430; 21409; 26925; 28084; 33232)
SEC. 49-50.   ESTIMATED INDUSTRIAL SURCHARGE FOR CLASS GROUP.
   (a)   Classes established. The director shall classify commercial and
industrial establishments that routinely discharge BOD and total suspended
solids concentrations exceeding 250 mg/L into the following class groups:
 
CLASS DESCRIPTION
(1)   EATING PLACES: Includes restaurants and other establishments that engage
      in preparation of food and beverage served directly to the consumer.
      EQUIPMENT SERVICE FACILITIES: Includes establishments that perform
(2)   washing, cleaning, or servicing of automobiles, trucks, buses, machinery,
      or equipment and includes public facilities, facilities limited to
      specific companies, and attended and coin-operated establishments.
      FOOD AND KINDRED PRODUCTS PROCESSING: Includes commercial establishments
      that engage in the preparation, packaging, processing, or distribution of
(3)   food, food products, grains, or produce, other than those included in
      Class (1) and that discharge less than 200,000 gallons of wastewater per
      month.
      DRINKING PLACES: Includes bars, lounges, clubs, and other establishments
(4)   that do not engage in any food preparation but that engage in the sale of
      beer, wine, liquor, or any other beverage served directly to the
      consumer.
 
   (b)   Assessment of surcharge class rate. The director shall assess an
industrial surcharge rate for each class group based on industrial waste
strength determinations established by averaging grab or composite samples, or
both, taken from a representative number of establishments in each group and
shall apply this rate to the water consumption or metered wastewater of the
establishment. If the establishment is within a larger facility for which water
usage is determined from a master meter, the director shall determine an
estimated volume for the establishment to which the surcharge rate is applied.
The director shall then add the appropriate industrial surcharge to billings
for regular water and wastewater service for each establishment classified into
a class group.
   (c)   Exceptions to surcharge class rate. If an establishment contains
operations from more than one of the class groups, and the director determines
that the surcharge rate for a particular class group would not adequately
compensate the city for its cost of treatment, the director may:
      (1)   assess a surcharge rate based on a proportional average of the
class group rates involved; or
      (2)   require the establishment to be billed for an industrial surcharge
computed under the requirements of Section
49-18.12(1)(A) or (B), whichever applies.
   (d)   Election of standard surcharges. The owner or agent of the owner of an
establishment classified into a class group may elect to have the industrial
surcharge billed directly under Section
49-18.12(1)(A) or (B), whichever applies, rather than under this section by
making application to the director and paying the required sampling costs.
   (e)   Authority to revise rates. The director may, from time to time, revise
class group surcharge rates based on analysis of current samples. (Ord. Nos.
19201; 21061; 21430; 26925; 28084)
SEC 49-51.   REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Baseline monitoring reporting.
      (1)   Deadlines for submission of reports.
         (A)   Existing categorical users. Within either 180 days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under Title 40, Code of
Federal Regulations, Section 403.6(a)(4), as amended, whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the wastewater system shall submit to the director a report that contains
the information listed in Subsection (a)(2) of this section.
         (B)   New sources and new categorical users. Ninety days prior to
commencement of discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical
users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard
shall submit a report containing the information listed in Subsection (a)(2) to
the director. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends
to use to meet applicable categorical standards. In addition to the information
required in Subsection (a)(2), a new source shall also provide:
            (i)   the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards; and
            (ii)   estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants
to be discharged.
      (2)   Required information in report. The following must be provided in
the report required in Subsection (a)(1):
         (A)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
         (B)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
         (C)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operations carried out by the industrial user. The description should include a
schematic diagram indicating points of discharge to the wastewater system from
the regulated processes.
         (D)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average and
maximum daily flows (in gallons per day) to the wastewater system from
regulated process streams and other streams, if necessary, to allow use of the
combined wastestream formula set out in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations,
Section 403.6(e), as amended.
         (E)   Measurement of pollutants.
            (i)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
            (ii)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration (and mass, where required by the standard or by the director)
of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations (and mass,
where required) must be reported. The sample must be representative of daily
operations and analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Subsection
(j).
            (iii)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with the
procedures set out in Subsection (k).
         (F)   Certification statement. A statement, reviewed by the industrial
user’s authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis,
or, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
         (G)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment or operation and
maintenance is required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the industrial user will provide the pretreatment or
operation and maintenance. No completion date in this schedule may be later
than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
The compliance schedule must meet the requirements of Subsection (b).
         (H)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with Subsection (m).
   (b)   Compliance schedule progress reports.
      (1)   The initial report must contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required of the
industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (examples of a
major event include, but are not limited to, the hiring of an engineer, the
completion of preliminary and final plans, the execution of contracts for major
components, and the commencement and completion of construction). No progress
increment may exceed nine months.
      (2)   The industrial user shall submit a report to the director no later
than 14 days following each scheduled progress increment date. The report must
include, at a minimum, whether or not the industrial user complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for delay, if any, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no
event may more than nine months elapse between submission of a progress report
to the director.
   (c)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
      (1)   All industrial subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall
submit to the director a report containing the information described in
Subsections (a)(2)(E) through (H).
      (2)   If an industrial user is subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in Title 40,
Code of Federal Regulations, Section 403.6(c), as amended, the report must also
contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user’s long- term production
rate.
      (3)   For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit, the
report must include the industrial user’s actual production during the
appropriate sampling period.
      (4)   All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with Subsection (m) and submitted within 90 days following the date of final
compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case
of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the POTW.
   (d)   Periodic compliance reports.
      (1)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined
by the director but in no event less than twice a year (once in July covering
the six- month period between January 1 through June 30, and once in January
covering the six-month period between July 1 through December 31), submit a
report containing at a minimum:
         (A)   the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
limited by pretreatment standards;
         (B)   the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for
the reporting period; and
         (C)   contributing information necessary to account for water usage,
materials recovery, or disposal practices.
      (2)   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Subsection (m).
      (3)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial
user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities must be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. Failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring equipment in good
working order negates any grounds for the industrial user’s potential claim
that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
      (4)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in this
section monitors any pollutant using the procedures prescribed in Subsections
(j) and (k), the results of the monitoring must be included in the report.
   (e)   Notification of changed conditions.
      (1)   At least 90 days before any planned significant change to an
industrial user’s operations or system that might alter the nature, quality, or
volume of its wastewater, the industrial user shall notify the director of the
change.
      (2)   The director may require the industrial user to submit all
information deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section
49-46(a). The director shall evaluate whether the industrial user needs a plan
or other action to control accidental discharges.
      (3)   The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an
existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed or anticipated
changed conditions.
      (4)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases or decreases of 20 percent or greater, the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, and the deletion of any
pollutant regulated by this article or a permit issued pursuant to this
article.
      (5)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the director
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug
discharge.
   (f)   Reports of accidental (Slug) discharges.
      (1)   In the case of any discharge (including an upset, an accidental
discharge, a discharge of a non- routine, episodic nature, a non-routine batch
discharge, or a slug load) that may cause potential problems for the wastewater
system, the industrial user shall immediately telephone and notify the director
of the incident. This notification must include the location of the discharge,
the type of waste, the concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken
by the industrial user.
      (2)   Within five days following the discharge, the industrial user
shall, unless waived by the director, submit to the director a detailed written
report that provides:
         (A)   a description and cause of the discharge, including location,
type, and concentration of the discharge and the volume of water;
         (B)   the duration of noncompliance, including the exact dates and
times of noncompliance and, if the noncompliance is continuing, an immediate
response to cause the noncompliant discharge to cease; and
         (C)   all steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
continuation or recurrence of an upset, slug load, or accidental discharge,
spill, or other condition of noncompliance.
      (3)   The notification does not relieve the industrial user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of
damage to the wastewater system or to natural resources, or any other damage to
persons or property, nor does the notification relieve the industrial user of
any fines, penalties, or other liability that may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter.
      (4)   A notice must be permanently posted on the industrial user’s
bulletin board or in another prominent location advising employees whom to call
in the event of a discharge. An industrial user shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
      (5)   The director shall evaluate whether the industrial user needs a
plan or other action to control possible future accidental discharges.
      (6)   The results of the activities described in Paragraphs (1) through
(5) of this subsection shall be made available to the approval authority upon
request.
   (g)   Reports from non-permitted users. Industrial users not required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit must still provide appropriate reports to
the director when required by the director.
   (h)   Submission of self-monitoring reports and violations based on self-
monitoring. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation,
the user shall notify the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware
of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within 30
days after becoming aware of the violation. Where the control authority has
performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the control
authority must perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the
user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis.
Resampling is not required if:
      (1)   the control authority performs sampling at the industrial user at a
frequency of at least once per month; or
      (2)   the control authority performs sampling at the user between the
time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the
control authority receives the results of this sampling.
   (i)   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
      (1)   Notification process in general.
         (A)   Pursuant to Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Section
403.12(p), as amended, any industrial user that commences the discharge of a
hazardous waste listed in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 261, as
amended, shall notify the director, the EPA Region VI Waste Management Division
Director, and the TCEQ, in writing, of the discharge.
         (B)   The notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 261, as amended, the
EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or
other).
         (C)   If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of
hazardous waste in a calendar month to the wastewater system, the notification
must also contain the following information to the extent the information is
known and readily available to the industrial user:
            (i)   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in
the wastes.
            (ii)   An estimation of the mass and concentration of the
constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month.
            (iii)   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
         (D)   All notifications must be sent within 180 days after the
discharge commences. Only one notification is required for each hazardous waste
discharged. Notification of changed conditions, however, must be submitted
pursuant to Subsection (e). The notification requirement in this subsection
does not apply to pollutants already reported by industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of
Sections
49-51(h) and
49-55.3.
      (2)   Certain discharges exempt. A discharger is exempt from the
requirements of Subsection (i)(1) during a calendar month in which it
discharges no more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous waste. Discharge of
more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of
any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in Title 40, Code of
Federal Regulations, Sections 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), as amended, requires a
one-time notification. No additional notification is required for the
subsequent discharge of a hazardous waste in excess of the quantities
permitted.
      (3)   Listing of new hazardous waste. In the case of any new regulation
under Section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 U.S.C.
6901 et seq.) identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or
listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user
shall notify the director, the EPA Region VI Waste Management Division
Director, and the TCEQ of the discharge of such substance within 90 days after
the effective date of the regulation.
      (4)   Certification required. In the case of any notification made under
this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place
to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree
it has determined to be economically practical.
      (5)   No right to discharge created. This subsection does not create a
right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by
this chapter, a permit issued under this chapter, or any applicable federal or
state law.
   (j)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses (including sampling
techniques) to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report must be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 136, as amended,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard.
If Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 136, as amended, does not
contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved
by the EPA or TCEQ.
   (k)   Sample collection.
      (1)   Except as indicated in Subsection (k)(2), the industrial user shall
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. If flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the director may
authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab
samples if the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample
of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to
show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
      (3)   The industrial user shall comply with self-monitoring, sampling,
reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements, including an
identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment
standards in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter 403, as amended,
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law.
   (l)   Date reports deemed received. Written reports are deemed to have been
submitted on the date postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage
prepaid, into a mail receptacle serviced by the United States Postal Service,
the date the report is received governs.
   (m)   Certification and signatory requirements.
      (1)   The following must be certified to and signed by the authorized
representative:
         (A)   All permit applications.
         (B)   Baseline monitoring reports.
         (C)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadlines.
         (D)   Periodic compliance reports.
         (E)   Any report specifically required by the director.
      (2)   The following statement must be used to certify the applications
and reports listed in Subsection (m)(1):
            I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
   (n)   Best management practice documentation. If the pretreatment standards
require compliance with best management practices or a pollution prevention
alternative, the industrial user shall submit documentation to the director
demonstrating compliance with these requirements. The industrial user is
required to submit the compliance documentation in the reports required by
Subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d). (Ord. Nos. 28084; 31480)
SEC. 49-52.   RECORDKEEPING.
   (a)   An industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of this
article shall retain (and make available for inspection and copying) all
information obtained pursuant to Section
49-51(k)(3), independent of such requirements. Records documenting best
management practices are specifically included in this recordkeeping
requirement and must be maintained in accordance with this section.
   (b)   Records must include the following information:
      (1)   The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling.
      (2)   The name of each person who took the samples.
      (3)   The dates the analysis was performed.
      (4)   The name of each person who performed the analysis.
      (5)   The analytical technique or method used.
      (6)   The results of the analysis.
   (c)   These records must be retained and made available by an industrial
user for a period of at least three years. This period will automatically be
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the industrial user or
the city, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the director.
   (d)   Any record submitted pursuant to Subsections (a) and (b) must be
retained by the city for a period of at least three years. This period will
automatically be extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
industrial user or the city, or where the city has notified the industrial user
of a longer retention period. In addition, the city shall make all reports
available for inspection and copying by the public. (Ord. Nos. 28084; 31480)
SEC. 49-53.   PUBLICATION OF INDUSTRIAL USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The director shall annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper
published in the city, a list of the industrial users who, during the previous
12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. (Ord. 28084)
SEC. 49-54.   REGULATION OF WASTES FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   (a)   Prior to contributing wastewater in the wastewater system, a
municipality must enter into an interlocal agreement with the city.
   (b)   The director may request the following information from the
contributing municipality:
      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater to be
discharged to the wastewater system by the contributing municipality.
      (2)   An inventory of all industrial users located within the
contributing municipality that will be discharging to the wastewater system.
      (3)   Any other information deemed necessary by the director. (Ord.
28084)
SEC. 49-55.   EXTRAJURISDICTIONAL USERS.
   (a)   An extrajurisdictional user shall apply for a permit in accordance
with this article as specified in Section
49-46(a) and (b) prior to discharging to the wastewater system.
   (b)   This section does not apply to extrajurisdictional users in
jurisdictions that have an agreement with the city pursuant to Section
49-54.
   (c)   A wastewater discharge permit issued to an extrajurisdictional user
must be in the form of a contract and include, at a minimum, the components
found in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 403.8(f)(1)(iii), as
amended, and be approved by the city council. An extrajurisdictional user must
agree to follow and be bound by the requirements of this article. (Ord. 28084)
SEC. 49-55.1.   INSPECTION CHAMBERS.
   (a)   Chambers required. A person who discharges industrial waste into the
wastewater system must provide, at his own expense, an inspection manhole or
chamber in an accessible location on the premises from which the waste is
discharged.
   (b)   Special requirements. An inspection manhole or chamber must be:
      (1)   near the outlet of each building lateral, sewer, drain, pipe, or
channel that connects with the wastewater system;
      (2)   designed and constructed to prevent infiltration by ground and
surface water; and
      (3)   maintained so that a person may easily and safely measure the
volume and obtain samples of the flow.
   (c)   Construction plans required. Before beginning construction of an
inspection manhole or chamber, a person must submit plans to the director for
review and approval to insure compliance with this section. Plans must include
the wastewater metering device if one is to be installed. (Ord. Nos. 19201;
26925; 28084)
SEC. 49-55.2.   MEASUREMENT OF WASTE VOLUME.
   (a)   Metering devices. If a person who discharges industrial waste into the
wastewater system installs and maintains in proper working condition a
wastewater metering device of a type approved by the director, the actual
wastewater flow from the premises will be the basis for computing charges for
services.
   (b)   Measurements without a meter. On premises where water is obtained
exclusively from the water system and no wastewater metering device is
installed, the director shall compute the wastewater flow, for purposes of
determining service charges, based on the water consumption during the previous
month.
   (c)   Wastewater from private sources. On premises where all or part of the
water is obtained from a source other than the water system and no wastewater
metering device is installed, the owner shall provide and maintain a metering
device, of a type approved by the director, to measure sources of private
water.
   (d)   Estimated usage. If an activity on premises consumes water by
evaporation, includes water in a product, or discharges water into a storm
sewer, the owner may make application to the director for reduction in the
volume of wastewater estimated to be discharged from the premises. The
application must contain supporting data, including but not limited to a flow
diagram showing the route and destination of the water supply and wastewater.
(Ord. Nos. 19201; 26925; 28084)
SEC. 49-55.3.   INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (a)   Inspection and sampling. The director shall inspect and sample each
significant industrial user at least once each year. The director may, however,
inspect and sample a significant industrial user more frequently. The
inspection, surveillance, and monitoring must be independent of information
received from the self-monitoring reports program. If a significant industrial
user requires additional samples, the director may require the user to pay the
cost of the additional service.
   (b)   Sample collection and analysis. Samples must be collected and analyzed
in accordance with Sections
49-51 (j) and (k). Self- monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, must be
based on the applicable general pretreatment standards in Title 40, Code of
Federal Regulations, Chapter 403, as amended, categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and state and local law. A sample may be taken
manually or by use of mechanical equipment.
   (c)   Submission of monitoring data. All significant industrial users shall
submit all monitoring data of regulated pollutants that has been collected at
the appropriate sampling location, in accordance with Section
49-51 . Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping
requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, must be based on the
applicable general pretreatment standards in Title 40, Code of Federal
Regulations, Chapter 403, as amended, categorical pretreatment standards, local
limits, and state and local law.
   (d)   Accidental discharge/slug control plans. Within one year after an
industrial user is designated as a significant industrial user, the director
shall evaluate and determine whether the significant industrial user needs to
develop, submit, and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The
director may also require any industrial user to develop, submit, and implement
such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop the plan for any
industrial user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan must address, at a
minimum, the following:
      (1)   A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges.
      (2)   A description of stored chemicals.
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental
or slug discharge, as required by Section
49-51(i).
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. The procedures may include, but are not limited to, the inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, the handling and transfer of materials, the
loading and unloading operations, the control of plant site runoff, worker
training, the building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and measures and
equipment needed in the event of emergency response.
The results of the activities described in Paragraphs (1) through (4) of this
subsection must be available to the approval authority upon request.
   (e)   Self-monitoring program. The director may, to the extent permitted by
the EPA, delegate self- monitoring and reporting responsibilities to specific
industrial waste discharge permittees, based upon the compliance history of a
permittee and the volume and character of the waste discharge. Self-monitoring
data from an industrial user must be submitted with accompanied chain-of-
custody forms.
   (f)   Waiver of pollutant sampling.
      (1)   The city may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a
categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated,
through sampling and other technical factors, that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or, if present, is only
present at background levels from intake water, without any increase in the
pollutant due to activities of the industrial user.
      (2)   The authorization is subject to the following conditions:
         (A)   The pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary
wastewater discharged from the facility, provided that the sanitary wastewater:
            (i)   is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard; and
            (ii)   includes no process wastewater.
         (B)   The waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective
period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer
than five years. The industrial user must submit a new request for a waiver
when a subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit is granted.
         (C)   The industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling
of the facility’s process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the
facility. The process wastewater sample must be representative of wastewater
from all processes.
         (D)   The request for a waiver must be signed in accordance with
Section
49-1(5) and include the following certification statement:
            “Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR ________
[specify applicable national pretreatment standard part(s)], I certify that, to
the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of
________ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the
facility since filing of the last periodic report.”
         (E)   Non-detectable sample results may be used as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA-approved method from Title 40, Code
of Federal Regulations, Part 136, as amended, with the lowest minimum detection
level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
         (F)   Any waiver by the director must be included as a condition in
the industrial user’s permit, including the requirement of Section
49-51(k)(3). The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by
the industrial user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the
director for a period of three years after the expiration of the waiver.
         (G)   The industrial user must certify that there has been no increase
of the pollutant in its wastestream due to its activities. The certification
must appear on all future reports, along with the statement in Section
49-51(m).
         (H)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or
is expected to be present based on changes occurring in the industrial user’s
operations, the industrial user must immediately:
            (i)   comply with the sampling requirements of Section
49-51(d) or other more frequent sampling requirements imposed by the director;
and
            (ii)   notify the director.
      (3)   This subsection does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise provided in the categorical pretreatment standards. (Ord. Nos. 19201;
20215; 21409; 26925; 28084; 31480)
SEC. 49-55.4.   CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   Confidential information. An industrial user who asserts the trade
secret exception to disclosure under Chapter 552 of the Texas Government Code
(the Public Information Act) and Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 2,
as amended, must clearly mark or stamp the words "confidential business
information” on each page that contains proprietary information at the time the
information is submitted to the city. If no claim is made at the time of
submission, the city shall make the information available to the public without
further notice. If a claim is asserted, the information will be treated in
accordance with the procedures in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part
2, as amended.
   (b)   Effluent data. Information and data provided to the city under
Subsection (a) of this section that is effluent data will be available to the
public without restriction.
   (c)   All other information. All other information submitted to the city is
available to the public in accordance with state and federal law. (Ord. 28084)
SEC. 49-55.5.   WASTE MANAGEMENT OPERATORS.
   (a)   General requirements. A person who is a waste management operator and
discharges industrial waste into the wastewater system must:
      (1)   discharge only at points in the wastewater system designated by the
director;
      (2)   install and maintain an accurate wastewater metering device, or
provide for accurate flow estimates in a manner as required by the director;
      (3)   compensate the city for the full cost of all sample collection and
laboratory analyses for the purpose of monitoring and maintaining control of
the discharge of industrial waste into the wastewater system, or implement a
self-monitoring and reporting program approved by the director;
      (4)   maintain accurate records, available to the director upon request,
showing:
         (A)   the volume of industrial waste discharged;
         (B)   the dates of receipt and disposal of industrial waste;
         (C)   the type of waste discharged; and
         (D)   the names and addresses of producers and haulers of all waste
being processed; and
      (5)   comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 20215; 21409; 26925; 28084)
SEC. 49-55.6.   POLLUTION OF WATER IN RESERVOIRS.
   (a)   Activities constituting offense. A person commits an offense if he
conducts any of the following activities in a city reservoir:
      (1)   Bathing.
      (2)   Throwing, depositing, or discharging urine, excrement, trash,
garbage, toxic or otherwise hazardous substances, or other pollutants.
      (3)   Causing some other nuisance upon or in the city reservoir. (Ord.
Nos. 19201; 26925; 28084)
SEC. 49-55.7.   DEPOSIT OR DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN MATERIAL INTO WASTEWATER SYSTEM
OR STORM-SEWER.
   (a)   Illegal discharges. A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   deposits garbage, dead animals, trash, articles, or other
substances tending to obstruct the flow of wastewater, into a manhole,
cleanout, or other opening;
      (2)   discharges industrial waste into a storm sewer or storm drain;
      (3)   discharges normal domestic wastewater into a storm sewer or storm
drain; or
      (4)   discharges storm water collected from a storm sewer or storm drain
into the wastewater system.
   (b)   Gutter connections. A person commits an offense if he connects a
private gutter, rainwater conductor, privy, or cistern to a part of the
wastewater system. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 26925; 28084)
ARTICLE V.
DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM EXTENSIONS.
SEC. 49-56.   AUTHORITY TO MAKE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS; SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; LOT
AND ACREAGE FEES.
   (a)   Authority. The director is authorized to:
      (1)   extend water and wastewater mains to permit connections to persons
seeking service;
      (2)   replace water and wastewater mains which are substandard in size or
condition; and
      (3)   make rules and regulations, not in conflict with this article or
other laws, regarding the extension of mains by or for developers to serve
newly created or redeveloped subdivisions or resubdivisions.
   (b)   Special assessments. The cost of extension of a water or wastewater
main a distance greater than 100 feet will be charged to an individual owner
who specially benefits from the extension in accordance with the provisions of
this section and the procedures established in Subchapter D of Chapter 402,
Texas Local Government Code, as amended. A special assessment will be based
upon the front foot rate prescribed in Section
49-18.10(a), unless the city council finds it necessary to adjust the rate
under the circumstances set forth in Subsection (c) of this section. The
director is authorized to promulgate regulations, not in conflict with state
law or this chapter, governing how requests for extensions under this
subsection are made and presented for assessment. In calculating the 100-foot
requirement of this section, street intersection distances will be excluded.
   (c)   Manner of special assessment. A lot or tract of land which is not a
corner lot and which extends between street lines so as to abut on two or more
public streets will be specially assessed for each frontage if the property
will be or is used in a manner such that service will actually be used from the
mains in those streets; otherwise, the property will be specially assessed
based only upon the frontage where the connection is made to the main.
   (d)   Adjustment of rates. If the city council determines in an assessment
under Subsection (b) that the front foot rate prescribed in Section
49-18.10 exceeds the special benefit to a lot or tract by its enhanced value,
or that the manner of assessment creates an inequality or injustice as to
similarly situated lots or tracts, the city council, in order to insure
substantial equality of benefits received and burdens imposed, will:
      (1)   adjust the prescribed front foot rate; or
      (2)   determine another method of apportioning the charges.
   (e)   Private service replacements. If the director determines it necessary
to replace or relocate a building water line or building lateral incidental to
the extension, relocation, or replacement of a main under this article because
of the size or location of the main extension, relocation, or replacement, the
director is authorized to:
      (1)   require the property owner to perform the private work at the
owner’s expense; or
      (2)   cause the private work to be done in accordance with Article
402.901, Texas Local Government Code, which article is hereby adopted as the
procedure for this subsection in all respects as it applies to the city.
   (f)   Manner of special assessment payment. A special assessment under
Subsection (b) or (d)(2) may be paid in a lump sum, or by installment, in
accordance with the terms prescribed in the applicable assessment ordinance.
Where paid in installments, a mechanic’s lien contract and installment
promissory note must be executed on forms provided by the director and approved
by the city attorney.
   (g)   Liability in event of transfer. If a mechanic’s lien contract and
installment promissory note have been executed as provided under this section,
and ownership of the property changes after execution of the contract and note,
the new owner may assume payment of the unpaid installments. The new owner
takes the property subject to the lien for special assessments. Notwithstanding
the new owner’s assumption of liability, the previous owner remains personally
liable for special assessment payments owed under the contract until it is paid
in full. In the event of nonpayment, the director may:
      (1)   discontinue service to the property;
      (2)   enforce the lien created under the contract and note; or
      (3)   look to the previous owner for payment due.
   (h)   Lot or acreage fee. If an individual owner of property using the water
or wastewater system for the first time connects to an existing main
constructed by a developer entitled to city participation under Section
49-62, the individual owner shall be charged a lot or acreage fee to aid in
reimbursement of developer construction in accordance with the following rules:
      (1)   The fee shall be charged as prescribed in Section
49-18.10(c). An individual owner of a lot that is part of a subdivided tract
shall pay a lot fee; an individual owner of an unsubdivided tract shall pay an
acreage fee.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any lot or acreage fee previously paid under this
subsection, if an individual owner subdivides, develops or redevelops his
property in a manner necessitating new extensions, the rules regarding
developers in this article shall apply.
      (3)   The lot or acreage fee charged shall be the fee in effect on the
date the individual owner applies for a service connection permit. The fee
shall be paid prior to issuance of the connection permit.
      (4)   All lot and acreage fees collected shall be deposited to the credit
of the appropriate city fund. All fees collected shall be used only for the
purpose of reimbursing developers as required under Section
49-62.
   (i)   No obligation to extend. The city and the director are not obligated
to make a main extension if:
      (1)   funds to pay for the extension are not available to the city;
      (2)   the director determines for engineering or financial reasons that
an extension is not practical; or
      (3)   the individual owner or developer requesting the extension fails to
abide by the provisions of this article. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19622; 20215; 20653;
26925; 29645)
SEC. 49-57.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 20653)
SEC. 49-58.   RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 20653)
SEC. 49-59.   REPLACEMENT OF SUBSTANDARD MAINS.
   (a)   Substandard size mains. The director is authorized to replace a
substandard size water or wastewater main when:
      (1)   property owners request in writing to the director that the
substandard size main be replaced in order to:
         (A)   provide fire protection;
         (B)   increase the water supply for consumption;
         (C)   improve the water pressure in an area; or
         (D)   improve the quality or capacity of wastewater collection in an
area;
      (2)   a substandard size main must be replaced by a standard size main in
advance of paving; or
      (3)   the director determines that replacement of a substandard size main
is necessary to provide for orderly improvement or operation of the system.
   (b)   Substandard condition mains. The director is authorized to replace a
water or wastewater main that is substandard as to condition when he determines
that:
      (1)   due to its overall condition, the main is no longer economical to
maintain as a part of the water or wastewater system; or
      (2)   the main is in such a condition that it poses a threat to the
health or safety of persons or property.
   (c)   Removal and reconnection of main. When a substandard main is replaced,
the department shall transfer and reconnect existing service connections to the
new main and remove or abandon the substandard main.
   (d)   Exception. A person connected to an existing substandard main at the
time of its replacement will not be required to pay special assessments for the
replacement of the substandard main. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 20653)
SEC. 49-60.   GENERAL RULES FOR EXTENSIONS BY DEVELOPERS.
   (a)   No extension without plat. Except in those instances where a plat is
not required by law to develop property, the director shall not permit, and no
person shall provide, extension of water or wastewater service to a lot, tract
or other parcel of land unless:
      (1)   the lot, tract or other parcel of land has been platted in
accordance with the requirements of this code and state law;
      (2)   the plat has been released for filing by the director and given
final approval by the city plan commission; and
      (3)   the plat has been filed for record in the plat records of the
county in which the lot, tract or other parcel of land is located.
   (b)   Plat approval guidelines. In addition, the following rules apply to
the release and approval of plats by the city:
      (1)   The city plan commission shall not approve a plat for filing
without a release from the director verifying that the plat conforms to the
city’s requirements for water or wastewater utility development and otherwise
conforms to the general plan of the city for water and wastewater extensions.
      (2)   The city plan commission is not obligated to approve a plat nor is
the director obligated to release a plat if the mains proposed to serve the
development exceed the existing capacity, or the immediate future capacity, of
the water or wastewater system to adequately and economically serve that
development and other adjacent property.
   (c)   Preliminary layout. At the same time that a preliminary plat is filed
for consideration with the city plan commission, the developer must submit the
following to the director:
      (1)   a preliminary layout or site plan showing the location and size of
all mains, valves and hydrants necessary to serve the proposed development;
      (2)   designated locations of dedications or public easements, proposed
or existing, necessary for the laying of all mains and appurtenances, to be
indicated on the layout or site plan; and
      (3)   the design review fee charged by the director in accordance with
Section
49-18.14(a).
   (d)   Design criteria. All layouts and designs for proposed mains and
appurtenances, whether preliminary or final, must be strictly in accordance
with the Water and Wastewater Design Manual of the department. The director may
refuse to release any plat for approval by the city plan commission where the
criteria of this manual are not met.
   (e)   Preliminary design phase. Upon review and approval of the preliminary
layout or site plan, the developer may proceed as follows:
      (1)   The developer may begin the preliminary design of water and
wastewater mains and appurtenances for the proposed development, in accordance
with Subsection (d).
      (2)   Upon completion of the preliminary design, the developer must
submit the preliminary design to the director. Pending review of the design,
the developer may then file a final plat with the city plan commission. Changes
or corrections in the design will be noted and returned to the developer.
      (3)   The developer may prepare the final design of the proposed system
after the director approves the preliminary design.
   (f)   Private development contracts. After approval of the preliminary
design, the developer may enter into a construction contract to build the
proposed facilities, subject to the following rules:
      (1)   The developer shall enter into one of the following types of
private development contract for construction of the facilities:
         (A)   a private development contract with a private construction
contractor, with the city as a beneficiary; or
         (B)   a private development contract directly with the city for the
developer to build the facilities.
      (2)   The cost of the system to be built must be borne as provided in
Section
49-62.
      (3)   The private development contract must be made according to terms
and conditions stated on a form provided by the director and approved by the
city attorney.
      (4)   The private development contract must include performance and
payment bonds equivalent to those which the city uses and requires in its
standard specifications, and the city must be a named obligee in the bonds.
      (5)   Charges for additional review of system designs under Section
49-18.14(a) shall be due upon submission of the additional review material.
      (7)   In addition, to ensure that the city will not incur claims or
liabilities as a result of the developer’s failure to make payment in
accordance with the terms of a private development contract, the director may
require the developer, as a precondition of approval of release of a final
plat, to provide sufficient surety guaranteeing satisfaction of claims against
the development in the event such default occurs. The surety shall be in the
amount of the private development contract. The surety shall also be in the
form of a bond, escrow account, cash deposit, or unconditional letter of credit
drawn on a state or federally chartered lending institution. The form of surety
shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney. If a bond is provided, the
bond shall be in a form furnished by the director and approved by the city
attorney. The bond shall be executed by the developer and at least one
corporate surety authorized to do business and licensed to issue surety bonds
in the State of Texas and otherwise acceptable to the city. If a cash deposit
is provided, the deposit shall be placed in a special account and shall not be
used for any other purpose. If an escrow account is provided, the account shall
be placed with a state or federally chartered lending institution with a
principal office or branch in Texas, and any escrow agreement between the
developer and the escrowing institution shall provide for a retainage of not
less than 10 percent of the private development contract amount, to be held
until the director gives written approval of the construction of the
facilities. Interest accruing on the special account shall be credited to the
developer. This subsection (f)(7) shall expire on January 1, 1994, unless this
subsection is terminated sooner or extended by ordinance of the city council.
   (g)   Final release. Prior to the director’s release of the final plat for
approval by the city plan commission, the developer must submit the following
items to the director:
      (1)   the approved design of all mains, valves, service connections to be
constructed by the developer and hydrants for the proposed development as
prepared in accordance with all applicable requirements of this article;
      (2)   an executed private development contract for the proposed
development and development surety, both as prescribed in Subsection (f); and
      (3)   if the developer desires to plat more lots than the developer will
construct utilities to serve, a covenant for the benefit of the city running
with the land and agreeing to construct the utilities necessary to serve the
development at total cost in accordance with this article.
   (h)   Covenant procedures. Covenants required under Subsection (g)(3) must
be approved in accordance with the procedure set out in Section
2-11.2 of this code. After approval as to form by the city attorney, the
covenant shall be filed in the deed records of the county where the property is
located. Upon determination by the director that all the conditions of the
covenant have been fulfilled, the city manager may execute and cause to be
filed of record a release of the covenant without the necessity of city council
approval.
   (i)   Development on previously platted or unplatted land. If a person
develops property without having to file a plat or replat for approval by the
city, the requirements of this section still apply, as modified by the
following rules:
      (1)   A copy of the existing recorded plat or replat within which the
property lies and all layouts, proposed system designs and design review and
survey staking fees must be submitted with the request for extension.
      (2)   Any charges due under Section
49-62 must be paid before or upon application for a service connection permit.
      (3)   The director is authorized to promulgate additional procedures, not
in conflict with this chapter or other laws, to aid implementation of this
subsection. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 20215; 20653; 21045; 21491; 23289)
SEC. 49-61.   CONSTRUCTION OF DEVELOPER EXTENSIONS.
   (a)   Commencement of construction. The department will approve commencement
of construction after approval of the final plat by the city plan commission,
upon the developer’s meeting the following conditions:
      (1)   the construction plans must be in complete and correct form;
      (2)   all easements, dedications and other public rights-of-way necessary
to construction must be in existence;
      (3)   all necessary contract documents and bonds must be submitted; and
      (4)   the final plat, as recorded, must be submitted.
   (b)   Early start. The director may, upon written request from the
developer, allow construction to commence before submission of the final
recorded plat required in Subsection (a)(4), if all other applicable
requirements of this article have been met; except that the city reserves its
right to refuse final acceptance of the facilities and building permits until
the final plat is approved and recorded.
   (c)   Construction conditions. The following additional rules apply to
actual construction of the facilities in a development under this section:
      (1)   Installation of facilities must be made in public rights-of-way
belonging to the city and filed of record, and must be made in a manner that
does not damage existing facilities of the water or wastewater system.
      (2)   Construction and installation of facilities, including service
connections, if any, must be supervised by inspectors of the city to see that
it is done in accordance with the plans and specifications, which are a part of
the private development contract, and applicable provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   On service connections larger than two inches that are constructed
by the developer, the developer shall reimburse the city for any necessary
materials or appurtenances furnished by the city.
      (4)   Grade stakes for mains will be set by the developer’s engineer
after the plans are released for construction by the director; provided,
however, that grade stakes may not be set until after the developer’s engineer
has properly staked on the ground with iron pins all easements, points of
curves and tangency, all block corners and all lot corners within the
subdivision, and has properly staked all fire hydrants.
      (5)   All construction plans must comply with the following publications
of the department:
         (A)   Water and Wastewater Procedures and Design Manual.
         (B)   Development Design Procedure and Policy Manual.
         (C)   North Central Texas Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction, as may be modified by the Water Utilities Department Addendum to
the Standard Specifications, or other special provisions.
         (D)   Water Utilities Department Standard Drawings.
      (6)   The director may, upon written request of the developer, permit
temporary, partial use of installed facilities in a development prior to final
acceptance of a system, if the department inspects the facilities to be used
and determines that they meet the city’s construction requirements. Temporary
permission under this subsection may not be construed as acceptance of any
facilities, and the developer shall remain liable for all applicable service
charges set forth in this chapter and all costs of construction. The duration
of temporary permission will be as determined by the director, but may never
exceed 90 days from the date of approval of the request. On the expiration
date, the director will discontinue service unless the director approves the
developer’s written request for an extension of temporary permission or issues
final acceptance in accordance with Subsection (c)(6) of this section. The
director may revoke or prohibit temporary permission under this subsection if
the developer fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
      (7)   The city will issue final acceptance when construction is complete
in accordance with the city’s requirements, the developer has paid all costs of
construction due and all charges due the city under this article, and the final
plat has been approved and filed of record as required by law. Following
issuance of final acceptance, facilities installed become the property of the
city, free and clear of all liens, claims, and encumbrances.
      (8)   Facilities constructed in a development pursuant to this article
must be hydrostatically tested by the department prior to final acceptance. The
developer shall cause any deficiencies or nonconformities in construction shown
as a result of the hydrostatic test to be corrected and retested by the
department until the test is passed. The developer shall pay a fee for
hydrostatic testing when required in Section
49-18.17.
      (9)   Damage to the work, relocation or revisions in the plans
necessitated by other construction, or modification of the development will be
charged to the developer, and service will be withheld or discontinued to the
development until the charges are paid.
   (d)   City not liable. Nothing in this article shall be construed to render
the city liable for sums owed by a developer to private contractors or
subcontractors for work done under a private development contract. (Ord. Nos.
19201; 19622; 20215; 23289; 26479)
SEC. 49-62.   RULES REGARDING THE CONSTRUCTION AND COST OF NEW MAINS IN A
DEVELOPMENT.
   (a)   Oversize mains. The city will participate in the cost of any oversize
main the developer is required to construct, by purchasing the excess capacity
in the main at the oversize cost of the main. The director’s determination of
the size of main necessary to adequately serve the subdivision, and the
necessary degree of oversizing, is final. Oversize cost will be based upon the
evaluated cost tables of Section
49-18.11 and will be paid after acceptance of the oversize main by the city.
   (b)   On-site extensions. The developer must construct all new on-site
extensions necessary to adequately serve the development, subject to applicable
city payments for participation in oversize cost under Subsection (a).
Construction of an on-site extension shall be pursuant to a private development
contract approved by the director and in accordance with Chapter 212,
Subchapter C, Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
   (c)   Off-site extensions. The following rules govern the installation of
and city participation in off- site extensions required to be constructed by a
developer in order to adequately serve the development:
      (1)   The developer shall construct any new off-site extension necessary
to adequately serve the development, if the city or another developer has not
already commenced design or construction of the extension in connection with
another development or project, subject to applicable city payments for
participation in oversize cost under Subsection (a).
      (2)   Construction of an off-site extension shall be pursuant to a
private development contract approved by the director and in accordance with
Chapter 212, Subchapter C, Texas Local Government Code, as amended. The off-
site extension construction may be included as a part of any private
development contract for construction of on-site extensions or other
infrastructure within the development, provided the rules of this article are
complied with. The city will participate in the cost of the off-site extension
by purchasing the extension, after completion and acceptance by the city, for
the total evaluated cost of the extension. City payment will be made in the
manner provided in this subsection.
      (3)   The city will make payment for purchase of the off-site extension
based upon new connections to the extension, at the applicable rate stated in
Section
49-18.15(a). The developer or other person entitled to payment under Subsection
(c)(5) must request payment in writing, and provide addresses and lot and block
numbers for new connections, on a semi-annual basis or on such other basis as
prescribed by the director in order to better facilitate proper payment.
However, if the development requiring the off-site extension and the
surrounding property through which the extension is constructed are, at
completion of construction, fully developed in a manner consistent with its
zoning so that all or substantially all of the new connections to the extension
capable of being made are actually made and no additional new connections are
expected or required, the full amount of city payment owed to the developer
will be made upon acceptance of the extension instead of the rated payment
method described above.
      (4)   City payments under Subsection (c)(3) may be made to:
         (A)   the original developer constructing the extension;
         (B)   the original developer’s legal successor by merger or other
proceedings, if the developer is a corporation, partnership or other business
entity;
         (C)   the original developer’s heirs or designated beneficiaries
legally established by a validly probated will or duly created estate
administration;
         (D)   an assignee of the original developer, pursuant to a written,
notarized agreement transferring the right to a payment which is executed by
the original developer, legal successor, heir, beneficiary or their authorized
agent and which is filed with the director after execution; or
         (E)   if after appropriate invest-igation the director determines that
no one else exists who could claim a right to city payments under Subsections
(c)(4)(A) through (c)(4)(D), any other person the director determines would
have a right to receive city payments; provided, however, that if no person
makes a claim for city payments owed under this subsection within 20 years
after acceptance of the off-site extension by the city, the funds will be
considered abandoned and will be placed in the department’s general operating
fund. The director is authorized to promulgate procedures, not in conflict with
this chapter or other laws, for handling claims under this Subsection (c)(4).
      (5)   City payments for off-site extensions will be processed in
accordance with Subsections (h) and (i) of this section, subject to any other
applicable credits or charges prescribed in this chapter.
   (d)   Existing mains. The developer may utilize any existing main that may
be available to adequately serve a proposed development in the design and
construction of extensions subject to the payment of the acreage fee described
in Subsection (e) of this section, if the director determines that:
      (1)   the existing main is not substandard as to size or condition; and
      (2)   the main is capable of adequately serving the development and not
impractical to use for engineering or financial reasons; otherwise, the mains
shall not be used or shall be replaced as required in Subsection (f).
   (e)   Acreage fee. A developer utilizing an existing main under this section
shall be charged an acreage fee if the existing main utilized was previously
constructed by a developer entitled to city participation under this section.
The amount of the fee shall be as prescribed in Section
49-18.10(d), and shall be paid upon completion of final design of the proposed
system serving the development. All acreage fees collected shall be deposited
to the credit of the appropriate city fund, and shall be used only for the
purpose of reimbursing developers as required under this section.
   (f)   Replacement mains. The following rules govern the construction of a
replacement main:
      (1)   The developer shall replace every existing substandard main serving
the development with a main of adequate size and condition for permanent
service, as determined by the director, subject to applicable city
participation under this section.
      (2)   The method of city participation in the cost of replacement of an
off-site main within the city shall be governed by the rules for off-site
extensions in Subsection (c).
   (g)   Trunk or transmission mains. If platted property abuts or fronts on an
existing water transmission or trunk wastewater main and connection to the main
is not permitted by the director, the developer will not be charged for the
existing trunk or transmission main, but may still be required to construct
another main to adequately serve the development. City participation in the
cost of the alternate main shall be governed by the applicable rules of
Subsections (a) through (c) of this section.
   (h)   Duplicate mains. Subject to the rules of Subsections (d) and (e) of
this section, if more than one existing water or wastewater main fronts, abuts
or lies within a development, the director shall determine which existing main
or mains the developer shall be allowed to connect to, if any.
   (i)   City payments and other charges offset. The director shall offset any
charges payable by developers under this chapter, except charges for retail use
of the water or wastewater system, against city payments owed to a developer.
If charges exceed city payments, payment must be made to the city prior to
commencement of service. If city payments exceed charges the city will make
payment upon acceptance of the system by the city, subject to the method of
payment for off-site extensions described in Subsection (c)(3); provided,
however, that no city payment under this article shall exceed 30 percent of the
total private development contract price. Where the city’s participation
exceeds $10,000, the director may waive the 30 percent limitation if the
director chooses, in the director’s sole discretion, to advertise the
construction for competitive bids in accordance with state law. Charges paid to
the city, if any, go into the department’s operating fund or into the trust
fund, where applicable.
   (j)   Disbursement of funds. Without additional city council approval, the
director of finance is authorized to encumber and allocate funds from the
appropriate water and wastewater system improvement fund and to issue checks or
warrants from the proper encumbrance out of that fund for the purpose of making
payments under this section, upon certification from the director that the
developer has met all the applicable requirements of this article and that the
amount of the payment accurately reflects the amount due the developer under
this section.
   (k)   No limitation on city. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
restrict the city’s authority to construct capital improvements for the benefit
of development or the citizens of the city. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 19526; 19622;
20215; 20653; 29645)
SEC. 49-63.   CERTAIN EXISTING MAINS EXEMPT.
   (a)   Exemption. Property platted into lots, tracts or other parcels and
having existing water and wastewater mains prior to December 11, 1936 is exempt
from pro rata.
   (b)   Resubdivided property. Where the property described in Subsection (a)
is later subdivided, replatted or otherwise developed such that the existing
mains are otherwise replaced or extended in order to serve the property, then
the terms of this article apply.
   (c)   Charges already paid. Where an individual owner or developer has
already paid or contributed toward an existing main in accordance with the
terms of this article, that person will not be assessed any further charges
prescribed under this article for that main. No person will be charged a lot or
acreage fee for connection to or utilization of an existing main if:
      (1)   the existing main has been installed and in service for a period of
20 years or greater at the time of connection or utilization; or
      (2)   the existing main has previously been fully paid for under this
article by persons other than the city. (Ord. Nos. 19201; 20653)
CHAPTER 50
CONSUMER AFFAIRS
ARTICLE I.
CONSUMER AFFAIRS ADMINISTRATION.
Sec.
50-1.   Director.
Sec.
50-2.   Assistants and additional personnel.
Sec.
50-3.   Powers of the director.
Sec.
50-4.   Power to seize.
ARTICLE II.
RESERVED.
Secs. 50-5 thru 50-35.   Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED.
Secs. 50-36 thru 50-71.   Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
CONSUMER PROTECTION.
Sec.
50-72.   Definitions.
Sec.
50-73.   Unlawful acts or practices.
Sec.
50-74.   Interpretation.
Sec.
50-75.   Advertising - Disclosure of name and address.
Sec.
50-76.   Exemption.
Sec.
50-77.   Investigation.
Sec.
50-78.   Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
WOOD VENDORS.
Sec.
50-79.   Definitions.
Sec.
50-80.   License required.
Sec.
50-81.   Application; issuance; non- transferability.
Sec.
50-82.   Fee.
Sec.
50-83.   Signs; display; issuance.
Sec.
50-84.   Sale of fuel wood - Invoices.
Sec.
50-84.1.   Sale of fuel wood - Unit requirement.
Sec.
50-85.   Refusal to issue or renew license; revocation.
Sec.
50-86.   Appeal.
ARTICLE VI.
COIN-OPERATED DEVICES.
Sec.
50-87.   Definitions.
Sec.
50-88.   Design and construction.
Sec.
50-89.   Maintenance.
Sec.
50-90.   Operating instructions.
Sec.
50-91.   Instructions for reporting faulty operation.
Sec.
50-92.   Statement of rates.
Sec.
50-93.   Unlawful to deface signs.
Sec.
50-94.   Exemptions.
Sec.
50-95.   Penalty.
ARTICLE VII.
MAIL ORDER SALES.
Sec.
50-96.   Prohibited acts.
Sec.
50-97.   Exceptions.
Sec.
50-98.   Failure to disclose legal name and address.
ARTICLE VIII.
ELECTRONIC REPAIRS.
Sec.
50-99.   Definitions.
Sec.
50-100.   License - Required; trade name registration.
Sec.
50-101.   Fees.
Sec.
50-102.   License - Application, issuance, and renewal.
Sec.
50-103.   License - Display, duplicates, transferability; employee
identification.
Sec.
50-104.   Powers and duties of the director.
Sec.
50-105.   License - Refusal to issue or renew.
Sec.
50-106.   License - Revocation.
Sec.
50-107.   License - Appeal from refusal to issue or renew; from decision to
revoke.
Sec.
50-108.   Disclosure required for repairs on premises of owner.
Sec.
50-109.   Disclosure required for repairs in licensee’s establishment.
Sec.
50-110.   Detailed statement required; return of replaced parts.
Sec.
50-111.   Unnecessary repairs; false representation of work.
Sec.
50-112.   Advertising.
ARTICLE IX.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIRS.
Sec.
50-113.   Definitions.
Sec.
50-114.   License required; trade name registration.
Sec.
50-115.   License application, place of business, issuance, renewal, and
expiration.
Sec.
50-116.   Fees.
Sec.
50-117.   License display, replacement, and transferability.
Sec.
50-118.   Refusal to issue or renew license.
Sec.
50-119.   License revocation.
Sec.
50-120.   Appeal from refusal to issue or renew license; from decision to
revoke license.
Sec.
50-121.   Powers and duties of the director.
Sec.
50-122.   Schedule of charges.
Sec.
50-123.   Disclosure of location of repairs, cost of repairs, time to complete.
Sec.
50-124.   Detailed invoice required; return of replaced parts.
Sec.
50-125.   Disclosure required for warranty.
Sec.
50-126.   Advertising.
Sec.
50-127.   Unnecessary repairs; charging for work not performed.
Sec.
50-128.   Exemptions.
Sec.
50-129.   Sign giving customer notice required.
Sec.
50-130.   Penalty.
ARTICLE X.
HOME REPAIR.
Sec.
50-131.   Article definitions.
Sec.
50-132.   Administration of article.
Sec.
50-133.   Article cumulative.
Sec.
50-134.   Home repair license required.
Sec.
50-135.   License exemptions.
Sec.
50-136.   License application, expiration, and renewal.
Sec.
50-137.   License fees.
Sec.
50-138.   Revocation of license.
Sec.
50-139.   Appeals.
Sec.
50-140.   Notice.
Sec.
50-141.   Regulations for home repairs under $500.
Sec.
50-142.   Regulations for home repairs of $500 or more.
Sec.
50-143.   Offenses.
ARTICLE XI.
CREDIT SERVICES ORGANIZATIONS AND CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES.
Division 1. General Provisions.
Sec.
50-144.   Purpose of article.
Sec.
50-145.   Definitions.
Sec.
50-146.   Violations; penalty.
Sec.
50-147.   Defense.
Division 2. Registration of Credit Services Organizations and Credit Access
Businesses.
Sec.
50-148.   Registration required.
Sec.
50-149.   Registration application.
Sec.
50-150.   Issuance and display of certificate of registration; presentment upon
request.
Sec.
50-151.   Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration.
Sec.
50-151.1.   Nontransferability.
Division 3. Miscellaneous Requirements for Credit Services Organizations and
Credit Access Businesses.
Sec.
50-151.2.   Maintenance of records.
Sec.
50-151.3.   Consumer right to copy of agreement.
Sec.
50-151.4.   Restrictions on extensions of consumer credit.
Sec.
50-151.5.   Referral to consumer credit counseling.
Sec.
50-151.6.   Restrictions on non-deferred presentment or motor vehicle title
loan extensions of consumer credit.
Sec.
50-151.7.   Compliance required.
ARTICLE XII.
STREET VENDORS.
Division 1. In General.
Sec.
50-152.   Declaration of policy.
Sec.
50-153.   General authority and duty of the director.
Sec.
50-154.   Authority to inspect.
Sec.
50-155.   Offenses; penalties.
Sec.
50-156.   Article cumulative.
Sec.
50-157.   Definitions.
Division 2. Vending on Public Property.
Sec.
50-158.   Vendors on public property.
Sec.
50-159.   Restrictions for mobile food establishments.
Division 3. Vending on Private Property.
Sec.
50-160.   Vendors on private property.
Division 4. Entertainment in the Central Business District.
Sec.
50-161.   Entertainment performances in the central business district.
Division 5. Central Business District Concession Licenses.
Sec.
50-162.   Central business district concession license.
Sec.
50-163.   License application; investigation.
Sec.
50-164.   License issuance; fees; transferability; vending location sites;
license expiration.
Sec.
50-165.   Suspension.
Sec.
50-166.   Revocation.
Sec.
50-167.   Appeal.
Division 6. Miscellaneous Requirements for Street Vendors in the Central
Business District.
Sec.
50-168.   Identification badges required.
Sec.
50-169.   Duties and conduct of street vendors.
Sec.
50-170.   Dress standards for street vendors.
Sec.
50-171.   Vehicles and equipment.
Sec.
50-172.   Signs and advertising devices.
ARTICLE I.
CONSUMER AFFAIRS ADMINISTRATION.
SEC. 50-1.   DIRECTOR.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the word “director” shall mean the director
of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this
chapter or the director’s authorized representative. (Ord. Nos. 13795; 17226)
SEC. 50-2.   ASSISTANTS AND ADDITIONAL PERSONNEL.
   The director shall appoint such assistants as he shall determine are
necessary. Additional personnel will be provided as is customary in other
departments, and subject to the provisions of the civil service rules and
regulations of the city. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-3.   POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The director shall enforce all laws concerning weights and measures.
   (b)   Reserved.
   (c)   The director shall plan, make recommendations, conduct research and
develop programs for consumer education and protection, facilitate the exchange
and dissemination of information in consultation with agencies, federal and
state officials, commercial interest, private groups and others working in this
field and coordinate the consumer protection activities of other city
departments.
   (d)   The director shall enforce all laws relating to unfair methods of
competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any
trade or commerce; in addition he shall receive and evaluate complaints and
initiate his own investigations relating to these matters and take appropriate
action, including referral to a federal or state agency.
   (e)   The director, in the performance of his duties, shall be authorized to
issue subpoenas and investigative demands to any person, administer an oath or
affirmation to any person, conduct hearings in aid of any investigation or
inquiry, prescribe such forms and promulgate such rules and regulations as may
be necessary to carry out the powers and duties of the department, which rules
and regulations shall have the force of law; provided that none of the powers
conferred by this chapter shall be used for the purpose of compelling any
natural person to furnish testimony or evidence which might tend to incriminate
him or subject him to a penalty or forfeiture; and provided further that
information obtained pursuant to the powers conferred by this chapter shall not
be made public or disclosed by the director beyond the extent necessary for law
enforcement purposes in the public interest. (Ord. Nos. 13795; 17226)
SEC. 50-4.   POWER TO SEIZE.
   Where any duty is placed upon the director under this chapter or any
ordinance of the city, the same may be performed by any assistant. The director
and the director’s assistants are granted the power to seize, without warrant,
for evidence any object or thing involved in an unfair or deceptive act or
practice in the conduct of any trade or commerce. (Ord. Nos. 13795; 19312;
21172)
ARTICLE II.
RESERVED.
SECS. 50-5 THRU 50-35. RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 21172)
ARTICLE III.
RESERVED.
SECS. 50-36 THRU 50-71. RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. 18252)
ARTICLE IV.
CONSUMER PROTECTION.
SEC. 50-72.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   (a)   PERSONS means natural persons, corporations, trusts, partnerships,
incorporated or unincorporated associations, and any other legal entity.
   (b)   TRADE and COMMERCE mean the advertising, offering for sale, rent,
lease, sale, or distribution of any services and any property, tangible or
intangible, real, personal or mixed, and any other article, commodity, or thing
of value wherever situate, and shall include any trade or commerce directly or
indirectly affecting the people of this city.
   (c)   DOCUMENTARY MATERIAL means the original or a copy of any book, record,
report, memorandum, paper, communication, tabulation, map, chart, photograph,
mechanical transcription or other tangible document or recording, wherever
situate.
   (d)   EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTARY MATERIAL shall include the inspection,
study, or copying of any such material, and the taking of testimony under oath
or acknowledgment with respect to any such documentary material or copy
thereof. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-73.   UNLAWFUL ACTS OR PRACTICES.
   No person shall engage in one or more of the following unfair or deceptive
acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce:
   (a)   Causing confusion or misunderstanding or likelihood of confusion or
misunderstanding as to the source, sponsorship, approval, or certification of
goods, or services;
   (b)   Causing confusion or misunderstanding or likelihood of confusion or
misunderstanding as to affiliation, connection or association with, or
certification by another;
   (c)   Using deceptive representations or designations of geographic origin
in connection with goods or services;
   (d)   Representing that goods or services have sponsorship, approval,
characteristics, ingredients, uses, benefits, or quantities that they do not
have or that a person has a sponsorship, approval, status, affiliation, or
connection that he does not have;
   (e)   Disparaging the goods, services, or business of another by false or
misleading representation of fact;
   (f)   Engaging in any other conduct in trade or commerce which creates
confusion or misunderstanding or the likelihood of confusion or
misunderstanding;
   (g)   The sale of goods or services to a consumer and the subsequent failure
of the seller or solicitor to honor his express and implied warranties with
respect to such goods or services. (Ord. 13795; Ord. 14369)
SEC. 50-74.   INTERPRETATION.
   (a)   This article shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its
purpose and policies. It is the intent of the city council that in construing
Section
50-73 of this article due consideration and great weight shall be given to the
interpretations of the federal trade commission and the federal courts relating
to Section 5(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45(a)(1), as
from time to time amended; and
   (b)   The director may make rules and regulations interpreting the
provisions of Section
50-73 of this article. Such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent
with the rules, regulations and decisions of the federal trade commission and
the federal courts in interpreting the provisions of Section 5(a)(1) of the
Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C., 45(a)(1), as from time to time
amended. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-75.   ADVERTISING - DISCLOSURE OF NAME AND ADDRESS.
   Whenever any person who is engaged in retail sales within the city
advertises in print within the city, goods or services for sale to the public,
the advertisement shall include the name of the advertiser and the permanent
street address of the advertiser if such street address is not listed under the
advertiser’s name in the current city of Dallas telephone directory. If the
name of the advertiser is different than the name of the owner of the business
advertised, and such business is not a corporation holding a permit to do
business in this state or the advertiser is not registered with the county
clerk of Dallas county as an assumed name, then the true name and permanent
address of the owner shall be included in the advertisement. Nothing in this
section shall apply to advertising in a classified section of a newspaper.
(Ord. Nos. 13795; 13827)
SEC. 50-76.   EXEMPTION.
   Nothing in this article shall apply to acts done by the publisher, owner,
agent, or employee of a newspaper, periodical or radio or television station in
the publication or dissemination of an advertisement, when the owner, agent or
employee did not have knowledge of the false, misleading or deceptive character
of the advertisement, did not prepare the advertisement, and did not have a
direct financial interest in the sale or distribution of the advertised product
or service. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-77.   INVESTIGATION.
   (a)   When it appears to the director that a person has engaged in, is
engaging in, or is about to engage in any act or practice declared to be
unlawful by this article, or when he believes it to be in the public interest
that an investigation should be made to ascertain whether a person in fact has
engaged in, is engaging in, or is about to engage in, any act or practice
declared to be unlawful by this article, he may execute in writing and cause to
be served upon any person who is believed to have information, documentary
material or physical evidence relevant to the alleged or suspected violation,
an investigative demand requiring such person to furnish, under oath or
otherwise, a report in writing setting forth the relevant facts and
circumstances of which he has knowledge, or to appear and testify or to produce
relevant documentary material or physical evidence for examination, at such
reasonable time and place as may be stated in the investigative demand,
concerning the advertisement, sale or offering for sale of any goods or
services or the conduct of any trade or commerce that is the subject matter of
the investigation.
   (b)   Failure or refusal to comply with the investigative demand made
pursuant to the provisions of Subsection (a), above, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-78.   RESERVED.
   (Ord. Nos. 13795; 21172)
ARTICLE V.
WOOD VENDORS.
SEC. 50-79.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   CORD means the amount of wood that is contained in a space of 128
cubic feet, when the wood is ranked and well-stowed and one-half the kerf of
the wood is included.
      (2)   ESTABLISHMENT means any building, motor vehicle, freight car, or
stand where fuel wood is sold or offered for sale by a retail dealer.
      (3)   FUEL WOOD means wood offered for sale by a retail dealer and
represented by the retail dealer as being suitable for use as fuel.
      (4)   PERSON means any individual, assumed named entity, partnership,
joint venture, association, or corporation.
      (5)   RETAIL DEALER means any person who both sells and delivers fuel
wood to the ultimate consumer. (Ord. Nos. 13795; 21172)
SEC. 50-80.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No retail dealer shall sell fuel wood in the city without first obtaining a
wood vendor’s license, nor shall a retail dealer sell fuel wood in the city
after his license has been revoked. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-81.   APPLICATION; ISSUANCE, NON-TRANSFERABILITY.
   (a)   Application for a wood vendor’s license shall be made to the director
upon a form prescribed and supplied by him, which shall include the following
information: The retail dealer’s name, the address and telephone number of his
business establishment(s), the address and telephone number of the retail
dealer’s residence if he does not have a business establishment with an
address, the license numbers of all vehicles used in delivering fuel wood, and
the method of distribution.
   (b)   When an application for a license, or renewal thereof, has been filed
with the director in proper form, the director shall within a period of 10 days
from the date of filing approve or deny said application. If the application is
denied, the director shall send to the applicant by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a written statement setting forth the reasons for the
denial.
   (c)   Each license issued pursuant to this article shall be numbered and
shall expire on August 31st of each year.
   (d)   No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable.
(Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-82.   FEE.
   The applicant shall pay an annual permit fee of $82. The fee for issuing a
replacement license for a lost, destroyed, or mutilated license is $20. The fee
is payable to the director at the time the license is issued. No refund of
license fees shall be made. (Ord. Nos. 13795; 16700; 29879; 31332; 32556)
SEC. 50-83.   SIGNS; DISPLAY; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   All vehicles used by a retail dealer in the business of selling fuel
wood, shall have posted on the door to the driver’s side, in a form and size
prescribed by the director, the retail dealer’s wood vendor’s license number.
   (b)   Upon issuance of a license, the director shall furnish one magnetic
sign each retail dealer. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-84.   SALE OF FUEL WOOD - INVOICES.
   Upon each sale of fuel wood, the retail dealer shall provide the purchaser
with an invoice showing the following information: The name and address of the
retail dealer; his wood vendor’s license number; the amount of fuel wood sold;
and the selling price of the fuel wood. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-84.1.   SALE OF FUEL WOOD - UNIT REQUIREMENT.
   A person commits an offense if he sells, offers for sale, or exposes for
sale any wood intended for fuel purposes other than by the cord or fraction of
a cord. (Ord. 21172)
SEC. 50-85.   REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW LICENSE; REVOCATION.
   The director shall refuse to approve issuance or renewal of a wood vendor’s
license to any applicant, and shall revoke the license of a retail dealer, upon
determination that the applicant or retail dealer has been convicted of a
violation of this article, Section 50-13, or Section 50-26 of this chapter
twice within a two year period; or upon determination that the applicant or
retail dealer has made any false statement as to a material matter in an
application for a license or renewal thereof. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-86.   APPEAL.
   In the event the director shall refuse to approve the issuance of an
original license or the renewal of a license to any applicant, or revokes the
license issued to any retail dealer under this article, this action shall be
final unless the retail dealer files an appeal with a permit and license appeal
board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 13795; 18200)
ARTICLE VI.
COIN-OPERATED DEVICES.
SEC. 50-87.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
   (a)   COIN-OPERATED DEVICE means any device that will accept a coin or paper
money in exchange for any commodity, thing, or service.
   (b)   COIN-OPERATED TIMING DEVICE means any device that measures the time
during which a particular service duly purchased is provided.
   (c)   OPERATOR means any person, firm, company, association or corporation
that exhibits, displays or permits to be exhibited or displayed in the city at
his or its place of business or upon premises under his or its control, any
“coin-operated device” for customer use.
   (d)   OWNER means any person, firm, company, association or corporation
owning or having the care, control, or management of any “coin-operated device”
in the city.
   (e)   UNATTENDED COIN-OPERATED DEVICE means any such device in a location
where there is no person readily available who is authorized to make rebates to
users when such device malfunctions. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-88.   DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
   No owner shall display or permit to be displayed in the city any coin-
operated device that dispenses any commodity, thing, or service unless such
device is of such materials, design, and construction as to make it reasonably
certain under normal operating conditions that:
   (a)   accuracy will be maintained as to quantity dispensed or interval of
service provided.
   (b)   operating parts will continue to function as intended; and
   (c)   any adjustments required will remain reasonably permanent. (Ord.
13795)
SEC. 50-89.   MAINTENANCE.
   The owner of a coin-operated device displayed in the city for customer use
shall continuously maintain such device in proper operating condition. (Ord.
13795)
SEC. 50-90.   OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS.
   The owner of any coin-operated device displayed in the city for customer use
which may fail to operate properly, except when special precautions are
observed, shall prominently and conspicuously mark such device with suitable
operating instructions that include such precautions. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-91.   INSTRUCTIONS FOR REPORTING FAULTY OPERATION.
   The owner or operator shall prominently display, at all locations where
unattended coin-operated devices are displayed for customer use in the city,
complete instructions for reporting to him the failure of any such device to
function properly. Said instructions shall include the name and either the
address or telephone number of the person, firm, corporation, or organization
responsible for operation. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of
said devices to rebate all money paid for commodities or services not received,
but the owner or operator may elect to check the device before making any
rebate; provided that the device must be checked promptly, so that a rebate to
which a customer is entitled will be made within 10 days from the time he
applies for it. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-92.   STATEMENT OF RATES.
   At the location of any coin-operated timing device displayed in the city for
customer use, where time is a critical factor in the use of the service
provided, the owner or operator shall clearly, prominently, and conspicuously
display the price in terms of money per unit or units of time for the service
provided. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-93.   UNLAWFUL TO DEFACE SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, destroy, or remove any signs
placed pursuant to the requirements of this article by the owner or operator at
the location where unattended coin operated devices are displayed for customer
use in the city. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-94.   EXEMPTIONS.
   The following coin-operated devices shall be exempt from the terms of this
article:
   (a)   all music and skill or pleasure coin-operated machines displayed in
establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold or served for on-premises
consumption;
   (b)   all game type coin-operated devices, including, but not limited to,
pinball machines, marble boards, miniature race track, football, golf and
bowling machines; and all juke boxes;
   (c)   all coin-operated devices which are owned by a federal, state, or
local government agency;
   (d)   all coin-operated devices owned by a public utility operating under a
franchise granted by the city or other public body. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-95.   PENALTY.
   A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less than $20 nor more
than $100. For any second or subsequent conviction, a person is punishable by a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500. (Ord. Nos. 13795; 19963)
ARTICLE VII.
MAIL ORDER SALES.
SEC. 50-96.   PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (a)   No person (including any business entity), who conducts a mail order
or catalog business in or from the city or advertises a city mailing address,
shall accept money through the mails from a consumer for merchandise ordered by
mail or telephone and then permit six weeks to elapse without:
      (1)   delivering or mailing the merchandise ordered; or
      (2)   making a full refund; or
      (3)   sending the customer a prior letter or notice advising him of the
duration of an expected delay or the substitution of merchandise of equivalent
or superior quality, and offering to send him a refund within one week if he so
requests; or
      (4)   sending the consumer substituted merchandise of equivalent or
superior quality, with a guarantee that should the merchandise be unacceptable,
the seller will accept the return of the merchandise at the seller’s expense
and that the purchase price will be refunded.
   (b)   For purposes of Subparagraphs (a)(3) and (a)(4), above, merchandise
may not be considered of “equivalent or superior quality” if it is not
substantially similar to the goods ordered, or not fit for the purposes
intended, or if the seller normally offers the substituted merchandise at a
price lower than the price of the merchandise ordered. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-97.   EXCEPTIONS.
   Sec. 50-95 shall not apply to:
   (a)   merchandise ordered pursuant to an open-end credit plan as defined in
the Federal Consumer Credit Protection Act or any other credit plan pursuant to
which the consumer’s account was opened prior to the mail order in question,
and under which the creditor may permit the customer to make purchases from
time to time from the creditor or by use of a credit card; or
   (b)   when all advertising for the merchandise contains a notice (which, in
the case of printed advertising, shall be in a type size at least as large as
the price) that a delay may be expected of a specified period. In such case,
one of the events described in Section
50-95(a)(1) through (a)(4) must occur no later than one week after expiration
of the period specified in the advertisement; or
   (c)   merchandise, such as quarterly magazines, which by their nature are
not produced until a future date and for that reason cannot be stocked at the
time of order; or
   (d)   installments other than the first, of merchandise, such as magazine
subscriptions, ordered for serial delivery. (Ord. 13795)
SEC. 50-98.   FAILURE TO DISCLOSE LEGAL NAME AND ADDRESS.
   No person (including any business entity), who conducts a mail order or
catalog business in or from the city or advertises a city mailing address, for
such business, shall fail to disclose the legal name of the company and the
complete street address from which the business is actually conducted, in all
advertising or other promotional materials containing a post office box
address, including order blanks and forms, unless the person or business entity
has its address currently listed in the city of Dallas telephone directory.
(Ord. 13795)
ARTICLE VIII.
ELECTRONIC REPAIRS.
SEC. 50-99.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   (a)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the city
manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s authorized
representative.
   (b)   ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT means electronic apparatus normally used or sold
for use by individuals for entertainment purposes, including, but not limited
to, televisions, radios, tape players, recorders or decks, phonograph
equipment, and antenna receiving systems.
   (c)   ELECTRONIC REPAIR means the repairing, servicing, or maintaining of
electronic equipment, including the pick-up and delivery of electronic
equipment from locations within the city for the purpose of repairing,
servicing or maintenance.
   (d)   LICENSE means an electronic repair license.
   (e)   LICENSEE means a person licensed to engage in the electronic repair
business under the provisions of this article.
   (f)   PERSON means any individual, assumed name entity, partnership, joint-
venture, association or corporation.
   (g)   PICK-UP AND DELIVERY CHARGE means the fee charged by a licensee for
the removal of electronic equipment from the home of a customer for the
purposes of repair, transportation to the service dealer’s place of business
and return to the home of the customer.
   (h)   SERVICE CHARGE means the total of fees charged by a service dealer for
his transportation to and from the premises of a customer and the first 30
minutes of examination and repair of one piece of electronic equipment which he
performs on the premises of the customer. Any other term used to describe a
service charge shall include these items. (Ord. Nos. 13966; 16476; 17226)
SEC. 50-100.   LICENSE - REQUIRED; TRADE NAME REGISTRATION.
   (a)   No person shall own, maintain, conduct, operate, or engage in an
electronic repair business, or hold himself out as being able to do so within
the city, without first obtaining an electronic repair license from the
director. Should such person maintain more than one electronic repair
establishment, a duplicate license shall be required for each additional
establishment operating under the same trade name. A separate license shall be
required for establishments operating under different trade names. The license
issued to an electronic repair establishment shall authorize the establishment
and all its bona fide employees to engage in the business of electronic repair.
   (b)   A licensee shall register with the director the trade name of his
electronic repair establishment. (Ord. Nos. 13966; 17393)
SEC. 50-101.   FEES.
   The annual fee for an electronic repair license is $126. The fee for issuing
a duplicate license for additional establishments or for a lost, destroyed, or
mutilated license is $0. The fee is payable to the director upon issuance of a
license. No refund of license fees shall be made. (Ord. Nos. 13966; 15970;
16476; 18411; 18876; 19300; 29879; 31332; 32556)
SEC. 50-102.   LICENSE - APPLICATION, ISSUANCE, AND RENEWAL.
   (a)   An applicant for a license shall file with the director, a written
application upon a form provided for that purpose, which shall be signed by the
applicant or his local authorized agent, who shall be an individual responsible
for the operation of applicant’s local electronic repair business. The
following information shall be required in the application:
      (1)   name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, including the
trade name by which applicant does business and the street address of all
repair establishments, and if incorporated, the name registered with the
secretary of state;
      (2)   type of electronic equipment repaired by applicant;
      (3)   a statement indicating whether any owner, proprietor, or current
employee of applicant has been convicted for violation of this article;
      (4)   a statement whether an electronic repair license issued to
applicant or any proprietor, partner or corporate officer of applicant, has
been revoked within one year preceding the date of application; and
      (5)   a statement that applicant engages in the lawful business of
electronic repair and that all facts stated in the application are true.
   (b)   An applicant shall be required to maintain a permanent and established
place of business at a location where an electronic repair business is not
prohibited by municipal ordinance and for which any store license and tax
permit, if required by law, has been issued and is in force.
   (c)   When an application for a license, or renewal thereof, has been filed
with the director in proper form, the director shall, within a period of 30
days from the date of filing, approve the application or if he finds any of the
facts listed in Section
50-105 to be true, deny the application. If the application is denied, the
director shall send to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a written statement setting forth the reasons for the denial.
   (d)   Repealed by Ord. 16476.
   (e)   The director may, at any time, require additional information of a
licensee or an applicant, to clarify the items on the application. (Ord. Nos.
13966; 16476)
SEC. 50-103.   LICENSE - DISPLAY, DUPLICATES, TRANSFERABILITY; EMPLOYEE
IDENTIFICATION.
   (a)   Each license issued pursuant to this article shall be posted and kept
in a conspicuous place in the electronic repair establishment.
   (b)   A duplicate license may be issued for one lost, destroyed or mutilated
upon application therefor on a form prescribed by the director. Each duplicate
license shall have the word “duplicate” stamped across the face thereof and
shall bear the same number as the one it replaces.
   (c)   No electronic repair license shall be assignable or transferable.
   (d)   Every licensee, within 10 days after a change or partial change in
local ownership or management of the electronic repair business, or if there be
no local ownership, then a change in the authorized agent referred to in
Section
50-102(a), or a change of address or trade name, shall notify the director of
any such change.
   (e)   Every licensee shall provide each of its electronic repair employees
with an identification card which identifies that person as an employee of the
licensee. The licensee’s license number shall be prominently printed on the
face of the card, and employees shall carry these cards with them at all times
while in the course of their employment. (Ord. 13966)
SEC. 50-104.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.
   In addition to the powers and duties elsewhere prescribed in this chapter,
the director shall be required to:
   (a)   administer and enforce all provisions of this article;
   (b)   keep all records of all licenses issued, suspend or revoke;
   (c)   adopt such rules and regulations, after reasonable notice to
licensees, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, with respect
to the form and content of applications for licenses, the receipt thereof, the
investigation of applicants, and other matters incidental or appropriate to his
powers and duties as may be necessary for the proper administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article; and
   (d)   conduct, on his own initiative, periodic investigations of electronic
repair establishments throughout the city, concerning their compliance with
this article. (Ord. 13966)
SEC. 50-105.   LICENSE - REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW.
   The director shall refuse to approve issuance or renewal of an electronic
repair license for any one or more of the following reasons:
   (a)   conviction twice within a two year period of the licensee, applicant
or any current employee thereof for a violation of any provision of this
article. Notice shall be given to a licensee on the date any formal charges are
filed against any employee of the licensee;
   (b)   the making of any false statement as to a material matter in an
application for a license, or renewal thereof, or in a hearing in connection
therewith;
   (c)   revocation of a license, pursuant to this article, or the applicant,
or any proprietor, partner or corporate officer therein, within one year
preceding application; or
   (d)   use by the licensee of any trade name for his electronic repair
business other than the one registered with the director. (Ord. 13966)
SEC. 50-106.   LICENSE - REVOCATION.
   (a)   An electronic repair license shall be revoked by the director for any
one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   the making of any false statement as to a material matter in an
application for a license, renewal thereof, or a hearing concerning the
license;
      (2)   conviction twice within a two year period of the licensee or any
current employee thereof, of a violation of any provisions of this article.
Notice shall be given to a licensee on the date any formal charges are filed
against any employee of the licensee; or
      (3)   use by the licensee of any trade name for his electronic repair
business other than the one registered with the director.
   (b)   Written notice of such revocation shall be sent by the director to the
licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the reasons
for the revocation. (Ord. 13966)
SEC. 50-107.   LICENSE - APPEAL FROM REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW; FROM DECISION
TO REVOKE.
   In the event the director shall refuse to approve the issuance of an
original license or the renewal of a license to any applicant, or revokes the
license issued to any licensee under this article, this action shall be final
unless the licensee files an appeal with a permit and license appeal board in
accordance with Section
2-96 of this code (Ord. Nos. 13966; 18200)
SEC. 50-108.   DISCLOSURE REQUIRED FOR REPAIRS ON PREMISES OF OWNER.
   Prior to work being performed on electronic equipment on the premises of the
owner of the electronic equipment, the owner, or his agent shall be furnished a
written schedule of charges, if such charges are made, to include the following
items:
      (1)   service charge;
      (2)   hourly labor charge with an explanation of fractional hour charges
or a flat labor charge;
      (3)   charges for making an estimate of repairs; and
      (4)   itemized lists of any and all other charges other than parts;
provided that, if a list of parts installation charges is on file in the office
of the director, such parts installation charges are not required to be
itemized on the schedule. Such lists on file with the director shall be kept
confidential.
   Upon completion of electronic repair work performed on the premises of the
owner, the owner or his agent shall be furnished a written statement showing
total charges for items (1), (2), (3), and (4), above, including any
installation charges, if such charges are made, and this statement shall
include a list of all parts supplied, described with reasonable particularity
and identified by part name and designation as to whether new or used parts
were installed. If neither the owner nor his agent is present, the schedule of
charges and the statement shall be left at the premises. (Ord. 13966)
SEC. 50-109.   DISCLOSURE, REQUIRED FOR REPAIRS IN LICENSEE’S ESTABLISHMENT.
   (a)   When electronic equipment must be removed from the premises of the
owner to an electronic repair establishment for repairs, or when electronic
equipment is delivered to an electronic repair establishment by the owner of
such equipment, or his agent, the licensee shall, before removing or taking
custody of the equipment, furnish the owner or his agent a written estimate of
time to complete repairs and a written schedule of charges, if such charges are
made, and are applicable, to include the following items:
      (1)   service charge;
      (2)   pick up and delivery charge;
      (3)   charges for making an estimate of repairs;
      (4)   storage charges;
      (5)   total charges for release of equipment to be repaired in the event
it is not repaired;
      (6)   hourly labor charge or flat labor charge; and
      (7)   itemized list of any and all other charges, other than parts;
provided that, if a list of parts installation charges is on file in the office
of the director, such parts installation charges are not required to be
itemized on the schedule. Such lists on file with the director shall be kept
confidential.
   (b)   Prior to work being performed, the licensee shall provide the owner or
his agent, either in writing or by telephone, an estimate of total charges for
repairs. After receiving the estimate, the owner or his agent may either
authorize the repairs at the estimate cost or request return of his equipment
in reasonably the same condition as when released to the licensee, in which
case the licensee shall receive payment only for those items on the schedule of
charges to which he is entitled. Total charges for repairs made shall not
exceed the original estimate or any subsequent estimate by more than 10 percent
unless the owner is notified by telephone or in writing and authorizes the
increased cost estimate. If the owner authorizes an estimate or time of
completion of repairs by telephone, the licensee or his agent shall record in
writing on the work order or invoice, the date, time, name of person
authorizing repairs, and the telephone number called.
   (c)   Should the licensee be unable to complete the repairs in the time
estimated, he shall notify the owner of this fact, at which time the owner may
request return of his equipment in reasonably the same condition as when
released to the licensee, in which case the licensee shall receive payment for
those items on the schedule of charges to which he is entitled only. Upon the
above request being made by the owner, if the licensee originally picked up the
equipment from the owner’s premises, he shall return the equipment to the
owner’s premises within two working days from date of request. (Ord. Nos.
13966; 16476)
SEC. 50-110.   DETAILED STATEMENT REQUIRED; RETURN OF REPLACED PARTS.
   All work performed by a licensee shall be recorded on a statement describing
all service work done and all parts supplied with reasonable particularity,
identifying parts by name, designating whether new or used parts were
installed, and indicating the exact charge for each part or service. One copy
shall be given to the customer and one copy retained by the licensee for a
period of at least one year. The licensee shall return replaced parts, other
than the picture tube, to the customer, except such parts as the licensee is
required to return to the manufacturer or distributor under a warranty or
exchange arrangement. (Ord. 13966)
SEC. 50-111.   UNNECESSARY REPAIRS; FALSE REPRESENTATION OF WORK.
   (a)   A person shall not intentionally make repairs upon electronic
equipment that are not bona fide and necessary to correct the malfunction for
repair of which his services were sought. This subsection does not apply to
replacement of weak parts of electronic equipment upon disclosure of the
weakness and authorization of the owner.
   (b)   A person shall not represent that he has performed work or replaced a
part on electronic equipment if he has not performed the work or replaced the
part. (Ord. Nos. 13966; 16476)
SEC. 50-112.   ADVERTISING.
   (a)   An advertised fee, charge, or stipulation of no charge for any
electronic repair service involving a trip to the premises of a customer, shall
mean the total of fees charged by the licensee for his transportation to and
from the premises of a customer and the first 30 minutes of examination and
repair of one piece of electronic equipment which he performs on the premises
of the customer.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to advertise in any manner, the
fact that he is a holder of a city electronic repair license. (Ord. Nos. 13966;
14369)
ARTICLE IX.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIRS.
SEC. 50-113.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   (a)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the city
manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s authorized
representative.
   (b)   MAJOR COMPONENT means the engine (excluding accessories),
transmission, or differential gear of a motor vehicle.
   (c)   MOTOR VEHICLE means any self-propelled device in, upon, or by which
persons or property are or may be transported upon a highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails.
   (d)   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR means mechanical repair, alteration, or addition
of equipment or parts, which includes but is not limited to, tuneup, brake
work, transmission work, engine repair, body work, painting, and upholstering.
   (e)   LICENSEE means a person licensed to engage in the motor vehicle repair
business under the provisions of this article.
   (f)   PERSON means an individual, assumed name entity, partnership, joint-
venture, association, corporation, or other legal entity. (Ord. Nos. 14487;
17226)
SEC. 50-114.   LICENSE REQUIRED; TRADE NAME REGISTRATION.
   (a)   No person shall own, maintain, conduct, operate, or engage in the
business of motor vehicle repair for compensation within the city, or hold
himself out as being able to do so, or act as the agent for another who is
engaged in the motor vehicle repair business, or take custody of the motor
vehicle within the city for the purpose of repair without first obtaining a
motor vehicle repair license from the director. Should a person maintain a
motor vehicle repair establishment at more than one location, a duplicate
license is required for each additional location. The license issued to a motor
vehicle repair establishment authorizes the licensee and all its bona fide
employees to engage in the business of motor vehicle repair.
   (b)   A licensee shall register with the director the trade name of his
motor vehicle repair establishment and shall not use or permit to be used more
than one trade name at a single location. (Ord. 14487)
SEC. 50-115.   LICENSE APPLICATION, PLACE OF BUSINESS, ISSUANCE, RENEWAL, AND
EXPIRATION.
   (a)   An applicant for a license shall file with the director a written
application upon a form provided for that purpose, which shall be signed by the
applicant or his local authorized agent, who shall be an individual responsible
for the operation of applicant’s local motor vehicle repair business. Should an
applicant maintain a motor vehicle repair establishment at more than one
location, a separate application must be filed for each location. The following
information shall be required in the application:
      (1)   name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, including the
trade name by which applicant does business and the street address of the motor
vehicle repair establishment, and if incorporated, the name registered with the
secretary of state;
      (2)   a statement whether a motor vehicle repair license issued to
applicant or any proprietor, partner, or corporate officer of applicant, has
been revoked within one year preceding the date of application; and
      (3)   a statement that applicant engages in the business of motor vehicle
repair and that all facts stated in the application are true.
   (b)   An applicant is required to maintain a permanent and established place
of business at a location where a motor vehicle repair business is not
prohibited by the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city.
   (c)   When an application for a license or license renewal has been filed
with the director in proper form, the director shall, within 30 days from the
date of filing approve or deny the application. If the application is denied,
the director shall send to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a written statement setting forth the reasons for the denial.
   (d)   Repealed by Ord. 16476.
   (e)   The director may, at any time, require additional information of a
licensee or an applicant to clarify items on the application. (Ord. Nos. 14487;
16476)
SEC. 50-116.   FEES.
   The annual fee for a motor vehicle repair license is $122 for the first
location and $75 for a duplicate license for each additional location. The fee
for issuing a replacement license for one lost, destroyed, or mutilated is $25.
The fee is payable to the director upon issuance of a license. No refund of
license fees will be made. (Ord. Nos. 14487; 16476; 16700; 18411; 18876; 20076;
26598; 29879; 31332; 32556)
SEC. 50-117.   LICENSE DISPLAY, REPLACEMENT, AND TRANSFERABILITY.
   (a)   Each license issued pursuant to this article must be posted and kept
in a conspicuous place in the motor vehicle repair establishment.
   (b)   A replacement license may be issued for one lost, destroyed, or
mutilated upon application on a form provided by the director. A replacement
license shall have the word “replacement” stamped across its face and shall
bear the same number as the one it replaces.
   (c)   A motor vehicle repair license is not assignable or transferable.
   (d)   A licensee shall notify the director within 10 days of a change or
partial change in local ownership or management of the motor vehicle repair
business, or if there is no local ownership, then a change in the authorized
agent referred to in Section
50-115(a), or a change of address or trade name. (Ord. 14487)
SEC. 50-118.   REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW LICENSE.
   The director shall refuse to approve issuance or renewal of a motor vehicle
repair license for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   a false statement as to a material matter intentionally made in an
application for a license;
      (2)   conviction twice within a two year period of the applicant or a
current employee of the applicant while he was in applicant’s employment for a
violation of a provision of this article;
      (3)   revocation of a license, pursuant to this article, of the
applicant, or a proprietor, partner, or corporate officer of the applicant,
within one year preceding application; or
      (4)   use by the licensee of a trade name for his motor vehicle repair
business other than the one registered with the director. (Ord. 14487)
SEC. 50-119.   LICENSE REVOCATION.
   (a)   The director shall revoke a motor vehicle repair license for one or
more of the following reasons:
      (1)   a false statement as to a material matter intentionally made in an
application for a license, license renewal, or a hearing concerning the
license;
      (2)   conviction twice within a two year period of the licensee or a
current employee of the licensee while he was in licensee’s employment for a
violation of a provision of this article; (Notice shall be given to a licensee
on the date formal charges are filed against an employee of the licensee. If
licensee discharges a convicted employee within one week after his second final
conviction, the license is not subject to revocation under this subparagraph.)
or
      (3)   use by the licensee of a trade name for his motor vehicle repair
business other than the one registered with the director.
   (b)   The director shall send written notice of a revocation to the licensee
by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the reasons for the
revocation. (Ord. 14487)
SEC. 50-120.   APPEAL FROM REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW LICENSE; FROM DECISION TO
REVOKE LICENSE.
   If the director refuses to approve the issuance of a license or the renewal
of a license to an applicant, or revokes the license issued to a licensee under
this article, this action is final unless the applicant or licensee files an
appeal with a permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 14487; 18200)
SEC. 50-121.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.
   In addition to the powers and duties elsewhere prescribed in this chapter
the director is required to:
      (1)   administer and enforce all provisions of this article;
      (2)   keep records of all licenses issued, suspended, or revoked;
      (3)   adopt rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this article, with respect to the form and content of applications for
licenses, the investigation of applicants, and other matters incidental or
appropriate to his powers and duties as may be necessary for the proper
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article; and
      (4)   conduct, on his own initiative, periodic investigations of motor
vehicle repair establishments throughout the city concerning their compliance
with this article. (Ord. 14487)
SEC. 50-122.   SCHEDULE OF CHARGES.
   (a)   Before taking custody of a motor vehicle, the licensee or his agent,
shall provide the owner or his agent, with a written itemized schedule of
charges, if such charges are made, to include the following items:
      (1)   charges for making an estimate of repairs;
      (2)   total charges for release of the motor vehicle in a disassembled
state if it is not repaired;
      (3)   total charges for release of the motor vehicle in reasonably the
same condition as when delivered to licensee if repairs are not made;
      (4)   storage charges;
      (5)   towing charges; and
      (6)   itemized list of all other charges, other than those included in
the estimate.
   (b)   Except for the estimate price a licensee shall not charge a person for
a service not recorded on the schedule of charges. The licensee shall retain
one copy of the schedule of charges signed by the motor vehicle owner or his
agent for a period of one year.
   (c)   If the motor vehicle is brought to the licensee’s establishment by a
towing service, which is either an agent of the motor vehicle owner or an agent
of the licensee, and there is no opportunity for licensee to present a schedule
of charges to the owner before taking custody, the licensee shall provide,
either in writing or by telephone, a schedule of charges at the time of giving
the estimate of repairs.
   (d)   If a schedule of charges is given by telephone, the licensee or his
agent shall record in writing on the work order or invoice, the date, time,
name of the person authorizing repairs, and the telephone number called. (Ord.
Nos. 14487; 16476)
SEC. 50-123.   DISCLOSURE OF LOCATION OF REPAIRS, COST OF REPAIRS, TIME TO
COMPLETE.
   (a)   If none of the repairs are to be performed by licensee at licensee’s
establishment, then before taking custody of a motor vehicle, the licensee or
his agent shall disclose to the owner or his agent, the trade name, address,
and telephone number where the vehicle will be repaired.
   (b)   Before disassembling a major component of the motor vehicle, the
licensee or his agent shall disclose to the owner or his agent that a major
component of the motor vehicle will need to be disassembled in order for an
estimate to be made.
   (c)   Prior to repair work being performed on a motor vehicle, the licensee
or his agent shall provide the owner or his agent, either in writing or by
telephone, an estimate of total charges for repairs, not including sales tax,
and an estimate of time to complete the repairs. A licensee is not required to
give an estimate of total charges for repairs and an estimate of time to
complete repairs for a job of $15 or less.
   (d)   After receiving the estimate, the owner or his agent may either
authorize the repairs at the estimate of cost and time or request return of the
motor vehicle in a disassembled state or in reasonably the same condition as
when released to the licensee, in which case the licensee or his agent shall
make the motor vehicle available for possession within three working days from
the time of request, and shall receive payment only for those items on the
schedule of charges to which he is entitled. If authorization of an estimate of
total charges for repairs or an estimate of time to complete repairs is made by
telephone, the licensee or his agent shall record in writing on the work order
or invoice, the date, time, name of the person authorizing the repairs, and the
telephone number called together with a list of parts, labor, and the total
cost.
   (e)   A licensee shall not charge for repairs an amount exceeding the
estimate by more than 10 percent or $10, whichever is greater, unless the owner
or his agent is notified by telephone or in writing and authorizes the
increased cost estimate. If authorization of an increased cost estimate is made
by telephone, the licensee or his agent shall record in writing on the work
order or invoice, the date, time, name of the person authorizing the additional
cost, and the telephone number called together with a list of additional parts,
labor, and the total additional cost.
   (f)   Should the licensee be unable to complete the repairs in the time
estimated, he shall notify the owner or his agent of this fact, after which
notification the owner or his agent may request return of the motor vehicle in
either an assembled or disassembled state, in which case the licensee or his
agent shall make the motor vehicle available for possession within three
working days from the date of request and the licensee shall receive payment
for the work actually done and those items on the schedule of charges to which
he is entitled. If authorization of an extended estimate of time to repair is
made by telephone, the licensee or his agent shall record in writing on the
work order or invoice, the date, time, name of the person authorizing the
repairs, and the telephone number called.
   (g)   The licensee or his agent shall give the owner or his agent a copy of
all documents that require the signature of the owner or his agent at the time
the documents are signed.
   (h)   Other than the disclosures required by this article and the following
standard work order agreement provisions, if any other preprinted provision is
stipulated on a document which the customer signs it must be in eight point
type. If any provisions appear on a side other than that which the customer
signs, a notice must appear just above the customer’s signature calling
attention to additional terms and conditions and their location on the
document. For the purposes of this section, the standard work order agreement
provisions are as follows:
      (1)   authorization of repairs to be made;
      (2)   permission to operate motor vehicle;
      (3)   acknowledgment of mechanic’s lien to secure amount of repairs; and
      (4)   limitation on liability for loss or damage. (Ord. Nos. 14487;
16476)
SEC. 50-124.   DETAILED INVOICE REQUIRED; RETURN OF REPLACED PARTS.
   (a)   The licensee shall record all work performed on an invoice describing
all service work done and all parts supplied with reasonable particularity,
identifying parts by name and the exact charge for each. If used, rebuilt, or
reconditioned parts are supplied, the invoice shall clearly state that fact.
The licensee shall disclose the trade name, business address, and business
telephone number of the licensee on the invoice unless licensee has its address
currently listed in the city of Dallas telephone directory. One copy shall be
given to the customer and one copy retained by the licensee for a period of at
least one year. Invoices and records pertaining to the invoices shall be open
for reasonable inspection by the director.
   (b)   The licensee shall return replaced parts to the customer if requested
by the owner or his agent when the estimate is given, except those parts which
must be returned to the manufacturer or distributor under warranty or for
exchange. (Ord. 14487)
SEC. 50-125.   DISCLOSURE REQUIRED FOR WARRANTY.
   (a)   If a licensee provides a warranty or pro rata warranty on repair parts
and labor, he shall put it in writing and give a legible copy to the customer.
The customer’s copy of the warranty must contain:
      (1)   the nature and extent of the warranty including a description of
parts or services included or excluded from the warranty;
      (2)   the duration of the warranty and requirements to be performed by
warrantee before the warrantor will fulfill the warranty;
      (3)   all conditions, limitations, and the manner in which the warrantor
will fulfill the warranty, such as repair, replacement, or refund;
      (4)   any options of the warrantor or warrantee; and
      (5)   the warrantor’s identity and address.
   (b)   When repair or diagnostic work is performed pursuant to a warranty,
licensee shall give an estimate of time to complete the repairs as required in
Section
50-123. (Ord. 14487)
SEC. 50-126.   ADVERTISING.
   (a)   A licensee shall disclose in any published or broadcasted
advertisement relating to motor vehicle repair the following information:
      (1)   the name of the licensee, as shown on the license;
      (2)   the street address of the motor vehicle repair establishment unless
the licensee has its address currently listed in the city of Dallas telephone
directory; and
      (3)   if an establishment does not perform repairs on motor vehicles but
takes custody of motor vehicles and contracts all repairs to another, it must
advertised that it is a motor vehicle repair brokerage business.
   (b)   An advertisement by a licensee of a warranty which provides for
adjustment on a pro rata basis, shall conspicuously disclose the basis on which
the warranty will be prorated.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to advertise in any manner, the
fact that he is a holder of a city motor vehicle repair license. (Ord. 14487)
SEC. 50-127.   UNNECESSARY REPAIRS; CHARGING FOR WORK NOT PERFORMED.
   (a)   A person shall not intentionally make repairs upon a motor vehicle
which are not bona fide and not necessary to correct the malfunction for repair
of which his services were sought.
   (b)   A person shall not represent that he has performed work or replaced
parts on a motor vehicle when he has not performed the work or replaced the
parts. (Ord. 14487)
SEC. 50-128.   EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   A person engaged in the business of adding fluids only to motor
vehicles is exempted from the provisions of this article.
   (b)   A licensee who enters into a contract with a commercial, industrial,
or governmental entity to repair motor vehicles belonging to the entity subject
to terms established in the contract, is exempted from the provisions of
Sections
50-122 and
50-123 while in the performance of repairs pursuant to the contract. (Ord. Nos.
14487; 16476)
SEC. 50-129.   SIGN GIVING CUSTOMER NOTICE REQUIRED.
   A licensee shall display a sign in a conspicuous place near the service
entrance where the customer normally brings his motor vehicle for repair work.
The sign shall be not less than 24 inches by 26 inches in size, with 72 point
bold face type used for the heading and 48 point bold face type used for the
wording in the list. The sign shall contain precisely the following words only:
IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DALLAS
THIS FIRM IS PLEASED TO FURNISH EACH CUSTOMER WITH:
      (1)   AN ESTIMATE FOR COST OF ALL REPAIR WORK IN EXCESS OF $15.00.
      (2)   AN ESTIMATE OF TIME TO COMPLETE REPAIR WORK.
      (3)   A DETAILED INVOICE OF WORK DONE AND PARTS SUPPLIED.
      (4)   RETURN OF REPLACED PARTS OTHER THAN THOSE WHICH MUST BE RETURNED TO
THE MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR IF REQUESTED AT THE TIME ESTIMATE IS GIVEN.
      (5)   A COPY OF ANY DOCUMENT THAT REQUIRES YOUR SIGNATURE.
(Ord. 14487)
SEC. 50-130.   PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500. (Ord. Nos.
14487; 19963)
ARTICLE X.
HOME REPAIR.
SEC. 50-131.   ARTICLE DEFINITIONS.
   The definition of a term in this section applies to each grammatical
variation of the term. In this article, unless the context requires a different
definition:
      (1)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (2)   CONTRACTOR means a person who contracts (whether written, oral,
express, or implied) to perform a home repair for another but does not include
a person who performs a home repair in the capacity of an employee.
      (3)   EMPLOYEE means a person in the service of another under a contract
for hire (whether written, oral, express, or implied) under circumstances in
which the employer has the power or right to control and direct the person in
the material details of performing the work.
      (4)   HOME REPAIR means the addition, improvement, remodeling, repair, or
replacement to an existing single-family or duplex dwelling or to the fixtures,
land, or other permanent structures that are part of the premises on which the
dwelling is located, and includes, but is not limited to, addition,
improvement, remodeling, repair, or replacement of driveways, swimming pools,
porches, garages, landscaping, fences, roofs, floor covering, and central heat
and air conditioning. Home repair does not include addition, improvement,
remodeling, repair, or replacement of removable appliances or furnishings (as
illustrated by, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, window air
conditioners, and draperies).
      (5)   HOME REPAIR LICENSE means a license issued under this article.
      (6)   LICENSEE means a person who holds a home repair license issued to
him under this article.
      (7)   OWNER means a person who is entitled under a contract (whether
written, oral, express, or implied) to the performance of a home repair.
      (8)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, government or governmental
subdivision, agency, trust, partnership, of two or more persons having a joint
or common economic interest. (Ord. Nos. 16476; 17226)
SEC. 50-132.   ADMINISTRATION OF ARTICLE.
   The director shall administer and enforce this article and may establish
such rules, not inconsistent with this article, as he determines are necessary
to implement this article. (Ord. 14990)
SEC. 50-133.   ARTICLE CUMULATIVE.
   This article is cumulative of other city ordinances and does not affect the
operation of other city ordinances applicable to persons or activity regulated
under this article. (Ord. 14990)
SEC. 50-134.   HOME REPAIR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A person who is not a licensee shall not perform, agree to perform, or
advertise or represent that he will perform a home repair for compensation.
(Ord. Nos. 14990; 16476)
SEC. 50-135.   LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   A person who is not a licensee may perform or agree to perform a home
repair for compensation if:
      (1)   city licensing of persons engaged in the kind of home repair
performed or agreed to be performed is prohibited under state law;
      (2)   he is an electrical contractor or plumbing contractor licensed or
registered under city ordinance, and the kind of home repair performed or
agreed to be performed is authorized by the city license or registration; or
      (3)   he is an employee of the contractor or owner.
   (b)   This section does not exempt a person from the duty to comply with
Sections
50-141 and
50-142 or from prosecution under Section
50-143(a)(2), (3), (4), (5) or (6). (Ord. 14990)
SEC. 50-136.   LICENSE APPLICATION, EXPIRATION, AND RENEWAL.
   (a)   A person may not obtain a home repair license unless he applies for a
license in the manner prescribed by this section.
   (b)   Repealed by Ord. 16476.
   (c)   A person desiring to obtain a home repair license shall file with the
director a written, verified application on a form supplied by the director
containing the following:
      (1)   name, address, and telephone number of the individual filing the
application;
      (2)   business or trade name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant;
      (3)   form of business of the applicant and:
         (A)   if an unincorporated association, the names and addresses of the
associates;
         (B)   if a corporation, the registered name of the corporation; or
         (C)   if an individual proprietorship, the name and address of the
proprietor;
      (4)   name and address of an individual designated by the applicant to
receive notice issued under this article;
      (5)   signature of the applicant; and
      (6)   such other information as the director determines is necessary to
evaluate the license application or to otherwise promote effective
administration or enforcement of this article.
   (d)   A licensee desiring to renew his license shall file a written,
verified request for renewal with the director. A renewal request must be made
on a form supplied by the director, filed not fewer than 10 days before the
license expires, and signed by the licensee. The licensee shall furnish with
his renewal request such information as the director determines is necessary to
evaluate the renewal request or to otherwise promote effective administration
or enforcement of this article.
   (e)   Upon the filing of a license application or renewal request, the
director shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the following
requirements and qualifications are satisfied:
      (1)   the information contained in the license application or renewal
request is true; and
      (2)   the applicant or licensee, an individual who is a business
associate of the applicant or licensee, or an individual who is a corporate
officer of the applicant or licensee, in the applicant or licensee’s home
repair business, or a current employee of the applicant or licensee has not
been convicted twice in municipal court under Section
50-143 within the two years immediately preceding the date that the license
application or renewal request is filed. The time period between conviction in
municipal court and final disposition on appeal of the conviction is not
included in calculating the two-year period if the conviction is affirmed; and
      (3)   The applicant or licensee, an individual who is a business
associate of the applicant or licensee, or an individual who is a corporate
officer of the applicant or licensee, in the applicant or licensee’s home
repair business, has not had a home repair license revoked within the year
immediately preceding the date the license application or renewal request is
filed.
   (f)   If the director determines that a license application or renewal
request satisfies the requirements and qualifications prescribed by Subsection
(e) of this section, the director shall issue or renew the home repair license;
otherwise, the director shall deny the license application or renewal request.
   (g)   The director shall within 10 days of the date of application notify in
writing a license applicant or licensee requesting renewal, of the issuance of
a license, renewal of a license, or denial of a license application or renewal
request. In the case of notice of a denial of a license application or renewal
request, the director shall include in the notice the reason for the denial and
a statement informing the applicant or licensee of his right of appeal.
   (h)   If, after a licensee requests renewal of his license in accordance
with Subsection (d) of this section, the license expires before the director
acts on the request, the licensee may temporarily operate under his expired
license pending the determination of the renewal request by the director, or in
the case of an appeal of a denial of a renewal request, pending the decision of
the permit and license appeal board. (Ord. Nos. 14990; 16476; 18200)
SEC. 50-137.   LICENSE FEES.
   (a)   The fee for a home repair license is $117 a year.
   (b)   The fee for issuance of a duplicate home repair license for a license
that is destroyed or lost is $20.
   (c)   License fees required under this section are not refundable and are
payable to the director upon issuance or renewal of the license. The director
may not issue or renew a home repair license before the fee is paid. (Ord. Nos.
14990; 16476; 18411; 18876; 19300; 20076; 26478; 29879; 31332; 32556)
SEC. 50-138.   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The director shall revoke a home repair license if he determines that:
      (1)   the licensee knowingly made a false representation as to a material
matter in a license application, license renewal request, or hearing concerning
the license; or
      (2)   the licensee identified himself with a business or trade name other
than that filed with the director; or
      (3)   the licensee, an individual who is a business associate of the
licensee, an individual who is a corporate officer of the licensee, or a
current employee of the licensee, while he was in licensee’s employment, has
been convicted in municipal court within a two-year period of two or more
offenses prescribed by Section
50-143. (The director shall give notice to a licensee on the date formal
charges are filed against an employee of the licensee. If a licensee discharges
a convicted employee within one week after his second final conviction, the
licensee is not subject to revocation under this subparagraph.) The time period
between conviction in municipal court and final disposition on appeal of the
conviction is not included in calculating the two-year period if the conviction
is affirmed; or
      (4)   the licensee has knowingly subcontracted with or employed, for the
performance of work which requires state or city professional licensing or
registration, a person who does not have the requisite license or registration,
or in the alternative has negligently failed to ascertain the person’s
qualifications prior to subcontracting with or employing the person;
      (5)   the licensee knowingly misrepresented the quality or quantity of a
material or service:
         (A)   used or rendered in connection with a home repair performed or
agreed to be performed by the licensee; or
         (B)   offered or advertised in connection with the licensee’s home
repair business; or
      (6)   the licensee knowingly misrepresented the price of a material or
service:
         (A)   used or rendered in connection with a home repair performed or
agreed to be performed by the licensee; or
         (B)   offered or advertised in connection with the licensee’s home
repair business.
   (b)   The director shall notify the licensee in writing of a revocation and
include in the notice the reasons for the revocation, the date the director
orders the revocation and the date the order is to take effect, and a statement
informing the licensee of his right of appeal.
   (c)   A home repair license becomes void on the effective date of
notification issued under Subsection (b) of this section, and the licensee
shall surrender the revoked license at the demand of the director. However, if
the licensee appeals the revocation, the licensee may continue to operate under
his license pending the appeal. (Ord. Nos. 14990; 18200)
SEC. 50-139.   APPEALS.
   A person may appeal a denial of a home repair license application, denial of
a renewal request, or revocation of a license if the person files an appeal
with a permit and license appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 14990; 18200)
SEC. 50-140.   NOTICE.
   Notice required or authorized under this article must be served on the
person to be notified personally or by mailing to the person at the address
last-known to the director. Notice to a licensee may be given to a person
designated by the licensee to receive notice. The effective date of notice
required or authorized under this article is the date the notice is personally
served or postmarked, as the case may be. (Ord. 14990)
SEC. 50-141.   REGULATIONS FOR HOME REPAIRS UNDER $500.
   A contractor who performs or agrees to perform a home repair for a price of
less than $500 shall furnish the owner, upon completion of the home repair, a
written memorandum (as illustrated by, but not limited to, a work order,
invoice or bill) containing:
      (1)   the name and address of the contractor;
      (2)   a description of the home repair performed and materials supplied,
stated in a manner consistent with generally accepted local trade practice; and
      (3)   a statement of the price of the home repair that includes each
charge incurred by the owner and due to the contractor in connection with the
home repair. (Ord. 14990)
SEC. 50-142.   REGULATIONS FOR HOME REPAIRS OF $500 OR MORE.
   A contractor who performs of agrees to perform a home repair for a price of
$500 or more shall comply with the following regulations:
      (1)   Before beginning the home repair, the contractor shall furnish the
owner with a written contract for the home repair containing (but not limited
to):
         (A)   the name and address of the contractor;
         (B)   the approximate beginning and ending dates for the home repair
job. (This requirement does not prohibit or limit contract provisions providing
for contingent delays);
         (C)   a description of the home repair job and materials to be used in
the job, stated in a manner consistent with generally accepted local trade
practice; and
         (D)   the consideration for the home repair and a statement of the
other charges to be incurred by the owner under the contract (as illustrated
by, but not limited to, taxes, permit fees, and material costs).
      (2)   Before completion of the home repair, the contractor shall furnish
the owner with a written memorandum of any changes in the home repair contract
made subsequent to its execution. (Ord. 14990)
SEC. 50-143.   OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   violates Section
50-134; or
      (2)   violates Section
50-141; or
      (3)   violates Section
50-142; or
      (4)   fails to perform a duty imposed under a home repair contract,
without legal excuse or justification, and with intent to violate the contract;
or
      (5)   advertises that he is a home repair licensee; or
      (6)   intentionally interferes with the director in the performance of
his duty or exercise of his authority.
   (b)   A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an
offense under this section unless the provision defining the offense expressly
requires a culpable mental state.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution for the offense prescribed by
Subsection (a)(1) of this section that the actor is a person who by virtue of
Section
50-135 is not required to obtain a home repair license.
   (d)   An offense committed under this section is punishable by a fine of not
more than $500.
   (e)   Prosecution for an offense under this section does not prevent the use
of other enforcement remedies or procedures applicable to the person charged
with or the conduct involved in the offense. (Ord. Nos. 14990; 19963)
ARTICLE XI.
CREDIT SERVICES ORGANIZATIONS AND CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES.
Division 1. General Provisions.
SEC. 50-144.   PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.
   The purpose of this article is to protect the welfare of the residents and
consumers in the city of Dallas by monitoring credit services organizations and
credit access businesses in an effort to reduce abusive and predatory lending
practices. To this end, this article establishes a registration program for
credit services organizations and credit access businesses, imposes
restrictions on extensions of consumer credit made by credit services
organizations and credit access businesses, and imposes recordkeeping
requirements on credit services organizations and credit access businesses.
(Ord. Nos. 28287, eff. 1-1-12; 31747)
SEC. 50-145.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION means a certificate of registration
issued by the director under this article to the owner or operator of a credit
services organization or credit access business.
      (2)   CONSUMER means an individual who is solicited to purchase or who
purchases or seeks the services of a credit services organization or credit
access business.
      (3)   CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESS has the meaning given that term in Section
393.601 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended.
      (4)   CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESS FEES mean the fees charged by a credit
access business pursuant to Section 393.602 of the Texas Finance Code, as
amended.
      (5)   CREDIT SERVICES ORGANIZATION has the meaning given that term in
Section 393.001 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended.
      (6)   DEFERRED PRESENTMENT TRANSACTION has the meaning given that term in
Section 393.601 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended.
      (7)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article and includes any
representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director.
      (8)   EXTENSION OF CONSUMER CREDIT has the meaning given that term in
Section 393.001 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended.
      (9)   EXTENSION OF CONSUMER CREDIT TRANSACTION means the entirety of the
agreements made by a consumer to obtain an extension of consumer credit, and
includes any loan agreement between the lender and the consumer, and any fee
agreement between the credit services organization or credit access business.
      (10)   MOTOR VEHICLE TITLE LOAN has the meaning given that term in
Section 393.601 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended.
      (11)   OWNER means any person who directly or indirectly owns a credit
services organization or a credit access business. For publicly traded
companies, the term means any person who directly or indirectly owns or
controls 10 percent or more of the outstanding shares of stock in the credit
services organization or credit access business.
      (12)   PERSON means any individual, corporation, organization,
partnership, association, financial institution, or any other legal entity.
      (13)   REGISTRANT means a person issued a certificate of registration for
a credit services organization or a credit access business under this article
and includes all owners and operators of the credit access business identified
in the registration application filed under this article.
      (14)   STATE LICENSE means a license to operate a credit access business
issued by the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under Chapter 393, Subchapter
G of the Texas Finance Code, as amended.
      (15)   VALUABLE CONSIDERATION means the consideration described in
Section 393.001(3) of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. Valuable
consideration includes an immediate payment and any future payments in exchange
for an extension of consumer credit as described in Section 393.001(3)(B) of
the Texas Finance Code, as amended, or advice or assistance with regard to an
extension of consumer credit as described in Section 393.001(3)(B) of the Texas
Finance Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 28287; 31747)
SEC. 50-146.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to
perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A
person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a
violation is committed, permitted, or continued.
   (b)   An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than
$500.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this article is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (d)   Except as provided in Subsection (e), each day that a violation occurs
is a separate offense.
   (e)   Each extension of consumer credit transaction is a separate offense if
the extension of consumer credit transaction violates Section
50-151.4 or Section
50-151.6.
   (f)   The penalties provided for in Subsection (b) are in addition to any
other enforcement remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and
state law. (Ord. 28287)
SEC. 50-147.   DEFENSE.
   It is a defense to prosecution under this article that at the time of the
alleged offense the person was not required to be licensed by the state as a
credit services organization or credit access business under Chapter 393 of the
Texas Finance Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 28287; 31747)
Division 2. Registration of Credit Services Organizations and Credit Access
Businesses.
SEC. 50-148.   REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts
business as a credit services organization or credit access business without a
valid certificate of registration. A certificate of registration is required
for each physically separate credit services organization and credit access
business.
   (b)   A person operating a business as both a credit services organization
and a credit access business at the same location may obtain one certificate of
registration for both per location. (Ord. Nos. 28287; 31747)
SEC. 50-149.   REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit services
organization or credit access business, a person must submit an application on
a form provided by the city for that purpose to the director. The application
must contain the following:
      (1)   The business or trade name, street address, mailing address,
facsimile number, and telephone number of the credit services organization or
credit access business.
      (2)   The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone
numbers of all owners of the credit services organization or credit access
business and other persons with a financial interest in the credit services
organization or credit access business, and the nature and extent of each
person's interest in the credit services organization or credit access
business.
      (3)   A copy of a current, valid state registration statement held by the
credit services organization pursuant to Section 393.101 of the Texas Finance
Code, as amended.
      (4)   A copy of a current, valid state license held by the credit access
business pursuant to Section 393.603 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended.
      (5)   A copy of a current, valid city certificate of occupancy showing
that the credit services organization or credit access business is in
compliance with the Dallas Development Code.
      (6)   A non-refundable application fee of $28.
   (b)   An applicant or registrant shall notify the director within 45 days
after any material change in the information contained in the application for a
certificate of registration, including, but not limited to, any change of
address and any change in the status of the state license or state registration
statement held by the applicant or registrant. (Ord. Nos. 28287; 29879; 31332;
31747; 32556)
SEC. 50-150.   ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; PRESENTMENT
UPON REQUEST.
   (a)   The director shall issue to the applicant a certificate of
registration upon receiving a completed application under Section
50-149.
   (b)   A certificate of registration issued under this section must be
conspicuously displayed to the public in the credit services organization or
credit access business. The certificate of registration must be presented upon
request to the director or any peace officer for examination. (Ord. Nos. 28287;
31747)
SEC. 50-151.   EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   A certificate of registration expires on the earlier of:
      (1)   one year after the date of issuance; or
      (2)   if the certificate of registration is held by a credit access
business, on the date of expiration, revocation, or other termination of the
credit access business's state license.
   (b)   A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in
accordance with Section
50-149. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the registration. (Ord. Nos. 28287; 31747)
SEC. 50-151.1.   NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   A certificate of registration for a credit services organization or credit
access business is not transferable. (Ord. 28287; 31747)
Division 3. Miscellaneous Requirements for Credit Services Organizations and
Credit Access Businesses.
SEC. 50-151.2.   MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   (a)   A credit services organization and a credit access business shall
maintain a complete set of records of all extensions of consumer credit
transactions:
      (1)   that the credit services organization or credit access business
arranged or obtained for a consumer; and
      (2)   on which the credit services organization or credit access business
provide advice or assistance to a customer.
   (b)   A complete set of records must include the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the consumer.
      (2)   The principal amount of cash actually advanced.
      (3)   The fees charged to arrange or obtain an extension of consumer
credit.
      (4)   The fees charged to advise or assist a consumer in obtaining an
extension of credit.
      (5)   The documentation used to establish a consumer's income under
Section
50-151.3.
      (6)   A copy of each written agreement, between the credit services
organization or credit access business and a customer, evidencing an extension
of consumer credit including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal
agreement with the consumer.
      (7)   Whether any part of the extension of consumer credit transaction
has been refinanced or renewed and, if so, the number of refinances or renewals
made.
      (8)   A copy of each written agreement between the lender and consumer.
   (c)   A credit access business shall maintain, and file with the director,
copies, in a format prescribed by the director, of all annual reports,
quarterly reports, and all revisions and updates to those reports, filed with
the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under Chapter 393 of the Texas Finance
Code, as amended. The reports, revisions, and updates must be submitted to the
director within five business days of being submitted to the Texas Consumer
Credit Commission.
   (d)   The records required to be maintained by a credit services
organization or credit access business under this section must be retained for
at least three years and, to the extent not filed with the director, made
available for inspection by the city upon request during the usual and
customary business hours of the credit services organization or credit access
business. (Ord. Nos. 28287; 31747)
SEC. 50-151.3.   CONSUMER RIGHT TO COPY OF AGREEMENT.
   (a)   A credit services organization and a credit access business shall give
to the consumer, upon request, a printed copy of a signed contract, and any
other document the credit services organization or credit access business
requires a consumer to sign or acknowledge reading.
   (b)   All contracts and other documents that a credit services organization
or credit access business requires the consumer to sign or acknowledge reading
shall be in the language in which the contract was negotiated and explained to
the consumer. (Ord. 31747)
SEC. 50-151.4.   RESTRICTIONS ON EXTENSIONS OF CONSUMER CREDIT.
   (a)   A credit services organization or credit access business shall not
obtain for a consumer, or assist a consumer in obtaining, a cash advance under
an extension of consumer credit transaction that exceeds 20 percent of the
consumer's gross monthly income.
   (b)   A credit services organization or credit access business shall not
obtain for a consumer, or assist a consumer in obtaining, a cash advance in the
form of a motor vehicle title loan that exceeds the lesser of:
      (1)   three percent of the consumer's gross annual income; or
      (2)   70 percent of the retail value of the motor vehicle.
   (c)   A credit services organization or credit access business shall use a
paycheck, bank statement, IRS Form W-2 from the previous tax year, the previous
year's tax return, a signed letter from an employer, or other similar
documentation establishing income to determine a consumer's income.
   (d)   A credit services organization or credit access business that obtains
for a consumer or advises or assists a consumer in obtaining an extension of
consumer credit shall, by the terms of the extension of consumer credit
transaction:
      (1)   require payment of the total amount of the extension of consumer
credit transaction, including any principal, interest, and fees, valuable
consideration, credit access business fees, and any other charges or costs, in
four or fewer payments; and
      (2)   reduce by at least 25 percent per payment the total amount of the
extension of consumer credit transaction, including any principal, interest,
fees, valuable consideration, credit access business fees, and any other
charges.
   (e)   A credit services organization or credit access business shall not
refinance or renew any part of an extension of consumer credit transaction,
unless the total amount of the extension of the consumer credit transaction,
including any principal, interest, fees, valuable consideration, credit access
business fees, and any other charges or costs, is due in a single payment.
   (f)   A credit services organization or credit access business that
refinances or renews an extension of consumer credit transaction under
Subsection (e):
      (1)   may not refinance or renew the extension of credit transaction more
than three times; and
      (2)   the minimum payment amount due to refinance or renew such extension
of consumer credit transaction must reduce by at least 25 percent the total
amount of the extension of consumer credit transaction, including any
principal, interest, fees, valuable consideration, credit access business fees,
and any other charges or costs, such that the total amount owed by the consumer
is paid in full after a maximum of three refinances or renewals.
   (g)   For purposes of this section, an extension of consumer credit that is
made to a consumer within seven days after a previous extension of consumer
credit transaction has been paid by the consumer constitutes a refinancing or
renewal. (Ord. Nos. 28287; 31747)
SEC. 50-151.5.   REFERRAL TO CONSUMER CREDIT COUNSELING.
   (a)   A credit services organization and a credit access business shall
provide a list of non-profit agencies that provide financial education,
training programs, or cash assistance programs to each consumer who seeks to
obtain or seeks advice or assistance on obtaining an extension of consumer
credit. The list must be on a form approved by the director and contain
information regarding extensions of consumer credit.
   (b)   A credit services organization and a credit access business must
conspicuously display a poster, or other similar document, that contains
information regarding extensions of consumer credit, as prescribed by the
director. The organization or business must display the poster or similar
document so that it is clearly visible to each consumer who enters the
facility. (Ord. 31747)
SEC. 50-151.6.   RESTRICTIONS ON NON-DEFERRED PRESENTMENT OR MOTOR VEHICLE
TITLE LOAN EXTENSIONS OF CONSUMER CREDIT.
   (a)   This section applies to an extension of consumer credit transaction
that a credit services organization obtains or arranges for a consumer or
provides advice or assistance to obtain and that is not a deferred presentment
transaction or a motor vehicle title loan.
   (b)   The sum of all valuable consideration, fees, or other charges owed by
the consumer to the credit services organization may not exceed 0.1 percent per
day of the outstanding balance of the extension of consumer credit. (Ord.
31747)
SEC. 50-151.7.   COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   A person may not knowingly use a device, subterfuge, or pretense to evade
the application of this article. (Ord. 31747)
ARTICLE XII.
STREET VENDORS.
Division 1. In General.
SEC. 50-152.   DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to promote the protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare by the regulation of street vendors operating inside the
city. The provisions of this article are to be construed, according to the fair
import of their terms, to effect this policy. (Ord. Nos. 16309; 29023)
SEC. 50-153.   GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF THE DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this article. The director may
prescribe rules and regulations governing the conduct of street vendors not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article, including, but not limited
to, the designation of zones and sites from which street vendors may operate.
(Ord. Nos. 16309; 17675; 29023)
SEC. 50-154.   AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   The director, any representative of the city health officer or environmental
health officer, or a peace officer may inspect any street vendor and the
business procedure of a street vendor operating under this article to determine
whether the vendor is complying with this article, regulations established
under this article, and any other applicable city ordinance or state or federal
law. (Ord. 29023)
SEC. 50-155.   OFFENSES; PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to
perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A
person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a
violation is committed, permitted, or continued.
   (b)   An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not less than
$25 or more than $500, except that a second or subsequent conviction for the
same offense within a period of less than one year from the first conviction is
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this article is governed by Section
1-5.1 of this code.
   (d)   The penalties provided for in Subsection (b) are in addition to any
other enforcement remedies and penalties that the city may have under city
ordinances and state law. Prosecution for an offense under this article does
not prevent the use of other administrative enforcement remedies or procedures
applicable to the conduct involved in the offense. (Ord. 29023)
SEC. 50-156.   ARTICLE CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions of this article and other city ordinances are cumulative law,
and this chapter does not prevent enforcement of another city ordinance that
regulates an area covered by this article and is otherwise applicable. (Ord.
Nos. 16309; 29023)
SEC. 50-157.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   AGENT means any person employed by or contracting with:
         (A)   the holder of a central business district concession license to
sell or distribute goods or services under the license; or
         (B)   any other street vendor.
      (2)   ARTS DISTRICT means the area of the city bounded by Woodall Rogers
Freeway on the north, Central Expressway (elevated bypass) on the east, Ross
Avenue on the south, and St. Paul Street on the west.
      (3)   CBD CORE DISTRICT means the area of the city contained within the
boundaries of the central business district, but that does not include the arts
district and the West End district.
      (4)   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD) means the area of the city bounded
by Woodall Rogers Freeway on the north, Central Expressway (elevated bypass) on
the east, R. L. Thornton Freeway on the south, and Stemmons Freeway on the
west. The central business district includes:
         (A)   the arts district;
         (B)   the CBD core district; and
         (C)   the West End district.
      (5)   COMMERCIAL PRINTED MATTER means any printed or written matter,
whether on a sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, or
booklet, and whether printed, reproduced, or copied, that:
         (A)   advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
service;
         (B)   directs attention to a business or commercial establishment or
other activity for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting
sales;
         (C)   directs attention to or advertises a meeting, performance,
exhibition, or event, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of
private gain or profit, unless an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up at the meeting, performance, exhibition, or event only for the purpose
of defraying the expenses; or
         (D)   while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as the advertiser or distributor.
      (6)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the
city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director’s
authorized representative.
      (7)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT means a “food establishment” as defined in
Chapter 17 of this code.
      (8)   GOODS means property of every kind.
      (9)   LICENSEE means a person issued a CBD concession license under this
article.
      (10)   MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT means a “mobile food establishment” as
defined in Chapter 17 of this code.
      (11)   PERSON means an individual, corporation, association, or other
legal entity.
      (12)   PUBLIC PROPERTY means any property open or devoted to public use
or owned by the city, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, streets,
parkways, or esplanades.
      (13)   SERVICES means any work done for the benefit of another.
      (14)   STREET VENDOR or VENDOR means a person who, personally or through
an agent, engages in a business of selling or offering for sale goods or
services from any structure or vehicle that is not affixed to the ground or
from no structure or vehicle. The term does not include any person operating,
or employed in the operation of, a licensed taxicab, limousine, bus, shuttle,
non-motorized passenger transport vehicle, or motor vehicle tow service. The
term does not include a stand that only offers the occasional sale of lemonade
or other nonalcoholic beverages on private property or in a public park by an
individual younger than 18 years of age.
      (15)   VEHICLE means every device in, upon, or by which a person or
property may be transported or drawn upon a street or sidewalk, including, but
not limited to, devices moved by human power.
      (16)   WEST END DISTRICT means the area of the city bounded by Woodall
Rogers Freeway on the north; Lamar Street on the east; the MKT railroad tracks
on the west; and a southern boundary consisting of and extending along Commerce
Street from Lamar Street west to Austin Street, then along Austin Street north
to Main Street, then along Main Street west to the MKT railroad tracks. (Ord.
Nos. 16309; 17226; 17675; 18702; 29023; 31375)
Division 2. Vending on Public Property.
SEC. 50-158.   VENDORS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person, either personally or
through an agent, occupies public property in the city for the purpose of
selling, distributing, or offering for sale services or goods, including, but
not limited to, food, drinks, flowers, plants, tickets, or souvenirs.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person
selling, distributing, or offering for sale services or goods:
      (1)   is doing so in connection with the transaction of official
government business;
      (2)   is doing so by authority of a contract with the city to operate a
concession on designated areas of public property;
      (3)   is selling, distributing, or offering for sale only periodicals
from a coin-operated machine by authority of a license to operate the machine;
      (4)   is selling, distributing, or offering for sale goods or services
from a vehicle by authority of and in compliance with a CBD concession license
as provided for in this article;
      (5)   is selling, distributing, or offering for sale vegetables, produce,
or other perishable commodities at the Dallas Farmers Market (as defined in
Section
29A-2 of this code), in compliance with
Chapter 29A of this code and with the market’s agreements and covenants with
the city;
      (6)   is selling, distributing, or offering for sale a food or beverage
from a mobile food establishment in accordance with Section
50-159 of this code;
      (7)   is selling, distributing, or offering for sale goods or services as
authorized by and in compliance with a special event permit;
      (8)   is selling, distributing, or offering for sale only printed matter
that is not commercial printed matter, including, but not limited to,
newspapers and magazines, and the selling, distributing, or offering for sale
is not being conducted from machines or other structures that occupy public
property;
      (9)   is operating a vehicle for hire;
      (10)   is selling, distributing, offering for sale, or delivering the
goods or services to a person in a structure or vehicle that is affixed to the
ground, or to a person who possesses a special event permit or a CBD concession
license; or
      (11)   is not receiving remuneration from the person being given the
goods or services, and the person distributing the goods or services does not
use any type of vehicle or stand, any part of which touches the ground, when
distributing the goods or services, and the method of distribution does not
interfere with traffic flow on public streets or sidewalks.
   (c)   In addition to any enforcement action by a peace officer or the
director for a violation of this section, any person who is a victim of an act
prohibited under this section, or who witnesses a violation of this section,
may file a complaint with the city attorney. Evidence to support a conviction
for a violation of this section may include, but is not limited to, testimony
of witnesses, videotape evidence of the violation, and other admissible
evidence.
    (d)   This section does not apply to the occasional sale of lemonade or
other nonalcoholic beverages from a stand in a public park by an individual
younger than 18 years of age. (Ord. Nos. 16309; 16835; 17675; 18702; 19517;
19895; 25213; 29023; 31375)
SEC. 50-159.   RESTRICTIONS FOR MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (a)   A mobile food establishment shall not occupy public or private
property in the central business district for the purpose of serving, selling,
or distributing any food or beverage unless the establishment is operating
under the authority of and in compliance with:
      (1)   a valid CBD concession license issued under this article; and
      (2)   a valid mobile food establishment permit issued under Chapter 17 of
this code.
   (b)   A general service mobile food establishment, as described in Section
17-8.2 of this code, shall not occupy public property located outside the
central business district for the purpose of serving, selling, or distributing
any food or beverage.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsections (a) and (b) of this
section that the mobile food establishment was serving, selling, or
distributing a food or beverage as authorized by and in compliance with:
      (1)   a special event permit issued by the city; or
      (2)   a contract with the city to operate a concession on designated
areas of public property.
   (d)   A mobile food establishment shall not sell, distribute, or offer for
sale any goods or services within two city blocks or 600 feet, whichever is
greater, of the grounds of any public, private, parochial, elementary, or
secondary school located outside the central business district between the
hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when the school is in session. (Ord.
Nos. 17675; 29023)
Division 3. Vending on Private Property.
SEC. 50-160.   VENDORS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he occupies any privately-owned
property within the city for the purpose of conducting business as a street
vendor.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section
that:
      (1)   the business was authorized by a valid certificate of occupancy or
was otherwise specifically allowed under the Dallas Development Code or another
city ordinance;
      (2)   the person was conducting the street vending business in the
central business district and:
         (A)   possessed a valid CBD concession license issued under this
article;
         (B)   possessed a valid mobile food establishment permit issued under
Chapter 17 of this code, if the person was a mobile food establishment;
         (C)   had the written permission of an owner of the private property
on which the business was conducted; and
         (D)   was not conducting the business operation or using any structure
in the business operation in violation of any applicable city ordinance or
state or federal law or regulation; or
      (3)   the person was a mobile food establishment conducting the street
vending business outside the central business district and:
         (A)   possessed a valid mobile food establishment permit issued under
Chapter 17 of this code;
         (B)   had the written permission of an owner of the private property
on which the business was conducted; and
         (C)   was not conducting the business operation or using any structure
in the business operation in violation of any applicable city ordinance or
state or federal law or regulation.
   (c)   This section does not apply to the occasional sale of lemonade or
other nonalcoholic beverages from a stand on private property by an individual
younger than 18 years of age.  (Ord. Nos. 29023; 31375))
Division 4. Entertainment in the Central Business District.
SEC. 50-161.   ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (a)   A person who engages or wishes to engage solely in providing
entertainment performances for the public free of charge in the central
business district is not required to obtain a CBD concession license so long as
no fees or monies are solicited from the public as remuneration for the
entertainment and no goods or services are sold in connection with the
performances. Voluntary contributions from members of the public may be
accepted. A CBD concession license must be obtained if fees or monies are
solicited from the public or if goods or services are sold in connection with
the performances.
   (b)   A person who wishes to provide entertainment in any portion of Stone
Place, the public area surrounding Thanksgiving Square, Four-Way Place, or the
Bullington Street Mall must obtain a permit from the chief of police as
required in Section
31-22 of this code. (Ord. 29023)
Division 5. Central Business District Concession Licenses.
SEC. 50-162.   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT CONCESSION LICENSE.
   (a)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, the director may issue
a central business district (CBD) concession license to enable the holder and
the holder’s agents to conduct business as street vendors on public or private
property in the central business district.
   (b)   A separate CBD concession license is required for each vending
location site from which a person wishes to conduct business as a street vendor
on public or private property in the central business district.
   (c)   The director may not issue a license to authorize the sale or
distribution of services or goods on:
      (1)   property under the control of the park and recreation board; or
      (2)   the premises of the “convention center” or “reunion arena” as
defined in Section
43-127 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 16309; 16835; 17675; 29023)
SEC. 50-163.   LICENSE APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.
   (a)   An applicant for a CBD concession license shall file with the director
a written application upon a form provided for that purpose. A separate
application is required for each vending location site from which the applicant
wishes to do business as a street vendor. The following information is required
in the application:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, address, and date of birth, and the
identifying number from the applicant’s driver’s license, military
identification card, passport, or personal identification certificate.
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the business.
      (3)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services to be
offered for sale or delivered.
      (4)   Proof that the applicant possesses a retail vendor’s sales tax
permit from the comptroller of the State of Texas, if a sales tax permit is
required for the type of proposed operation.
      (5)   The nature of the proposed advertising to be done for the business
at the proposed location.
      (6)   The license number and type of any vehicle that is to be used.
      (7)   The nature of the business and the method of distributing or
providing goods or services.
      (8)   Proposed vending location sites for the business (only one of which
will be assigned with the license).
      (9)   Days of the week and hours requested to vend at the proposed site.
      (10)   The name, address, date of birth, and identifying number from the
driver’s license, military identification card, passport, or personal
identification certificate of each agent who will be assisting the applicant in
the proposed business.
      (11)   Proof that the applicant possesses all licenses and permits
required by this code or any other applicable city ordinance or state or
federal law for the operation of the proposed business.
      (12)   Any other information required by the director to clarify items on
the application.
   (b)   A licensee shall notify the director of any changes or corrections in
the information required by Subsection (a) within 30 days after the need for
the change or correction occurs.   
   (c)   When an application has been filed with the director in proper form,
the director shall initiate appropriate action to process the application. The
director shall make an appropriate investigation of the applicant, which may
include, but is not limited to, an inspection of the establishment and
operation of the applicant to ensure compliance with this code and all
applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws governing the sale and
distribution of the goods and services. (Ord. Nos. 16309; 17675; 18702; 27353;
29023)
SEC. 50-164.   LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEES; TRANSFERABILITY; VENDING LOCATION SITES;
LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   (a)   The director shall issue a license to the applicant within 30 days
after receipt of the application, unless the director finds one or more of the
following to be true:
      (1)   The applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   All available vending location sites, as designated by the
director, are occupied by licensees.
      (3)   The applicant or applicant’s spouse is overdue in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or applicant’s spouse.
      (4)   The applicant is physically or mentally incapacitated to an extent
that the applicant cannot operate a vending business.
      (5)   The applicant has failed to answer or falsely answered a question
or request for information on the application form provided.
      (6)   The applicant has failed to provide proof of a license or permit
required by this code or any other applicable city ordinance or state or
federal law for the operation of the proposed business.
      (7)   The applicant, or any agent of the applicant, individually or
cumulatively, has been convicted of two violations of this article, other than
the offense of operating a business without a license, within the two years
immediately preceding the application. A plea of “guilty” or “no contest” in
any court of law, including the municipal court, constitutes a conviction for
purposes of this section. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no
effect.
      (8)   The required license fee has not been paid.
      (9)   The applicant has failed to comply with or the proposed business
will violate any applicable law, ordinance, or regulation of the city.
      (10)   The applicant’s business or method of doing business will
interfere with traffic flow on public streets or sidewalks.
      (11)   The applicant has already received the maximum number of licenses
to which the applicant is entitled under Subsection (g) of this section.
   (b)   If the director finds that one of the items listed in Subsection (a)
is true, the director shall deny the application and send to the applicant by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement setting forth the
reasons for the denial and notifying the applicant of the right to appeal.
   (c)   A CBD concession license must state on its face the name of the person
to whom it is granted and the expiration date. A CBD concession license
authorizes the licensee to do business only at a specific vending location
site, designated by the director, in the central business district.
   (d)   The annual fee for each CBD concession license is:
      (1)   $601 ($150 for license processing and regulation and $450 for the
use of 40 square feet of public property) to vend entirely or partially on
public property, plus $25 for each square foot of public property over 40
square feet that is contained in the vending location site; and
      (2)   $151 to vend on private property only.
   (e)    The fees listed in this section may not be prorated and are not
refundable.
   (f)   A CBD concession license is not transferable in any manner to any
person or location other than the one for which it was issued. Only agents
listed in the licensee’s most recent updated application for a CBD concession
license are authorized to operate under the license.
   (g)   The same vendor, either personally or through an agent, may not
simultaneously hold more than a total of 12 CBD concession licenses for vending
on public property. Of those 12 licenses, the same vendor may not
simultaneously hold more than one in the West End district, one in the arts
district, and 10 in the CBD core district.
   (h)   For purposes of Subsection (g) of this section, an applicant will be
considered to be the same vendor if the same sales tax identification number is
listed on each license application.
   (i)   The number and location of vending location sites to be assigned on
public property will be determined by the director based upon the availability
of space, the congestion that may result, and other factors related to the
public health, safety, and welfare. Each site must have an area of not less
than 40 square feet. The director may not authorize or assign on public
property:
      (1)   more than two vending location sites for each side of a block face
in the central business district;
      (2)   a vending location site within 50 feet of another site at which the
applicant is licensed to vend;
      (3)   a vending location site within 100 feet of an existing fixed
business that sells, distributes, or offers for sale goods or services similar
to those to be sold, distributed, or offered for sale by the applicant, unless
the applicant files with the director the written consent of the owner of the
existing fixed establishment;
      (4)   a vending location site within 50 feet of an outdoor patio of an
existing fixed food establishment located on the same side of the same block
face; or
      (5)   a vending location site within 1,000 feet of the Dallas Farmers
Market, as defined in Section
29A-2 of this code, if the vendor will sell potted plants, fruits, or
vegetables.
   (j)   An applicant may select a vending location site from those available
at the time of application in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated
by the director. If more than one applicant applies for the same vending
location site, the director shall award the site by drawing lots in accordance
with rules and regulations promulgated by the director.
   (k)   A CBD concession license expires one year after the date of issuance.
To renew a CBD concession license for the same vending location site, a
licensee must file an application with the director and pay all required
license fees not more than 60 days or less than 30 days before the license
expires. Upon expiration of a CBD concession license, the licensee may apply
for a new license, but must select a site from those available at the time of
application in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the
director. (Ord. Nos. 17675; 19300; 25048; 27353; 29023; 33232)
SEC. 50-165.   SUSPENSION.
   (a)   The director may suspend a CBD concession license for not less than 30
days or more than one year if the director determines that:
      (1)   a violation of this article or any other city ordinance or state or
federal law concerning the sale or distribution of goods or services by the
licensee or an agent has occurred; or
      (2)   the licensee or a representative has failed to establish policy and
take action to discourage, prevent, or correct violations of this article by
the licensee’s agents.
   (b)   The director shall send to the licensee by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a written statement of the reasons for the suspension, the
date the suspension is to begin, the duration of the suspension, and the
licensee’s right to appeal. A timely request for appeal by the licensee stays
the effect of the suspension unless the director determines that an emergency
exists.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, an emergency exists if the director
determines that a violation has occurred and constitutes an imminent and
serious threat to the public health or safety. In case of an emergency, the
director may order the licensee or any representative or agent to correct the
violation immediately or cease business operations to the extent the director
determines is necessary to abate the threat until the violation is corrected.
(Ord. 29023)
SEC. 50-166.   REVOCATION.
   (a)   The director shall revoke a license issued under this article if the
director determines that:
      (1)   the licensee or an agent, individually or cumulatively, has been
convicted in any court of two violations of this article or any other city
ordinance or state or federal law concerning the sale or distribution of goods
or services within a 12-month period; the fact that a conviction is being
appealed has no effect;
      (2)   the licensee has given false or misleading information of a
material nature or has withheld vital information on the application or in any
hearing concerning the application or license;
      (3)   the licensee or an agent has intentionally or knowingly impeded a
lawful inspection by the director, the director’s authorized representative, or
any representative of another department who has the authority to inspect the
licensee and the licensee’s agents and business procedures;
      (4)   a cause for suspension under Section
50-165 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months;
      (5)   the vending location site for which the license was issued is not
being used for street vending purposes; or
      (6)   the conduct of the business at the vending location site for which
the license was issued endangers the public health, safety, or welfare.
   (b)   The director shall send to the licensee by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a written statement setting forth the reasons for the
revocation and notifying the licensee of the right to appeal.
   (c)   If the director revokes a license, the fee already paid for the
license will be forfeited. A person whose license has been revoked under this
section may not apply for a new license for one year after the date the
revocation took effect. (Ord. 29023)
SEC. 50-167.   APPEAL.
   If the director denies the issuance or renewal of a license, suspends or
revokes a license, or orders the cessation of any part of the business
operation conducted under the license, the aggrieved party may appeal the
decision of the director to a permit and license appeal board in accordance
with Section
2-96 of this code. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the director in
suspending or revoking a license or any part of the business operation being
conducted under the license until the permit and license appeal board makes a
final decision unless the director determines that operation of the facility or
business in violation of the suspension or revocation constitutes an imminent
and serious threat to the public health or safety, in which case the director
shall take or cause to be taken such action as is necessary to immediately
enforce the suspension, revocation, or order. (Ord. 29023)
Division 6. Miscellaneous Requirements for Street Vendors in the Central
Business District.
SEC. 50-168.   IDENTIFICATION BADGES REQUIRED.
   (a)   An identification badge must be conspicuously displayed on the
clothing of the upper body of each licensee and agent of a licensee at all
times when selling, distributing, or offering for sale goods or services on
public or private property in the central business district. A licensee or an
agent of a licensee shall allow the director or a peace officer to examine the
identification badge upon request.
   (b)   An identification badge must be obtained from the director and must
include the following:
      (1)   The name of the person to whom the badge is issued and a photograph
clearly depicting the person’s facial features.
      (2)   The name and license number of the licensee under whose CBD
concession license the person is conducting vending activities.
      (3)   The vending location site at which the person is authorized to
conduct vending activities.
      (4)   A description of the type of goods or services the person is
authorized to sell, distribute, or offer for sale at the site.
      (5)   The number and expiration date of the identification badge.
   (c)   An identification badge expires on whichever of the following dates
occurs first:
      (1)   the date of revocation or expiration of the CBD concession license
under which the badge is authorized; or
      (2)   the date the person to whom the badge is issued is no longer an
agent of the licensee.
   (d)   An identification badge is not transferable from one person to another
or from one license to another.
   (e)   One identification badge will be included with each issuance or
renewal of a CBD concession license. The fee for each additional new or renewal
identification badge is $20. The fee for replacement of an identification badge
that is lost, damaged, or stolen is $5.
   (f)   Within 10 days after terminating an agent, a licensee shall collect
and surrender to the director the agent’s identification badge. (Ord. 29023)
SEC. 50-169.   DUTIES AND CONDUCT OF STREET VENDORS.
   A person who, either personally or through an agent, sells, distributes, or
offers for sale goods or services on public or private property in the central
business district shall:
      (1)   possess a license and an identification badge authorizing the
activity as provided for in this article;
      (2)   situate any vehicle used in connection with the sale or
distribution of goods and services so that it does not occupy any portion of a
public roadway;
      (3)   if vending on public property, operate the business so as to offer
the least physical or visible obstruction to pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
including, but not limited to, refraining from placing boxes on any public
street or sidewalk;
      (4)   not enter a public roadway to solicit or conduct a sale;
      (5)    not sell, distribute, or offer for sale goods or services to a
person on a public roadway;
      (6)   if vending on public property, stay within five feet of the
vendor's vehicle except for periodic breaks not to exceed 10 minutes and for
emergencies;
      (7)   take reasonable steps to keep the area around which the business is
being conducted free from litter and waste, including, but not limited to:
         (A)   maintaining a waste receptacle for public use on the vending
vehicle;
         (B)   maintaining the vending location site in a clean and hazard-free
condition;
         (C)   at the close of business each day, collecting and disposing of
all litter and waste accumulating on the vending location site or within 15
feet of any vending vehicle; and
         (D)   not disposing of liquid waste or grease on the sidewalks,
streets, grounds, tree pits, city trash receptacles, or other public property;
      (8)   if vending on public property, operate the business only during the
following times, unless special operating hours are approved by the director:
         (A)   6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday;
         (B)   8:00 a.m. to midnight, Friday and Saturday; and
         (C)   10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Sunday;
      (9)   sell, distribute, or offer for sale only those goods or services
that the director has approved as not endangering the public health, safety, or
welfare; the director may withdraw a previous approval of any goods or services
by serving a written notice upon the seller or distributor to cease selling,
distributing, or offering for sale the goods or services within 10 days;
      (10)   remove any equipment, sales aids, or vehicle from public property
at the close of operation each day;
      (11)   not smoke while conducting vending activities at the vending
location site;
      (12)   comply with the noise regulations set forth in
Chapter 30 of this code;
      (13)   not do business except on a vending location site designated by
the director;
      (14)   allow an inspection of the business operation as authorized in
this article;
      (15)   comply with all rules and regulations promulgated by the director
under this article;
      (16)   post the applicable license or copy of the license in a
conspicuous place on the vehicle from which goods or services are being sold,
distributed, or offered for sale so that it may be easily read at any time or,
if the person does not use a vehicle from which to sell goods or services,
display the license or copy on the person's clothing at any time the goods or
services are being sold, distributed, or offered for sale on public or private
property;
      (17)   establish policy and take action to discourage, prevent, or
correct violations of this chapter by agents;
      (18)   prohibit an agent from operating under a CBD concession license if
the person knows or has reasonable cause to suspect that the agent does not
have a valid identification badge issued under this article or has otherwise
failed to comply with this article, the rules and regulations established by
the director, or any other applicable city ordinance or state or federal law;
and
      (19)   comply with all other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations
of the city.
   (b)   This section does not apply to the occasional sale of lemonade or
other nonalcoholic beverages from a stand on private property or in a public
park by an individual younger than 18 years of age.  (Ord. Nos. 16309; 17675;
29023; 31375)
SEC. 50-170.   DRESS STANDARDS FOR STREET VENDORS.
   Each licensee shall have company dress standards for vendors employed by or
contracting with the licensee. These standards must be kept on file with the
director and must include the following:
      (1)   A vendor may not wear:
         (A)   cut-offs;
         (B)   apparel with offensive or suggestive language, pictures, or
symbols;
         (C)   tank tops or halter tops; or
         (D)   outer apparel made of fishnet or undergarment material.
      (2)   Shoes must be worn at all times in the manner for which they were
designed.
      (3)   A vendor and the vendor’s clothing must conform to basic standards
of hygiene and be neat, clean, and sanitary at all times.
      (4)   A vendor’s hair must be clean and neatly groomed. Facial hair must
be neatly trimmed. (Ord. 29023)
SEC. 50-171.   VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Any non-motorized vehicle used by a street vendor to sell, distribute,
or offer for sale goods or services in the central business district must:
      (1)   have operable wheels;
      (2)   not exceed six feet in length (including any handles measuring six
inches or more in length and any permanently attached trailer hitches), three
feet in width (exclusive of wheels), or four feet in height (exclusive of
wheels);
      (3)   not occupy any portion of a public roadway in the central business
district;
      (4)   not be attached to any tree, utility pole, sign pole, streetscape,
or public property; and
      (5)   not be stored, parked, or left overnight on any street, sidewalk,
public parking space, or other public property.
   (b)   All equipment required for operation of the business and all goods
being offered for sale must be confined to or within the vehicle or, if no
vehicle is used, the vending location site.
   (c)   Only one small stool or chair is allowed at the vending location site
for the vendor. No seating may be provided for customers.
   (d)   Any umbrella on a vehicle must be properly secured and must be removed
during high winds.
   (e)   No electrical power cords are allowed to be used by a vendor on public
property. (Ord. 29023)
SEC. 50-172.   SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES.
   (a)   A vendor shall not place any sign or other advertising device on
public property other than those signs affixed to the vehicle or equipment and
not extending beyond the basic dimension of the vehicle or equipment.
   (b)   A vendor shall prominently display a sign that contains city of Dallas
contact information to which customers may report service or health concerns or
complaints.
   (c)   No free standing signs are permitted as part of the vending operation.
   (d)   Prices for goods or services must be conspicuously displayed on the
vending vehicle, the individual items offered for sale, or the display surface
or container.
     (e)   This section does not apply to the occasional sale of lemonade or
other nonalcoholic beverages from a stand on private property or in a public
park by an individual younger than 18 years of age. (Ord. Nos. 29023; 31375)
Code Comparative Table
Ordinance Number Specified Passage Effective Date Ordinance City Code Section
                 Date                              Section
Ordinance Number Specified Passage Effective Date   Ordinance City Code
                 Date                                Section   Section
13520            01-24-72                           1         31-12.1(a)
                                                  2         31-12.2
                                                  3         31-12.1(a), 12.2
13521            01-31-72                           1         Repeals 28-125,
                                                               125.1
13522            01-31-72                           1, 2, 3   13A-13, 14
13525            02-07-72                           1         46-15(g)
                                                  2         46-19(a)(2)
13526            02-07-72                           1, 2      13-12.2(b)
13547            02-21-72                           1         2-133 thru
                                                               135
13548            02-21-72                           1         46-15(h)
                                                  2         46-19(a)(2)
13558            02-28-72                           1, 2      28-393.1
13559            02-28-72                           1, 2      43-126(a) thru
                                                               (d)
13574            03-06-72                           1         Repeals 21-
                                                               1 thru 9
                                                  2         Repeals 29-4
                                                  3 thru 5  29-5 thru 7
                                                  6         29-9(a), (b)
                                                  7         29-11
                                                  8, 9      29-24, 25
                                                  10        29-33
                                                  11        29-34 thru 39
                                                  12        Ch. 29 (note)
13583            03-13-72                           1         2-16(4), (5)
                                                  2         2-71 thru
                                                               75
13605            04-03-72                           1, 2      28-49.1
13610            04-10-72                           1 thru 3  50-30(b)
13624            04-17-72                           1, 2      15-144, 145
13625            04-17-72                           1         31-47
13636            04-24-72                           1         Repeals 38A-
                                                               1 thru 14
13677            06-05-72                           1, 2      28-393, 394
13678            06-05-72                           1         15-145(d)
13680            06-05-72                           1         39A-1 thru
                                                               8
13686            06-12-72                           1         9-1 thru
                                                               5
13701            07-03-72                           1         Repeals 37-31
                                                               thru 38
                                                  2         Repeals 31-11
                                                  3         Repeals 13-40
                                                               thru 44
13708            07-10-72                           1         28-369
                                                  2, 3      28-393
13718            07-17-72                           1         2-136,
                                                               137
                                                  2         2-138,
                                                               139
13743            08-07-72                           1         28-168.1 thru 8
                                                  2         Repeals 28-115
13744            08-07-72                           1         30-1 thru
                                                               4
13745            08-07-72                           1         31-61
13752            08-14-72                           1         25A-1 thru
                                                               15
                                                  2         Repeals 8-1 thru
                                                               29
13764            08-21-72                           1         Repeals 43-10,
                                                               11
13765            08-21-72                           1         Repeals 41-
                                                               1 thru 6
13766            08-21-72                           1         15D-1 thru
                                                               9
                                                  2         Repeals 28-63
                                                               thru 72
13772            08-28-72                           1         18-1 thru
                                                               12
13777            09-05-72                           1         35-153(j)
13782            09-11-72                           1         15D-3
13795            09-18-72                           1         50-1 thru
                                                               98
                                                  2         Repeals 3-2 thru
                                                               10
                                                  3         Repeals 29-
                                                               1 thru 39
13796            09-18-72                           1         18-13 thru
                                                               18
                                                  3         Repeals 19-118
                                                               thru 124
13804            09-25-72                           1         7A-18
                                                  2         7A-20
13811            10-02-72                           1         10-1 thru 25
13812            10-02-72                           1         49-65.1
                                                  2, 4      49-65.1 (note)
13827            10-02-72                           1         50-75
13828            10-02-72                           1         37-39
13831            10-09-72                           1         26-1(a)
                                                  2         26-6(i)
                                                  3         26-7(a) thru (c)
                                                  4         26-7(4r)
                                                  5         26-7(7r)
                                                  6         26-7(19r)
                                                  7         26-7(20p)
                                                  8         26-8
                                                  9         26-11
                                                  10        26-35(f)1
                                                  11        26-35(i)
                                                  12        26-35(r)
                                                  13        26-37
                                                  14        26-39
                                                  15        26-43
                                                  16        26-44(17P)
                                                  17        26-44(24P)
13832                                              1         13-5.3
                                                  2         13-5.4
13849                                              1         Repeals 7-1 thru
                                                               42
                                                  1         7-1 thru 39
13875                                              1         9-6
13898                                              1         43-63
13900                                              1         18-19 thru
                                                               28
                                                  2         Repeals Ch. 28
                                                               Art. XVIII
13932            01-02-73                           1         9B-6 thru 9
                                                  2         37-39
13935            01-08-73                           1         2-140,
                                                               141
                                                  2         Repeals 15A, 15B
13966            01-29-73                           1         Ch. 50, Art.
                                                               VIII
13976            02-05-73                           1         31-11
13977            02-05-73                           1         Ch. 15D, Art. II
                                                               Repeals 28-75
                                                  3         thru 83, 357
                                                               thru 360
13993            02-19-73                           1         42-1 thru 16
14001            02-16-73                           1         28-369
14002            02-26-73                           1         26-7(a) thru (c)
14012            03-12-73                           1         19A-1 thru 12
14013            03-12-73                           1         2-71 thru
                                                               75
                                                  2         15-98
                                                  3         15-107
                                                  4         35-15
                                                  5         35-178
14029            03-26-73                           1         Repeals 14-7
                                                  2         Repeals 14-30
14060            04-16-73                           1         37-67
14061            04-16-73                           1         19-118
14082            04-30-73                           1         49-1
                                                  2         49-1.1
                                                  3         49-8
                                                  4         49-9
                                                  5         49-11
                                                  6         49-15
                                                  7         49-20
                                                  8         49-22
                                                  9         49-23
                                                  10        49-28
                                                  11        49-31
                                                  12        49-51
                                                  13        49-54
                                                  14        49-57
                                                  15        49-69
                                                  16        49-71
                                                  17        49-76(1)
                                                  18        Repeals 49-56
14083            04-30-73                           1         2-126
14086            04-30-73                           1         41-1 thru 35
                                                  3         Ch. 41 (note)
14111            05-14-73                           1         31-84
14163            07-02-73                           1         Repeals 2-61
                                                               thru 70, 104
                                                  2         Repeals 2-130
                                                               thru 132
                                                  3         Repeals 19-1,
                                                               19-1.1
14164            07-02-73                           1         2-76 thru
                                                               2-81
                                                               24-7,
14165            07-02-73                           1         8, Repeals 24-
                                                               9 thru 11
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         24-9 thru
                                                               11
14166            07-02-73                           1         2-41 thru
                                                               43
14167            07-02-73                           1         46-9.1
14180            07-16-73                           1         8-1 thru
                                                               27
14211            08-13-73                           1         2-82 thru
                                                               84
14212            08-13-73                           1         2-38 thru
                                                               40
14213            08-13-73                           1         2-21,
                                                               23
                                                  2         Repeals 2-23
                                                               thru 26
14214            08-13-73                           1         Adds
                                                               2-48, 49
                                                               Adds
14215            08-13-73                           1         2-50,
                                                               51
                                                               Adds
14216            08-13-73                           1         2-46,
                                                               47
14217            08-13-73                           1         19-1
                                                  2         19-1.1
                                                               Adds
                                                               19-119 thru
14218            08-20-73                           1         124,
                                                               19-125 thru
                                                               127
14219            08-20-73                           1, 2      18-2
                                                               Adds
                                                  3         18-29 thru
                                                               39
                                                               Adds
14267            09-24-73                           1         37-75 thru
                                                               84
14300            10-15-73                           1         Adds 42-17 thru
                                                               22
                                                               Adds
14319            11-05-73                           1         2-44 thru
                                                               45
14326            11-12-73                           1         8-17
                                                  2         8-21
14351            12-10-73                           1 thru 3  11-12, 13
                                                  4         Repeals 11-15
                                                               thru 17
14368            12-17-73                           1         Repeals 31-12
14369            12-17-73                           1         50-13
                                                  2         50-16(b)
                                                  3         50-19(a)
                                                  4         50-31(a)
                                                  5         50-33
                                                  6         50-34
                                                  7         50-73
                                                  8         50-112(b), (c)
                                                  9         Repeals 50-32
14373            12-31-73                           1         49-1.1
14383            12-31-73                           1         45-3
                                                  2         45-37
                                                  3, 4      45-1
                                                  5         45-60
                                                  6         Repeals 45-65
                                                               5-2 thru
                                                               4,
                                                               8,
                                                               9,
                                                               11,
14384            12-31-73                           1         12,
                                                               14 thru
                                                               30,
                                                               32,
                                                               33,
                                                               36 thru 42, 44,
                                                               45
                                                  3         Repeals 5-35
14385            12-31-73                           1         Adds
                                                               2-139 (b)(3)
14392            01-14-74                           1         17-9
14470            03-18-74                           1         18-4(A)(2)
                                                  2         18-5
                                                  3         18-10(A)
                                                  4         18-10(C)(2)
14486            04-01-74                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 15B
                                                               Adds
14487            04-01-74                           1         50-113 thru
                                                               130
14494            04-08-74                           1         18-19
                                                  2         18-20(b)
                                                  3         18-21(a)
                                                  4         18-27
                                                  5         Repeals 18-23
14515            04-29-74                           1         19A-5
14552            05-20-74                           1         46-14
14566            05-28-74                           1         18-32
14584            06-10-74                           1         Ch. 28
                                                               Adds
14586            06-10-74                           1         15D-31 thru
                                                               35
14587            06-10-74                           1         Adds
                                                               7A-7.1
14588            06-10-74                           1         Adds
                                                               3-2
14602            07-01-74                           1         26-3(g)
                                                  2         26-6(i)
14615            07-22-74                           1         49-75
                                                  2         49-77
14648            08-19-74                           1         28-26.1
14649            08-19-74                           1         Adds 41-31(d)
                                                  2         Adds 41-36, 37
14677            09-23-74                           1         Adds 41-7(d)
                                                  2         41-13(i)(1)
14682            09-23-74                           1         Adds
                                                               19-37.1
14683            09-30-74                           1         Adds 45-15.1
14684            09-30-74                           1         32-22
14685            09-30-74                           1         15D-10 thru
                                                               30
14686            09-30-74                           1         28-4(b)
14696            10-07-74                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
14697            10-07-74                           1         41-2
                                                  2         41-7(d)
14721            10-21-74                           1         41-2
14730            11-04-74                           1         46-14
                                                  2         46-15(b)
                                                  3         46-15(c)
                                                               Adds
14736            11-11-74                           1         6A-1 thru
                                                               11
14737            11-11-74                           1         43-123
14755            11-25-74                           1         42-1 thru
                                                               12
14756            11-25-74                           1         45-43
                                                  2         Adds 45-43.1
14757            11-25-74                           1         10-8(a)(3)
14762            12-09-74                           1         Repeals 43-20
14763            12-16-74                           1         Adds
                                                               2-142 thru 146
14764            12-16-74                           1         45-15.1(b)
14765            12-23-74                           1         7-2
14781            01-06-75                           5         Repeals Ch. 35
14796            02-03-75                           1         27-19
14799            02-10-75                           1         9A-9
14809            02-17-75                           1         20A-1 thru
                                                               14
14818            02-26-75                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-46
                                                  3         28-59
14834            03-10-75                           1         46-4
                                                  2         46-4.3
                                                  3         Adds 46-9.2
                                                  4         Adds 46-9.3
14854            03-31-75                           1         Adds
                                                               28-159.1
14857            03-31-75                           1         5-31
14861            04-07-75                           1         Adds
                                                               7-1.1
14862            04-07-75                           1         46-13(a)(4)
                                                  2         46-13(a)(10)
                                                  3         46-14
                                                  4         46-15(b)
                                                  5         46-15(c)
                                                  6         46-15(e)
14869            04-14-75                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
14872            04-22-75                           1         49-10
14875            04-22-75                           1         Adds 2-147 thru
                                                               149
14885            04-28-75                           1         2-31 thru 37.1
14896            05-19-75                           1         46-9.2
14900            05-27-75                           1         28-24
                                                               Adds
14911            06-09-75                           1         28-128.1 thru
                                                               128.7
                                                  2         28-52
14920            06-23-75                           1         50-36
                                                  2         50-42(g)
                                                  3         50-43(b), (c)
                                                  4         50-44(b)
                                                  5         50-45(b)
                                                  6         50-46
                                                  7         50-50
                                                  8         50-52
                                                  9         50-53
                                                  10        50-56
                                                  11        50-59
                                                  12        50-67 thru 69
14921            06-23-75                           4         Repeals Ch. 15
14922            06-23-75                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-45(b)
                                                  3         28-59
14926            06-30-75                           1         13-5.3
                                                  2         13-5.4
                                                  3         13-5.5
14927            06-30-75                           1         45-15.1(b)
14930            07-07-75                           1         46-13 thru 19
14932            07-14-75                           1         6A-1(1), (2)
                                                  2         6A-4(a)(3)
                                                  3         6A-7(2)
                                                  4         6A-8(a)(2)
                                                  5         6A-10
                                                  6         6A-11
14940            07-28-75                           1         Repeals 37-43
                                                               thru 55
14941            07-28-75                           1         2-125 thru
                                                               129
14942            07-28-75                           1         24-7(a)
14943            07-28-75                           1         2-76
14944            07-28-75                           1         2-142
                                                  2         2-143
14945            07-28-75                           1         13A-2
14950            08-04-75                           1         27-12
                                                  2         27-13
                                                  3         Adds 27-13.1
                                                  4         27-15
14952            08-04-75                           1         46-14
14955            08-11-75                           1         43-123
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               43-126.1
14971            08-18-75                           1         Ch. 31
14974            08-25-75                           1         Adds
                                                               28-26(c)
                                                  2         28-44
                                                  3         28-45(a)
                                                  4         28-45(b)
                                                  5         28-59
                                                               Adds
14983            09-02-75                           1         50-144 thru
                                                               151
                                                               Adds
14990            09-16-75                           1         50-131 thru
                                                               143
14995            09-22-75                           1         2-19
                                                  2         Repeals 2-75,
                                                               16-145, 50-41
14996            09-22-75                           1         15D-20
                                                  2         15D-22
                                                  3         15D-23
15000            09-29-75                           1         41-2
                                                  2         41-2
                                                  3         41-7
                                                  4         Repeals 41-13(b)
                                                               (4)
                                                  5         41-13(i)
                                                  6         41-14(e)(2)
                                                  7         41-16(c)
                                                  8         41-30, 31
15001            09-29-75                           1         15D-1(a)
                                                  2         15D-2(b)
                                                  3         15D-4(b)(2)
                                                  4         15D-4(c)
                                                  5         15D-4(d)
                                                  6         15D-1(e)
15002            09-29-75                           1         18-9(C)(1)(a)
                                                  2         18-11
15003            09-29-75                           1         Adds
                                                               2-52 thru 54
15004            09-29-75                           1         2-138 thru
                                                               139
                                                  2         28-2(17)
                                                  3         Ch. 28, Div. 1
                                                  4         28-7
                                                  5         Repeals 28-6
15005            09-29-75                           1         2-49
                                                  2         Repeals 2-44.1
                                                               (e)
15028            10-20-75                           1         41-30 thru 32
15035            11-03-75                           1         2-122(j)
                                                  2         Adds 2-122.1
15045            11-10-75                           1         50-36
                                                  2         50-43(a), (b)
                                                  3         50-51(a)
                                                  4         50-55
                                                  5         50-59
                                                  6         50-67
                                                  7         50-69(a)
                                                  8         50-70
                                                  9         50-71
15055            11-24-75                           1         49-15(a)
15064            12-08-75                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 39B
15065            12-08-75                           1         2-122.1
                                                               Adds
15071            12-29-75                           1         32-61 thru
                                                               83
15072            12-29-75                           1         43-99 thru
                                                               106
15073            12-29-75                           1         Repeals 20-32
                                                               thru 54
15079            01-05-76                           1         Ch. 5A
15084            01-26-76                           1         31-14
15094            02-02-76                           1         9B-6
15105            02-16-76                           1         Adds
                                                               1-5.1
15123            03-08-76                           1         43-33
                                                  2         43-34
                                                  3         43-135 thru
                                                               139
                                                  3         Adds 43-139.1
15124            03-08-76                           1         Adds
                                                               28-24.1
15126            03-15-76                           1         8-1.1
15127            03-15-76                           1         Ch. 45
15145            04-05-76                           1         46-18(a)
                                                  2         46-20
15147            04-12-76                           1         14-27(d)
                                                  2         22-2
                                                  3         47-1
15147            04-12-76                           1         14-27(d)
                                                  2         22-2
                                                  3         47-1
                                                  4         47-24
                                                               Repeals 44-17
                                                  5         thru 21, 33.1
                                                               thru 33.4
                                                  6         Repeals 47-
                                                               7 thru 10
15167            05-03-76                           1         43-127
15179            05-10-76                           1         49-84
                                                  2         49-100
                                                  3         Adds 49-100.1
                                                               49-107 thru 109,
                                                               Adds 49-109.1,
                                                  4         49-110, Adds 49-
                                                               110.1, 49-111,
                                                               112, Adds 49-
                                                               112.1, 112.2
                                                  5         Adds 49-134, 135
15194            06-01-76                           1         28-26(c)
                                                  2         28-44
                                                  3         28-45(a)
                                                  4         28-45(b)
                                                  5         28-59
                                                  6         28-71
                                                  7         28-77(b)
                                                  8         28-122
                                                  9         28-156
                                                  10        28-157
                                                  11        28-158
                                                  12        28-159
                                                  13        28-159.1
                                                  14        28-190(c)
15195            06-01-76                           1         32-40
                                                  2         32-44
15196            06-01-76                           1         49-15(f)
15197            06-01-76                           1         Adds 13A-8.1
15198            06-01-76                           1         Ch. 27
15202            06-07-76                           1         Adds
                                                               27-14.1
15204            06-14-76                           1         42-3
15207            06-21-76                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 31A
15208            06-21-76                           1         31-20(a)
15214            06-28-76                           1         Ch. 14
15215            06-28-76                           1         Ch. 9A
15216            07-06-76                           1         13A-2
15220            07-06-76                           1         44-16
15225            07-12-76                           1         43-99(a)
15234            07-26-76                           1         Adds
                                                               31-25
15243            08-02-76                           1         31-26
15244            08-02-76                           1         46-9.2
15246            08-09-76                           1         19-118
15247            08-09-76                           1         31-27
15256            08-23-76                           1         Ch. 43A
15269            09-13-76                           1         46-9.2
                                                  2         46-9.3
15271            09-13-76                           1         2-16(4)
15272            09-13-76                           1         Ch. 7
15278            09-27-76                           1         26-7.1
15279            09-27-76                           1         2-11.2(b)
                                                  2         2-16(4)
                                                  3         2-33(b)
                                                  4         2-37(4)
                                                  5         2-83
                                                  6         5-3(a)
                                                  7         5-10
                                                  8         13-9
                                                  9         13-11
                                                  10        13-20
                                                  11        13-24
                                                  12        13A-8
                                                  13        13A-9
                                                  14        50-42(b)
                                                  15        Repeals 2-81,
                                                               13-14, 13-28
15289            09-27-76                           1         18-9(C)(1)(a)
                                                  2         18-9(C)(3)
                                                  3         Adds 18-11.1
15302            10-05-76                           1         9A-1
                                                  2         9A-2(a)
                                                  3         9A-3(b)
                                                  4         9A-4
                                                  5         9A-5
                                                  6         9A-8(b)
                                                  7         9A-9(a)
15303            10-05-76                           1         14-5
                                                  2         14-9(b)
                                                  3         14-11(b)
                                                  4         Repeals 14-4(e)
15315            10-18-76                           1         2-16(4)
15331            11-01-76                           1         37-18
15335            11-08-76                           1         Adds
                                                               2-16(6)
15357            12-06-76                           3         Repeals 16-161
15360            12-06-76                           1         13A-8
15361            12-06-76                           1         49-77
15365            12-13-76                           1         46-13(a)(1)
                                                  2         46-15
                                                  3         46-16
                                                  4         46-18(a)
                                                  5         46-18(d)
                                                  6         46-18(e)
                                                  7         46-20
15371            12-20-76                           1         6-10
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         6-11,
                                                               12
15372            12-20-76                           1         27-11(d)
                                                  2         27-11(f)
                                                  3         27-12
                                                  4         27-13(b)
                                                  5         27-13(h)
15378            01-03-77                           1         8-1.1
15396            01-24-77                           1         49-1
                                                  2         49-1.1
                                                  3         49-1.2
                                                  4         49-8(a)
                                                  5         49-8(f)
                                                  6         49-15(b)
                                                  7         49-52
                                                  8         49-58
                                                  9         49-109.1(a)(4)
15401            01-31-77                           1         41-32
15405            01-31-77                           1         49-1
                                                  3         Adds 49-1.3
                                                  5         Adds 49-1.4
15414            02-07-77                           1         Ch. 40A
15415            02-07-77                           1         9A-9(b), (c)
                                                  2         14-12(b), (c)
15422            02-14-77                           1         Adds 49-15.1
15424            02-14-77                           3         6-10
15430            02-21-77                           1         28-44
15433            02-28-77                           1         18-19(A)(1)(c)
                                                  2         18-19(A)(2)(c)
15434            02-28-77                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 15A
15455            03-28-77                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-45(a)
                                                  3         28-46
                                                  4         28-59
                                                  5         28-87
15456            03-28-77                           1         Ch. 19, Art. X
15472            04-18-77                           1         31-22
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               31-22.1
15485            04-25-77                           1         34-7
15511            05-16-77                           1         46-15(e)(2)
                                                  2         Adds 46-15(h)
                                                               Adds
15519            05-25-77                           1         2-37.2 thru
                                                               37.9
                                                  2         Repeals 2-29
                                                  2         Repeals Ch. 37,
                                                               Art. VI
15525            06-01-77                           1         Ch. 16
15526            06-01-77                           1         25A-1(b)
                                                  2         25A-2
                                                  3         25A-5
                                                  4         25A-11
15527            06-01-77                           1         6-12
15527            06-01-77                           1         7-24(e)
15538            06-15-77                           1         46-1
                                                  2         46-3
15541            06-22-77                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
15552            07-13-77                           1         Ch. 9A
15555            07-13-77                           1         44-35(a), (b)
15562            07-20-77                           1         Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. X
15573            08-03-77                           1         31-21(b)
15574            08-03-77                           1         2-125(3)
                                                  2         2-126
15578            08-10-77                           1         Ch. 17
15579            08-10-77                           1         13A-2
15597            08-31-77                           1         Adds
                                                               31-28
15603            09-07-77                           1         13-2.1
                                                  2         13-2.2
                                                  3         13-2.3
                                                  4         13-3
                                                  5         13-4
                                                               Repeals 13-2.4
                                                  6         thru 2.7, 13-
                                                               5 thru 13-5.2,
                                                               13-6
15612            09-14-77                           1         Adds
                                                               15D-10(q)
                                                  2         15D-15
                                                  3         15D-16
                                                  4         15D-17
                                                  5         15D-18
                                                  6         15D-20
                                                  7         15D-21
                                                  8         15D-22
                                                  9         15D-24
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               15D-26(c)
                                                  11        15D-27
                                                  12        15D-29(e)
15621            09-28-77                           1         2-141
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XIX
15626            09-28-77                           1         28-113
15627            09-28-77                           1         18-9(C)(1),(2)
15628            09-28-77                           1         15D-2(b)
15629            09-28-77                           1         5-33
15630            09-28-77                           1         49-25
                                                  2         49-69(a)
                                                  3         49-70
                                                  4         49-102
15635            10-05-77                           1         6-6.1
15646            10-12-77                           1         41-29
15648            10-12-77                           1         28-184(a), (f)
15655            10-26-77                           1         Ch. 19, Art.VI
15669            11-02-77                           1         6-4
15684            11-23-77                           1         44-35(a)
15686            11-23-77                           1         28-63.1
15690            11-30-77                           1         41-2
                                                  2         41-6
                                                  3         Adds 41-9.1
15699            12-14-77                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
                                                  3         28-71
15720            12-21-77                           1         18-19(d)
                                                  2         18-20(b)
                                                  3         18-21(b)
                                                  4         18-22(b)
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               18-23
15721            12-21-77                           1         Ch. 14
15760            03-01-78                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
15789            03-29-78                           1         7-1
                                                  2         7-9
                                                  3         7-18
                                                  4         Adds 7-18.1
                                                  5         Adds 7-18.2
                                                  6         7-29(b)
                                                  7         7-32
15790            03-29-78                           1         49-1
                                                  2         49-1.3
15801            04-05-78                           1         Ch. 10
15815            04-19-78                           1         41-18
                                                  2         41-32
15816            04-19-78                           1         6-6.1
15834            05-24-78                           1         49-77
15835            05-24-78                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
15848            05-31-78                           1         8-1.2
                                                  2         8-20(e)
15849            05-31-78                           1         6-6.1(d)
15857            06-14-78                           1         Repeals Ch. 23
15868            06-21-78                           1         Adds
                                                               6-13
15890            07-19-78                           1         28-107
15899            08-02-78                           1         Ch. 15
15900            08-02-78                           1         18-18
15904            08-09-78                           1         1-6
15919            08-16-78                           1         27-3(19)
                                                  2         27-7
                                                  3         27-9
                                                  4         27-11(c)
                                                  5         27-13
                                                  6         27-14(d)
                                                               Adds
                                                  7         27-14.2,
                                                               14.3
15936            09-06-78                           1         28-59
15948            09-13-78                           1         18-11
15949            09-13-78                           1         28-4
15955            09-20-78                           1         Ch. 2, Art. XIII
15956            09-20-78                           1         Ch. 2, Art. V-e
15962            09-27-78                           1         49-1.2(c)
                                                  2         49-6
                                                  3         49-8(f)
                                                  4         49-8(g)
                                                  5         49-36
                                                  6         49-135
15963            09-27-78                           1         49-70(c)
                                                  2         49-74(c)
15968            09-27-78                           1         7-1
                                                  2         7-24(a)
                                                  3         7-25
                                                  4         7-26
                                                  5         7-28
15969            09-27-78                           1         18-9(c)(1)
15970            09-27-78                           1         50-101
15971            09-27-78                           1         19-28
15972            09-27-78                           1         2-16(6)
15979            10-04-78                           1         2-126(c)
15983            10-09-78                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 14B
                                                  2         Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. IX, X
15984            10-09-78                           1         16-19.104
16018            11-08-78                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-45(a)
                                                  3         28-59
16023            11-15-78                           1         50-150(a)
                                                  2         50-151(a)
16024            11-15-78                           1         2-11.1
16035            12-06-79                           1         42-1
                                                  2         Adds Ch. 42,
                                                               Art. I-a
16066            01-03-79                           1         9A-3
                                                  2         9A-8
                                                  3         9A-9
16067            01-03-79                           1         14-3
                                                  2         14-11
                                                  3         14-12
16091            01-24-79                           1         28-44
16105            01-31-79                           1         15A-2
                                                  2         15A-3
                                                  3         15A-6
16126            02-14-79                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 37A
16130            02-14-79                           1         47-1
                                                  2         47-24
16133            02-21-79                           1         46-13(a)(7)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               46-13 (a)(14)
                                                  3         46-18(c)
                                                  4         46-19
16157            03-21-79                           1         Ch. 9B
16159            03-21-79                           1         2-16
16166            04-04-79                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-45(a)
                                                  3         28-45(b)
                                                  4         28-59
16176            04-11-79                           1         41-16
                                                  2         41-18
16177            04-11-79                           1         49-1.4(a)
16210            05-02-79                           1         Art. I
16218            05-09-79                           1         9B-9
16220            05-09-79                           1         49-74(c)
                                                  2         49-77
16226            05-16-79                           1         8-26
16232            05-23-79                           1         Adds Art. I
16239            05-30-79                           1         13A-2
16264            06-21-79                           1         Repeals 2-76, 77
16270            06-20-79                           1         46-12.3
16271            06-27-79                           1         Adds
                                                               43A-6(f)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               43A-8(d)
                                                  3         43A-17(c)
                                                  4         43A-19
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               43A-20(h)
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               43A-20.1
                                                  7         43A, Table I
16287            07-11-79                           1         2-37.8
                                                  2         28-4, Title
                                                  3         28-4(b)(7)
16288            07-11-79                           1         28-44
16295            07-18-79                           1         46-15(e)(1)
16297            07-18-79                           1         Repeals 16-1.202
                                                               (b)
                                                  2         16-1.204(b)
                                                  3         16-1.207(b)
                                                  4         16-1.212 (a),
                                                               (b)
                                                  5         16-1.215(a) thru
                                                               (f)
                                                  6         Repeals 16-
                                                               11.109
                                                  7         16-11.110
                                                  8         16-12.110
                                                  9         16-13.101
                                                  10        16-13.104(3)
                                                  11        16-13.105
                                                  12        Adds 16-13.502A
                                                  13        16-13.505
                                                  14        16-13.602
                                                  15        16-13.604
                                                  16        16-13.607
                                                  17        16-15.211
                                                  18        16-15.503
                                                  19        16-20.102
                                                  20        16-21.210
                                                  21        16-27.216
                                                  22        Repeals 16-
                                                               29.102
                                                  23        16-30.101
                                                  24        16-31.204
                                                  25        16-32.112
16302            07-18-79                           6         34-9
16309            07-25-79                           1         Adds Art. XII
                                                               Repeals 43-123
                                                  2         thru 126.1, 128,
                                                               130 thru 132
16310            07-25-79                           1         31-26
16314            08-01-79                           1         10-3(c)
                                                  2         10-13(c)
                                                  3         Adds 10-22(f)
                                                  4         10-26
                                                  5         10-30(c)
16367            09-26-79                           1         Ch. 18, Art. I
                                                  2         18-18
                                                  3         18-21(b)
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               18-31(d)
16368            09-26-79                           1         15D-2
16369            09-26-79                           1         2-16
16384            10-10-79                           1         42-14(c), (d)
                                                  2         42-15
16388            10-17-79                           1         2-122.2
16403            11-07-79                           1         15D-27
16411            11-14-79                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-45(a)
                                                  3         28-59
16434            12-12-79                           1         49-1
                                                  2         49-1.3
16435            12-12-79                           1         18-9(c)(1)
                                                  2         18-9(c)(4)
16442            12-19-79                           1         2-34(d)
16443            12-19-79                           1         31-3(a)
                                                  2         31-3(e)
                                                  3         31-3(f)
16444            12-19-79                           1         49.1.1(b)
                                                  2         49.1.1(e)
                                                  3         49-1.2(b)
                                                  4         49-8(a)
                                                  5         49-11(b), (c)
                                                  6         49-15
                                                  7         49-15.1
                                                  8         49-58
                                                  9         49-109.1
16451            01-09-80                           1         41-2
                                                  2         41-5
                                                  3         41-7
                                                  4         41-8(c)
                                                  5         41-8(f), (g)
                                                  6         41-10
                                                  7         41-12(b)(2)
                                                  8         41-12(c)
                                                  9         41-13(a)
                                                  10        41-13(c), (d)
                                                  11        41-13(i)
                                                  12        41-15
                                                  13        41-22
                                                  14        41-31
                                                  15        41-32
                                                  16        41-31.1
                                                  17        41-33
16462            01-16-80                           1         16-8.104
                                                  2         16-11.402
                                                  3         Ch. 16, Art. XII
                                                  4         16-15.215
                                                  5         16-15.1002
                                                  6         16-26.201
                                                  7         16-32.107
                                                  8         16-33.105(b)
                                                  9         16-33.107
                                                  10        Ch. 16, Appendix
                                                               D
16467            01-23-80                           1         8-1.3
16470            01-23-80                           1         15D-5(b)(5)
16471            01-23-80                           1         50-145(a)
                                                  2         50-146(b)
                                                  3         50-149
                                                  4         50-150(a)
                                                  5         50-151
16473            01-23-80                           1         27-3(19)
                                                  2         27-8(a)
                                                  3         27-10
                                                  4         27-11(b)
                                                  5         27-11(c)
                                                  6         27-13
                                                  7         27-15
                                                  8         27-16
16475            01-30-80                           1         28-59
16476            01-30-80                           1         50-43
                                                  2         50-99
                                                  3         50-101
                                                  4         50-109(b)
                                                  5         50-111
                                                  6         50-116
                                                  7         50-122(d)
                                                  8         50-123
                                                  9         50-128(b)
                                                  10        50-131
                                                  11        50-134
                                                  12        50-137(a)
                                                               Repeals 50-102
                                                  13        (1)(d), 115(2)
                                                               (d), 136(3)(b)
16477            01-30-80                           1         28-4(f)
16478            01-30-80                           1         15D-23
16501            02-27-80                           1         28-45(a)
16503            03-05-80                           1         32-8
16520            03-19-80                           1         49-100.2
16524            04-02-80                           1         28-44
16525            04-02-80                           1         8-1.4
16545            04-23-80                           1         43-116
16554            04-30-80                           1         15D-15(c)
                                                  2         15D-16(d)
                                                  3         15D-16(f)
                                                  4         15D-17(a)
                                                  5         15D-18(3)(a)
                                                  6         15D-18(c)
                                                  7         15D-18(d)
                                                  8         15D-20
                                                  9         15D-21(a)
                                                  10        15D-22
                                                  11        15D-28
16577            05-23-80                           1         28-2
                                                  2         28-44
                                                  3         28-59
16578            05-23-80                           1         15D-16
16585            06-04-80                           1         31-12
16586            06-04-80                           1         6A-10(c)
16590            06-11-80                           1         7-1.2
                                                  2         7-20
                                                  3         Repeals 7-19, 23
16600            06-18-80                           1         6-6.1
16605            06-25-80                           1         41-5
16606            06-25-80                           1         49-77
16617            07-02-80                           1         31-14.1
16624            07-09-80                           1         28-44
16700            09-24-80                           1         50-82
                                                  2         50-116
                                                  3         50-146(b)
16701            09-24-80                           1         2-16(1)
16702            09-24-80                           1         34-7(a)
                                                  2         34-7(d)
16703            09-24-80                           1         32-21
                                                  2         32-22
                                                  3         32-24
                                                  4         32-26
                                                  5         32-27
                                                  6         32-28
16710            10-01-80                           1         32-22.2
16715            10-15-80                           1         16-15.402(a)
                                                  2         16-26.115(7)
                                                  3         16-32.110
16718            10-15-80                           1         Ch. 15A, Article
                                                               I
16788            12-10-80                           10        44-1
16801            12-17-80                           1         2-33
16813            12-17-80                           1         41-7(a)
16814            12-17-80                           1         41-32.1
16815            12-17-80                           1         34-9
16821            01-07-81                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
16833            01-14-81                           1         34-8
16834            01-14-81                           1         43-127
16835            01-14-81                           1         50-156
                                                  2         50-157
16849            01-28-81                           1         44-3
16850            01-28-81                           1         15D-24
                                                  2         15D-25
                                                  3         15D-26
16851            01-28-81                           1         2-122.3
16870            02-11-81                                    Repeals 6-7, 8
16881            02-18-81                           1         32-11.3
16882            02-18-81                           1         39B-2;
                                                               39B-3
16886            02-25-81                           1         40A-1
                                                  2         40A-9(c)
                                                  3         40A-13
                                                  4         40A-14(c)
                                                  5         40A-16
                                                  6         40A-18
                                                  7         40A-19
                                                  8         40A-21(b)
                                                  9         40A-22
                                                  10        40A-23
                                                  11        40A-27
16901            03-11-81                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
16923            03-25-81                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XXI
                                                               Repeals 19A, 34,
16926            03-25-81                           2         41, 2-16, 2-21,
                                                               2-22, 31-16, 31-
                                                               17
16969            04-29-81                           1         10-1(1)
                                                  2         10-2
                                                  3         10-3(d)
                                                  4         10-4
                                                  5         10-5
                                                  6         10-8(a)
                                                  7         10-9(a)
                                                  8         10-10
                                                  9         10-12
                                                  10        10-22
                                                  11        10-29
                                                  12        10-30(d)
                                                  13        10-31
                                                  14        10-36
                                                  15        10-37
                                                  16        10-38
16986            05-20-81                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
                                                  3         28-71
17028            07-01-81                           1         46-18
17029            07-01-81                           1         13-3
                                                  2         13-6
                                                  3         13-7
                                                  4         13-20
                                                  5         13-21
                                                  6         13-24
                                                  7         Repeals 13-
                                                               8 thru 13-23
17030            07-01-81                           1         13-25
17031            07-08-81                           1         28-59
17032            07-08-81                           1         49-1
                                                  2         49-1.1
                                                  3         49-1.2
                                                  4         49-1.3(b)
                                                  5         49-1.3(e)
                                                  6         49-1.4(a), (b)
                                                  7         49-1.5
                                                  8         49-1.6
                                                  9         49-5
                                                  10        49-6
                                                  11        49-8
                                                  12        49-10
                                                  13        49-11
                                                  14        49-25(a)
                                                  15        49-35
                                                  16        49-36(d)
                                                  17        49-52(a), (b)
                                                  18        49-58
                                                  19        49-69(a)
                                                  20        49-70(c)
                                                  21        49-71(c)
                                                  22        49-102
                                                  23        49-109.1(a)
17041            07-15-81                           1         28-44
17063            07-22-81                           1         28-59
                                                  2         28-71
17080            07-29-81           10-1-82                   116-13.401A
17087            08-05-81                           1         8-1.4(a)
17090            08-12-81                           1         32-11.4
17096            08-19-81                           1         17-5.4(a)
                                                  2         17-8.1(a)
                                                  3         17-8.1(b)
                                                  4         17-8.4(a)
                                                  5         17-9.2(c)
                                                  6         17-9.6(a)
                                                  7         17-9.18(b)
17097            08-19-81                           1         16-13.401
17099            08-19-81                           1         50-43(a)
                                                  2         50-43(b)
                                                  3         50-67(b)
17131            09-16-81                           1         2-11.2(c)
17133            09-16-81                           1         18-9(c)
                                                  2         18-11
17134            09-16-81                           1         19-82.1
17135            09-16-81                           1         28-157
17136            09-16-81                           1         2-130-
                                                               132
17139            09-23-81                           1         2-151(a)
17146            09-30-81                           1         28-44
17149            09-30-81                           1         50-146(b)
17151            09-30-81                           1         9B-6(b)
17157            10-07-81                           1         2-27
                                                  2         2-49
17166            10-14-81                           1         28-59
17167            10-14-81                           1         28-27.1
17200            11-11-81                           1         Ch. 2, Article
                                                               XXII
17207            11-18-81                           1         10-4
                                                  2         10-10(a)
                                                  3         10-10(d)
                                                  4         10-31
                                                  5         10-38(a)
                                                  6         10-38(c)
17208            11-18-81                           1         15D-16(b)
                                                  2         15D-17(a)
17225            12-09-81                           1         28-27.1
17226            12-09-81           2-3-82                    12-41, 42
                                                               2-43,
                                                  2         44,
                                                               45
                                                  3         2-46,
                                                               47
                                                  4         2-52,
                                                               53, 54
                                                               2-71,
                                                               72,
                                                  5         73,
                                                               74,
                                                               75
                                                               2-76, 77, 78,
                                                  5A        79, 80,
                                                               81
                                                  6         2-139
                                                  7         2-142,
                                                               143
                                                  8         5A-3(3)
                                                  9         7-1(2)
                                                  10        7-1(4)
                                                  11        7-1.2
                                                  12        7-2
                                                  13        7-4
                                                  14        7-11
                                                  15        7-18.1
                                                  16        7-18.2(a)
                                                  17        7-18.2(b)
                                                  18        7-20
                                                  19        7-24(a)
                                                  20        7-25
                                                  21        7-26
                                                  22        7-27
                                                  23        7-28
                                                  24        7-35
                                                  25        7-39
                                                  26        7A-20
                                                  27        10-1(4)
                                                  28        13-1.1
                                                  29        13-25(c)
                                                  30        Ch. 14B
                                                  31        15-4(c)
                                                  32        15D-1(d)
                                                  33        15D-10(c)
                                                  34        17-1.3
                                                  35        17-1.5(3)(4)
                                                  36        18-12
                                                               18-15,
                                                  37        16,
                                                               17,
                                                               18
                                                  38        18-19(a)(3)
                                                  39        18-28.1
                                                               18-31,
                                                  40        32,
                                                               33
                                                  41        18-37
                                                  42        19-1
                                                               19-38,
                                                               39,
                                                               40,
                                                               41,
                                                  43        42,
                                                               43,
                                                               44,
                                                               45,
                                                               46,
                                                               46.1
                                                  44        19-86(2)
                                                  45        19-119(1)
                                                  46        25A-1(b)
                                                  47        27-3(1)
                                                  48        27-3(6)
                                                  49        28-2(17)
                                                  50        28-127,
                                                               128
                                                  51        28-140
                                                  52        40-8
                                                  53        42-1(4)
                                                  54        43A-1(1)
                                                  55        45-1.5(2)(3)
                                                  56        47-24(h)(i)
                                                  57        Ch. 50 Title,
                                                               Art. I
                                                  58        50-1
                                                  59        50-39
                                                  60        50-99(a)
                                                  61        50-113(a)
                                                  62        50-131(l)
                                                  63        50-144(b)(1)
                                                  64        50-155(3)
                                                  65        50-163
                                                  73        Ch. 52, 201
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. IV-a, Ch.
                                                  74        2, Art. XV, 27-
                                                               4, 28-7, Ch. 37,
                                                               Art. IV, 50-3(b)
17237            12-16-81                           1         19-28
17251            01-06-82                           1         45-2.11(b)
                                                  2         45-3.9
                                                  3         45-6.4
17256            01-13-82                           1         16-12.107
                                                  2         16-35.105
                                                               Repeals 16-
                                                  3         13.403, 404,
                                                               405, 35.106
17259            01-13-82                           1         2-21,
                                                               26.1
                                                  2         Repeals 2-29.1,
                                                               2-30
17276            01-27-82                           1         16-1.215(h)
17278            01-27-82                           1         2-130,
                                                               131
17293            02-10-82                           1         17-1.3
                                                  2         17-1.5(3)(4)
                                                  3         19-1
                                                  4         50-163
17344            03-24-82                           1         5A-6
                                                  2         5A-3
17345            03-24-82                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-45
                                                  3         28-59
17353            03-31-82                           1         13A-10.1
                                                  2         2-83
17386            04-28-82                           1         2-37.7(c)
17392            04-28-82                           1         2-133(a)(3)
17393            04-28-82                           1         2-132
                                                  2         19-1.1
                                                  3         20A-6
                                                  4         37-78
                                                  5         50-100
                                                  11        52-209(c)(2)
                                                               2-76, 2-77,
                                                  12        2-128,
                                                               19-46.1
17398            05-05-82                           1         39B-2
                                                  2         39B-3
                                                  3         39B-5
                                                  4         39B-6
                                                  5         Ch. 39B, Article
                                                               II
17406            05-12-82                           1         28-4(f)
17407            05-12-82                           1         49-15
17413            05-19-82                           1         28-89
                                                  2         Repeals 28-90,
                                                               91, 92
                                                  3         28-95
                                                  4         28-96
                                                  5         28-110
17416            05-19-82                           1         2-133(a)
17456            06-30-82                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
17457            06-30-82                           1         2-24(g)
17481            07-28-82                           1         13-15.1
17489            08-04-82                           1         8-1.3
17498            08-18-82                           1         Adds 5-55
17499            08-18-82                           1         28-121.1
                                                  2         28-121.2
                                                  3         28-121.3
                                                  4         28-121.4
                                                  5         28-121.5
                                                  6         28-121.6
17500            08-18-82                           1         Ch. 22, Article
                                                               XX
17517            08-25-82                           1         46-13(a)
                                                  2         46-15(e)
                                                  3         46-19(b)
                                                  4         46-20(a)
17545            09-22-82           10-1-82                   118-9(c)(1), (2)
17546            09-22-82           10-1-82                   115D-2(b)
17547            09-22-82                           1         2-37.8
                                                  2         28-4(b)
17548            09-22-82           10-1-82                   149-1
                                                  2         49-1.1(b)
                                                  3         49-1.1(e)
                                                  4         49-1.1(f)
                                                  5         49-1.2(b)
                                                  6         49-1.2(c)(2)
                                                  7         49-1.3(b)
                                                  8         49-1.4 (a), (b)
                                                  9         49-1.5
                                                  10        49-1.7
                                                  11        49-36(d)
                                                  12        49-37 (title)
                                                  13        49-37(g), (h),
                                                               (i), (j)
                                                  14        49-52
                                                  15        49-58
                                                  16        49-59
                                                  17        49-69(a)
                                                  18        49-70(c), (d)
                                                  19        49-109.1(a)(4)
                                                  21        49-1.3
17576            10-20-82           3, 5-1-85                 128-44
                                                  2         28-59
                                                  3         28-59
17586            10-27-82                           1         Ch. 15C
17597            11-10-82                           1         18-13
                                                  2         18-14
                                                  3         18-17
                                                  4         18-18
                                                  5         Repeals 18-16
17618            11-24-82                           1         50-19
17640            12-15-82                           1         28-182
17642            12-15-82                           1         Adds
                                                               2-26.2
17653            12-15-82                           1         Adds
                                                               44-17
17667            01-05-83                           1         28-44
17672            01-19-83                           1         2-37.5
                                                  2         2-37.6
                                                  3         2-37.9
                                                  4         2-37.10
                                                  5         2-37.11
17673            01-19-83                           1         15D-27(a)
17674            01-19-83                           1         17-1.5(10)
                                                  2         17, Art. VIII,
                                                               Adds Div. 1
                                                  3         17, Art. VIII,
                                                               Adds Div. 2
17675            01-19-83                           1         50-153
                                                  2         50-155
                                                  3         50-156
                                                  4         Adds 50-156.1
                                                  5         50-157
                                                  6         50-159
                                                  7         Adds 50-159.1
                                                  8         Adds 50-159.2
                                                  9         50-160
                                                  10        50-161
                                                  11        50-164
                                                  12        50-165
                                                  13        50-167
                                                  14        50-168
                                                  15        Repeals 50-166
17677            01-19-83           2, 2-1-84                 128-59
                                                  2         28-59
17700            02-02-83                           1         2-32
                                                  2         2-33(a)
                                                  3         2-34(a)
                                                  4         2-34(c)
17702            02-02-83                           1         2-150(c)
                                                  2         2-151(b)
17713            03-02-83                           1         40A-1
                                                  2         40A-4(a)
                                                  3         40A-6(a)
                                                  4         40A-18(d)
                                                  5         40A-18(e)
                                                  6         40A-21(b)(4)
                                                  7         40A-22(a)(2)(D)
                                                  8         40A-28(b)
                                                  9         40A-25
17725            03-02-83                           1         28-59
17727            03-02-83                           1         16-1.212
                                                  2         16-13.606
                                                  3         16-13.608
                                                  4         Adds 16-13.610
                                                  5         16-27.301(a)
                                                  6         Adds 16-27.304
17728            03-02-83                           1         2-37.1
17739            03-16-83                           1         2-133(a)
17743            03-16-83                           1         Adds
                                                               31-29
17746            03-16-83                           1         16-13.106
                                                  2         Adds 16-13.604A
                                                  3         16-13.607
                                                  4         16-13.608
17762            03-30-83                           1         52-209(a)
17767            03-30-83                           1         28-59
17775            04-06-83                           1         45-1.5
                                                  2         45-3.2(a)
                                                  3         45-3.7(b)
                                                  4         45-3.10
                                                  5         45-3.11(b)
                                                  6         Adds 45-3.15
                                                  7         45-4.6
                                                  8         Adds 45-4.8
                                                  9         45-5.7
                                                  10        45-5.8
                                                  11        45-6.5
                                                  12        45-7.2
                                                  13        45-7.3
                                                  14        Adds 45-7.6,
                                                               7.7, 7.8
                                                  15        45-8.6(a)
17776            04-06-83                           1         2-42
17777            04-06-83                           1         2, Art. IV, Div
                                                               2
17792            04-20-83                           1         28-72
17815            04-27-83                           1         Adds
                                                               2-37.12
17817            04-27-83                           1         28-182
17828            05-04-83                           1         Adds 18-34.1
17872            06-08-83                           1         28-59
17875            06-15-83                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
17899            07-06-83                           1         2-133
17906            07-13-83                           1         49-84
                                                  2         Adds 49-84.1
                                                  3         49-100
                                                  4         49-106
                                                  5         49-107
                                                  6         49-108
                                                  7         Adds 49-112.1(c)
17932            07-27-83                           1         Adds Art. XXIII
17938            08-03-83           10-01-83         1         Adds
                                                               2-17.1
17939            08-03-83                           1         Ch. 2, Art. XXII
17944            08-10-83                           1         28-59
17948            08-17-83                           1         Adds
                                                               8-20.1
17953            08-17-83                           1         2-155
17955            08-24-83           09-01-83         1         Ch. 44, Article
                                                               V
17964            09-07-83                           1         28-113
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         28-114.1 thru
                                                               28-114.12
17985            09-28-83                           1         18-13
17987            09-28-83           10-01-83         1         18-9(c)(1), (2)
17988            09-28-83           10-01-83         1         17-9.6(a)
                                                  2         17-9.8(b)
17989            09-28-83           10-01-83         1         43A-17(c)
17990            09-28-83           10-01-83         1         15D-2(b)
17991            09-28-83           10-01-83         1         49-1.1(b)
                                                  2         49-1.1(e)
                                                  3         49-1.1(f)
                                                  4         49-1.2(b)
                                                  5         49-1.2(c)(2)
                                                  6         49-1.3(b)
                                                  7         49-1.4(a), (b)
                                                  8         49-1.7
                                                  9         49-6(b)
                                                  10        49-8
                                                  11        49-11(d),(e),
                                                               (f)
                                                  12        49-37(i)
                                                  13        49-69(a)
                                                  14        Adds 49-69(g)
                                                  15        49-70(c)
                                                  16        49-102
                                                  17        49-109.1(a)(4)
17992            09-28-83           10-01-83         1         15-2(c)
                                                  2         52-303(f)(1)
                                                  3         52-303 (Table A)
18001            10-05-83                           1         5A-14(d)
                                                  2         7-24(f)
                                                  3         7-29(b)
                                                  4         13-1
                                                  5         16-1.209(e)
                                                  6         16-12.112
                                                  7         16-13.401(f)
                                                  8         16-27.303
                                                  9         16-27.304(d)
                                                  10        17-9.18(b)
                                                  11        27-10(d)
                                                  12        49-84.1(c)
                                                  14        52-214
18027            10-26-83                           1         52-209(a)
                                                  2         52-210(a)
18029            10-26-83                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 44, Art. IV
18033            11-02-83                           1         45-3.2
18034            11-02-83                           1         49-77
18044            11-16-83                           1         Ch. 42, Art. I
                                                  2         Repeals 42-9
18056            11-23-83                           1         2-26.2(g)(3)
18093            01-04-84                           1         24-3
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               24-6.1
                                                  3         Repeals 24-2,
                                                               24-4
18094            01-04-84                           1         Adds
                                                               2-26.3
                                                  2         2-27
18100            01-11-84                           1         Ch. 39
18119            01-11-84                           1         Ch. 43, Art. VI
18122            01-11-84           07-11-84         1         16-13.101(12)
                                                  2         16-13.104(3)(A)
                                                  3         16-13.401A(c)
                                                  4         16-13.502
                                                  5         16-13.503(3)(B)
                                                  6         16-35.108(2)
18123            01-11-84           1, 07-11-84      1         49-26
                                  2, 10-01-84      2         Repeals 49-26A
18136            01-18-84                           1         52-301(a)
                                                  2         52-301(c)
                                                  3         52-303(b), (c)
                                                  4         52-303 Table A
18147            01-25-84                           1         16-13.106
                                                  2         Adds 16-13.403
                                                  3         16-19.104
18181 (by        02-29-84           04-09-84         1         40A-1
election)
                                                  2         40A-4(a)
                                                  3         40A-7
                                                  4         40A-9
                                                  5         40A-11(c)
                                                  6         40A-13(a)
                                                  7         40A-14(a)
                                                  8         40A-16(a)
                                                  9         40A-17(a)
                                                  10        40A-19
                                                  11        40A-21
                                                  12        40A-22(a)
                                                  13        40A-23(b)
                                                  14        40A-28
                                                  15        40A-29
18193            03-07-84                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 19, Art. IVA
18200            03-14-84                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. IX
                                                  2         7-18.2
                                                  3         9A-9
                                                  4         10-12
                                                  5         10-36
                                                  6         14-12
                                                  7         15D-8
                                                  8         15D-23
                                                  9         17-9.4(b)
                                                  10        17-9.4(c)
                                                  11        17-9.12(c)
                                                  12        17-9.15(c)
                                                  13        17-9.17
                                                  14        19-126
                                                  15        20-14
                                                  16        22-7
                                                  17        25A-9
                                                  18        28-167
                                                  19        28-176
                                                  20        32-28
                                                  21        45-2.10(d)
                                                  22        46-11
                                                  23        50-69(c)
                                                  24        50-86
                                                  25        50-107
                                                  26        50-120
                                                  27        50-136(g)
                                                  28        50-136(h)
                                                  29        50-138(b)
                                                  30        50-138(c)
                                                  31        50-139
                                                  32        50-148
                                                  33        50-167
                                                  35        Repeals 17-9.16
18201            03-14-84                           1         2-37.2
                                                  2         2-37.7
18203            03-14-84                           1         Adds
                                                               15A, Art. II
18212            03-21-84                           1         2-37.2
                                                  2         2-37.7(c)
18215            04-04-84                           1         Repeals 6-6
18223            04-11-84                           1         5A-7(a), (b)
18252            05-09-84                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 29
                                                  2         Repeals Ch. 50,
                                                               Art. III
18265            05-23-84                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-45(a)
                                                  3         28-45(b)
                                                  4         28-59
18283            06-06-84                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-45(a)
18297            06-13-84                           1         Adds 17-2.7
18298            06-13-84                           1         2-42
18311            06-27-84                           1         16-13.101(10)
                                                  2         16-13.106
18403            09-19-84                           1         15A-2
18408            09-26-84                           1         Adds
                                                               28-52.1
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         28, Art. XI,
                                                               Div. 6B
18409            09-26-84                           1         28-50
                                                  2         28-60
18411            09-26-84           10-01-84         1         6A-5
                                                  2         7-9(a)
                                                  3         7-10
                                                  4         7-18(d)
                                                  5         7-24(a)
                                                  6         7-31
                                                  7         7-32(a)
                                                  8         14-4
                                                  9         15C-12(a)
                                                  10        17-9.7(c)
                                                  11        19-121
                                                  12        25A-6
                                                  13        27-14(c)
                                                  14        27-18(a)
                                                  15        28-4
                                                  16        28-170
                                                  17        28-177
                                                  18        32-27
                                                  19        39B-9
                                                  20        43A-17(c)
                                                  21        43A-18(b)
                                                  22        44-16(a)
                                                  23        46-1
                                                  24        46-2
                                                  25        46-3(d)
                                                  26        46-5
                                                  27        50-12
                                                  28        50-101
                                                  29        50-116
                                                  30        50-137(a)
                                                  35        52-301(b)
                                                  36        52-303
                                                  37        53-4513
                                                  38        53-6101(d)
                                                  39        53-6412
                                                  40        Repeals 20-17,
                                                               18
18412            09-26-84           10-01-84         1         49-1.1(b)
                                                  2         49-1.2(b)
                                                  3         49-1.3(b)
                                                  4         49-1.4(a), (b)
                                                  5         49-1.7
                                                  6         49-6(c)
                                                  7         49-8
                                                  8         49-11(d), (e),
                                                               (f)
                                                  9         49-25(a)
                                                  10        49-36(d)
                                                  11        49-51(a)
                                                  12        49-52
                                                  13        49-69(a)
                                                  14        49-71(d)
                                                  15        49-70(c)
                                                  16        49-102
                                                  17        49-109.1(a)(4)
                                                  18        49-135(3)
18416            09-26-84                           1         Ch. 19, Art. X
18441            10-24-84                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 19, Art. XI
18476            11-21-84           12-01-84         1         2-155
18477            11-21-84                           1         13-2.2
                                                  2         Adds 13-2.4
                                                  3         Adds 13-2.5
                                                  4         13-3
18483            12-05-84                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-50
                                                  3         28-59
18484            12-05-84           4, 6, 01-01-85   4         28-44
                                                  5         28-59
                                                  6         28-71
18515            12-12-84                           1         Ch. 13A
18531            12-19-84                           1         2-133(a)(2)
                                                  2         2-148(a)
18534            12-19-84                           1         17-9.2
                                                  2         17-9.5
                                                  3         17-9.8
18560            01-23-85           09-01-85         1         Ch. 2, Art. XII
                                                  2         8-1.2(a)
                                                  3         8-14
18566            01-30-85                           1         15D-27
18567            01-30-85                           1         50-151
18575            02-06-85                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 31A, Art. II
18591            02-13-85           06-01-85         1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 27, Art. VI
18623            03-06-85                           1         Adds
                                                               2-37.13
                                                  2         24-11
18665            04-10-85                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XXIV
18682            04-24-85                           1         Ch. 17
18685            05-01-85                           1         28-59
18702            05-15-85                           1         Adds Ch. 42A
                                                  2         50-156(b)
                                                               Repeals Ch. 12,
                                                  3         50-158, 50-159
                                                               (f)
18725            05-22-85                           1         14-1
                                                  2         14-3(c)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               14-3.1
                                                  4         14-4
                                                  5         14-5
                                                  6         14-9
                                                  7         14-13
18735            05-29-85                           1         Adds
18745            06-05-85                           1         Adds
                                                               32-11.2
18785            07-10-85                           1         Ch. 33
18795            07-17-85                           1         2-155(b)
                                                  2         2-155(g)
18796            07-17-85                           1         2-153(e)
18798            07-17-85                           1         30-4
18803            07-24-85                           1         14-1
                                                  2         14-3
                                                  3         14-4
                                                  4         14-5
                                                  5         14-6(a)
                                                  6         14-8
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               14-8.1
                                                  8         14-9(a)
                                                  9         14-10
                                                  10        14-11
18823            07-31-85                           1         32-65
18828            08-07-85                           1         1-5
                                                  2         1-6(a)
18829            08-07-85                           1         45-1.5
                                                  2         45-2.10(c)(1)
                                                  3         45-3.2
                                                  4         45-3.6
                                                  5         45-3.7(d)
                                                  6         45-3.8
                                                  7         45-3.12
                                                  8         45-3.13
18836            08-14-85                           1         2-150(c)
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         2-151 (b)(9),
                                                               (10)
18837            08-14-85                           1         13-2.2(c)
                                                  2         13-2.4
                                                  3         13-5.4
                                                               Adds
18838            08-14-85                           1         43, Art. VI,
                                                               Div. 1 Title
                                                               Adds
                                                           43, Art. VI,
                                                               Div. 2
                                                  2         43-116 thru
                                                               119
18850            08-28-85                           1         Ch. 2, Art. IV,
                                                               Div. 2
18875            09-18-85                           1         42-18
18876            09-18-85           10-01-85         1         18-11(a), (b)
                                                  2         19-121(a)
                                                  3         27-14(c)
                                                  4         27-18(a)
                                                  5         49-1.3(b)
                                                  6         49-1.4(a)
                                                  7         49-1.7(a)
                                                  8         50-101
                                                  9         50-116
                                                  10        50-137(a)
18891            10-02-85                           1         Adds
                                                               28-63.2
18892            10-02-85                           1         39B-2
                                                  2         39B-3
                                                  3         39B-4
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               39B-4.1
                                                  5         39B-5(a)
18902            10-16-85                           1         5A-6
                                                  2         5A-7
                                                  3         5A-9
                                                  4         5A-14
                                                  5         Repeals 5A-8
18905            10-23-85                           1         31A-7(a)
18940            11-20-85                           1         2-157
18960            12-04-85                           1         31-3
18961            12-04-85           02-06-86, 41-3,  1         Adds
                                    06-06-86                   Ch. 41
                                                  3         Repeals 19-37.1
18962            12-04-85                           1         43-112
                                                  2         43-114
                                                  3         43-115(a)
18969            12-11-85           01-01-86         1         15-2
                                                  2         15-10(a)
                                                  3         19-88
18982            12-18-85                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-59
18983            12-18-85                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-50
                                                  3         28-59
18994            01-08-86                           1         14-1(6)
                                                  2         14-8.1
18997            01-15-86                           1         8-9
                                                  2         Repeals 8-12
19081            03-19-86                           1         28-59
19099            03-26-86           04-01-86         1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 48A
                                                  2         31-14.1(c)
                                                  4         Repeals 50, Art
                                                               XI
19172            05-21-86                           1         Adds
                                                               18-4(a)(3)
19173            05-21-86                           1         28-2(8)
                                                  2         28-114.1
                                                  3         28-114.2
                                                  4         Repeals 28-114.3
                                                               thru 28-114.10
19180            06-04-86                           1         Adds
                                                               28-20.1
19181            06-04-86                           1         13-4
                                                  2         13-15
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 43, Art. VI,
19190            06-11-86           07-15-86         1         Div. 3,
                                                               43-126.3 thru
                                                               43-126.14
19196            06-18-86                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 41A
                                                  2         Repeals 31-24
                                                  3         Repeals 31-26
19201            06-25-86           07-01-86         1         Ch. 49
19232            07-16-86                           1         43-136
                                                  2         43-139
19234            07-16-86                           1         Ch. 27
19241            07-23-86                           1         46-1
                                                  2         46-3(e)
                                                  3         46-4
                                                  4         46-9
                                                  5         46-10(b), (c)
                                                  6         46-11
                                                  7         46-12.3
                                                  8         46-12.4
                                                  9         14-1(e)
                                                  10        14-2(e)
                                                  11        14-12
19290            09-17-86           10-01-86         1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 13, Art. III
19300            09-24-86           10-01-86         1         5-4
                                                  2         7-10
                                                  3         Ch. 7, Art. II
                                                  4         15C-12(a)
                                                  5         15D-4(c)
                                                  6         15D-5(c)
                                                  7         Adds 16-1.307
                                                  8         16-11.102
                                                               Adds 16-11.103
                                                  9         (c), (d), and
                                                               (e)
                                                  10        Adds 16-11.106
                                                               (c)
                                                  11        16-12.102
                                                  12        16-12.103
                                                  13        16-12.104
                                                  14        16-19.503
                                                  15        16-19.505
                                                  16        16-20.114(a)
                                                  17        Adds 16-20.114B
                                                  18        16-31.201
                                                  19        16-31.202
                                                  20        16-31.204
                                                  21        16-31.301
                                                  22        16-31.401
                                                  23        16-31.402
                                                  24        17-9.6(a)
                                                  25        17-9.7(c)
                                                  26        17-9.8(b)
                                                  27        18-9(c)(1), (2)
                                                  28        18-11
                                                  29        19-82.1
                                                  30        19-121(a)
                                                  31        27-18(a)
                                                  32        28-4(b)
                                                  33        28-9
                                                  34        Adds
                                                               28-26(d)
                                                  35        29-6
                                                  36        29-24(b)
                                                  37        43A-17(c)
                                                  38        45-2.11(b)
                                                  39        48A-7(c)
                                                  40        48A-22(a)
                                                  41        49-18.1(c)
                                                  42        49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  43        49-18.2(c)
                                                  44        49-18.4(e)
                                                  45        49-18.6
                                                  46        49-18.7(a)
                                                  47        49-18.7(e)
                                                  48        49-18.9
                                                  49        49-18.10(a)
                                                  50        49-18.12
                                                  51        49-18.13
                                                  52        49-18.16
                                                  53        50-7
                                                  54        50-101
                                                  55        50-137(a)
                                                  56        50-159.1(c)
                                                  69        Repeals 7-9
19312            10-01-86                           1         Ch. 2, Art. IV
                                                  2         2-42
                                                  3         Ch. 2, Art. XVI
                                                  4         9B-2(a)
                                                  5         9B-6(a)
                                                  6         Ch. 14A
                                                  7         15-4(c)
                                                  8         Ch. 15D, Art.
                                                               III
                                                  9         Ch. 16, Appendix
                                                               B(a)
                                                  10        28-128.6
                                                  11        28-128.7
                                                  12        28-128.10
                                                  13        28-128.11(b)
                                                  14        28-128.13
                                                  15        28-128.15
                                                  16        28-128.16
                                                  17        28-140(c)
                                                  18        28-140(f)
                                                  19        32-83
                                                  20        42-2(c)
                                                  21        42-10(a)
                                                  22        42-12
                                                  23        42A-5(c)
                                                  24        46-13(a)
                                                  25        46-15(g)
                                                  26        46-18(e)
                                                  27        Adds
                                                               47-1(3)
                                                  28        47-24(h)
                                                  29        47-24(i)
                                                  30        48A-4(4)
                                                  31        50-4
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                  33        Art. V-a, Art.
                                                               XIV, and Art.
                                                               XVIII
19340            10-22-86           10-27-86         1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 34
19377            11-12-86                           1         41A-2(13)
                                                               Renumbers
                                                  2         41A-2 (15) thru
                                                               (21) as (17)
                                                               thru (23)
                                                               Adds
                                                  3         41A-2 (15) and
                                                               (16)
                                                  4         41A-5
                                                  5         41A-7
                                                  6         41A-10(d) and
                                                               (e)
                                                  7         41A-13(a)
19388            11-19-86                           1         Adds
                                                               44-37.1
                                                  2         44-39(a)
19398            12-03-86                           1         Ch. 43, Art. IV
                                                               Renumbers
                                                               18-2(26) thru
19409            12-10-86                           1         (46) as (27)
                                                               thru (47) and
                                                               adds new
                                                               18-2(26)
                                                  2         18-2(37)
                                                  3         18-3(a)
                                                  4         18-5
                                                  5         18-9(b)(3)
                                                  6         18-9(c)(1)
                                                  7         18-9(c)(2)
19425            12-17-86                           1         5-31(c)
19455            02-04-87                           1         1-5
                                                  2         1-6(c)
                                                  3         2-26.2(g)(3)
                                                  4         7-15(c)
                                                  5         15A-8
                                                  6         15A-9(c)
                                                  7         15A-10
                                                  8         15A-13(b)
                                                  9         20-30
                                                  10        28-81
                                                  11        30-4(a)(1)
                                                  12        31-22(b)
                                                  13        31-22.1(b)
                                                  14        43-125(b)
                                                  15        43-126.11(a)
                                                  16        44-17
                                                  17        50-168(c)
                                                  19A       Title, Art. I
19470            02-18-87 (by       04-04-87         1         40A-1
                 election)
                                                  2         40A-4(a)(9)
                                                  3         40A-5(a)
                                                  4         40A-6
                                                  5         40A-7
                                                  6         40A-8
                                                  7         40A-10
                                                  8         40A-11
                                                  9         40A-13
                                                  10        40A-14(b)
                                                  11        40A-16(b)
                                                  12        40A-18
                                                  13        40A-19
                                                  14        40A-21
                                                  15        40A-22
                                                  16        40A-23
                                                  17        40A-25
                                                  18        40A-26
                                                  19        40A-27(b)(1)
                                                  20        40A-28
                                                  21        40A-31(a)
                                                  22        40A-33
19473            02-18-87           7, 6, 04-01-87   1         34-1(b)(18)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               34-4(33)
                                                  3         34-8(a)(2)
                                                  4         34-16
                                                  5         34-17(d)
                                                  6         34-20(b)
                                                  7         34-23(c)
                                                  8         34-28(b)
                                                  9         Reletters
                                                               34-31(e) as (d)
                                                  10        34-41(a)(7)(A)
                                                  11        34-43(d)
                                                  12        34-43(j)
19502            03-25-87                           1         28-59
19517            04-15-87                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 35
                                                  2         50-156(b)
19521            04-22-87                           1         28-114.12
19526            04-22-87                           1         49-1
                                                  2         49-18.11
                                                  3         49-18.15
                                                  4         49-62
19541            05-13-87                           1         Adds
                                                               32-11.5
19555            05-20-87                           1         28-114.1
19562            05-27-87                           1         34-37(d)
                                                  2         34-38(a)
19566            06-03-87                           2         7A-6
19567            06-03-87                           1         10-1(1)
                                                  2         Adds 10-41(c)
19579            06-24-87           07-01-87         1         28-19
19580            06-24-87           10-01-87         1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 44, Art. II
19604            07-22-87                           1         2-150(c)
                                                  2         2-151(b)
19605            07-22-87                           1         2-155(g)
19606            07-22-87                           1         2-153(e)
19622            07-29-87                           1         49-1(23)
                                                  2         49-1(67)
                                                  3         49-1(77)
                                                  4         49-1(79)
                                                  5         49-3
                                                  6         49-14
                                                  7         49-24(a)
                                                  8         49-26(d)
                                                  9         49-42(a)
                                                  10        49-47
                                                  11        49-56(d)
                                                  12        49-61(c)
                                                  13        49-62(d)
                                                  14        49-62(e)
19631            08-12-87           09-01-87         1         44-35
19640            08-19-87                           1         2-37(e)
19647            08-26-87                           1         5A-3
                                                           5A-5
                                                           Adds
                                                               5A-8
19648            08-26-87           03-01-88         1         Ch. 41
19649            08-26-87                           1         Adds Div.
19660            09-02-87                           1         2-133(a)
19673            09-16-87                           1         27-6(a)
19677            09-23-87           10-01-87         1         5-31(c)
19679            09-23-87           10-01-87         1         2-37.10
                                                  2         2-137
                                                  3         9B-5
                                                  4         9B, Art. II
                                                  5         28-128.6
                                                  6         28-128.7
                                                  7         28-128.15
                                                  8         28-128.16
                                                               Renumbers
                                                               34-4(33) thru
                                                  9         (36) as (34)
                                                               thru (37), Adds
                                                               34-4(33)
19680            09-23-87           10-01-87         1         15D-2(b)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               44-17.1
                                                  3         50-7
19682            09-23-87           10-01-87         1         49-2(d)
                                                  2         49-18.1(c)(5)
                                                  3         49-18.1(c)(6)
                                                  4         49-18.1(f)
                                                  5         49-18.1(g)
                                                  8         49-18.4(e)(1)
                                                  9         49-18.5
                                                  10        49-18.12(1)
                                                  11        49-41(c)
19712            10-14-87                           1         2, Art. XXIII
19742            10-28-87                           1         2-37.8
19749            11-04-87                           1         28-10(b)
                                                  2         28-24.1
                                                  3         28-44
                                                  4         28-45(a)
                                                  5         28-45(b)
                                                  6         28-50(c)
                                                  7         28-59
                                                  8         28-60(b)
                                                  9         28-64
                                                  10        28-71
                                                  11        28-72
                                                  12        28-74
19760            11-11-87                           1         Repeals 2-155(e)
19774            12-02-87                           1         2-133(a)
19802            12-16-87           01-01-88         1         13, Art. II
                                                  2         Repeals 13, Art.
                                                               III
19804            12-16-87           01-01-88         1         16-1.204
19814            01-06-88                           1         28-45(a)
19818            01-06-88                           1         Adds
                                                               37, Art. III
19825            01-13-88                           1         Adds 46-14.1
                                                               Adds
19854            02-10-88           06-01-88         1         15C, Art. I
                                                               Title and
                                                               Art. II
                                                  2         15C-1
                                                  3         15C-2(c)
                                                  4         15C-6
                                                  5         15C-16
                                                  6         Repeals
                                                               15C-17
19855            02-10-88                           1         Adds
                                                               31-16
19861            02-24-88                           1         19-28
19869            02-24-88                           1         28, Art. XVI
                                                  2         42A-1
                                                  3         42A-4
                                                  4         42A-5
                                                  5         42A-6(a)
                                                  6         42A-8(a)
                                                  7         42A-10
                                                  8         42A-11(b)
19875            03-09-88                           1         2-11.2
                                                  2         2-26.2(f)
19884            03-09-88                           1         31A-7(a)
                                                  2         31A-10
19889            03-23-88           04-01-88         1         Adds
                                                               31-29
                                                               16, Retitles
19894            03-23-88                           1         Art. XIII, Div.
                                                               6
                                                  2         16-13.601
19895            03-23-88                           1         50-156
19896            03-23-88                           1         27-3(17)
                                                  2         27-4
                                                  3         27-5.1
                                                  4         27-8(a)
                                                  5         27, Retitles
                                                               Art. IV
                                                  6         27-13
                                                  7         27-14
                                                  8         27-14.3
19903            03-23-88                           1         37-34
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         37-35(c), (d)
                                                               and (e)
19924            04-13-88                           1         8-1
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               8-14.1
19932            04-27-88                           1         34-11
                                                  2         34-22(a)
                                                  3         34-23(a)
19954            05-11-88                           1         7-1
                                                  2         7-1.1
                                                  3         7-2
                                                  4         7-4
                                                  5         7-5
                                                  6         7-7
                                                  7         7-8
                                                  8         7-10
                                                  9         Adds 7-10.1
                                                  10        7-16
                                                  11        7-18
                                                  12        7-18.1
                                                  13        7-20
                                                  14        7-22
                                                  15        Adds 7-22.1
                                                  16        Adds 7-22.2
                                                  17        7-23
                                                  18        7-24
                                                  19        7-25
                                                  20        7-29
                                                  21        7-31
                                                  22        7-35(c)
                                                  23        7-38
19963            05-25-88                           1         2-4
                                                  2         2-9
                                                  3         5A-14(c)
                                                  4         6-6.1(c)
                                                  5         7A-20(b)
                                                  6         11-7
                                                  7         13-1(a)
                                                  8         13A-10
                                                  9         14B-13(b)
                                                  10        15C-16(b)
                                                  11        16-1.209
                                                  12        16-12.112(a)
                                                  13        16-13.401(f)
                                                  14        16-20.118B
                                                  15        16-27.303
                                                  16        16-27.304(d)
                                                  17        17-9.17(c)
                                                  18        18-9(c)(8)
                                                  19        18-12(b)
                                                  20        18-25
                                                  21        19-6
                                                  22        19-22
                                                  23        19-23
                                                  24        19-24
                                                  25        19-25
                                                  26        19-26
                                                  27        19-33
                                                  28        19-35
                                                  29        19-44
                                                  30        19-58
                                                  31        19-59
                                                  32        19-65
                                                  33        28-30
                                                  34        28-150(a)
                                                  35        29-4(b)
                                                  36        31-19(c)
                                                  37        31-20(c)
                                                  38        31-21(c)
                                                  39        32-11
                                                  40        32-45
                                                  41        32-60
                                                  42        35-10
                                                  43        36-4
                                                  44        36-9
                                                  45        36-41
                                                  46        39-3(d)
                                                  47        39B-6
                                                  48        40-5
                                                  49        41A-21(a)
                                                  50        41A-21(c)
                                                               42-12a;
                                                  51        Renumbered as
                                                               42-12.1
                                                  52        43-7
                                                  53        43-14
                                                  54        43-15
                                                  55        43-63
                                                  56        43-117
                                                  57        43-139.1(d)
                                                               44-18;
                                                  58        Renumbered as
                                                               44-17.1
                                                  59        44-28
                                                  60        44-33
                                                  61        44-39(b)
                                                  62        45-8.6(a)
                                                  63        48-9
                                                  64        48-10
                                                  65        48A-42(a)
                                                  66        50-35
                                                  67        50-95
                                                  68        50-130
                                                  69        50-143(d)
                                                  70        50-162(b)
19969            05-25-88                           1         43-126.6(b)
19983            06-08-88                           1         Ch. 37, Art. III
                                                  2         2-122 (a)(10)(B)
                                                  3         8-1.4(a)(4)
19991            06-22-88           07-01-88         1         18-3
                                                  2         18-4(a)(1)
                                                  3         18-4(f)(2)
                                                  4         18-5(a)
                                                  5         18-9(c)(1)
19997            07-13-88                           1         Repeals 44-35(d)
20012            07-27-88           10-01-88         1         28-2
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         28-76.1,
                                                               28-76.2,
                                                               28-76.3
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               28-81.1
                                                  4         28-82
                                                  5         28-85
                                                  6         28-88
                                                  7         28, Art. XI,
                                                               Div. 7
                                                               Repeals 28-83,
                                                               28-118, 28-
                                                  8         121.6, 28-126,
                                                               28-128.5, 28-
                                                               128.14
20016            07-27-88                           1         8-1.4(a)
20017            07-27-88                           1         27-4
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               27-5.2
20026            08-10-88                           1         17-1.5
                                                  2         17-1.6
                                                  3         17-2.1
                                                  4         17-2.2(b)
                                                  5         17-2.4
                                                  6         17-2.5(a)
                                                  7         17-3.1(a)
                                                  8         17-3.2(d)
                                                  9         17-3.3(a)
                                                  10        17-3.4(g)
                                                  11        17-4.2(a)
                                                  12        17-4.3(e)
                                                  13        17-4.9(b)
                                                  14        17-4.11(c)
                                                  15        17-5.4(a)
                                                  16        17-6.3
                                                  17        17-6.4
                                                  18        17-6.5
                                                  19        17-6.6(a)
                                                  20        17-6.7
                                                  21        17-7.1
                                                  22        17-7.3
                                                  23        17-7.5(c)
                                                  24        17-7.6
                                                  25        17-7.7
                                                  26        Retitles 17,
                                                               Art. VIII
                                                  27        17-8.1
                                                  28        17-8.2
                                                  29        17-8.4
                                                  30        17-8.9
                                                  31        17-8.10(c)
                                                  32        17-8.11
                                                  33        17-8.12(a)
                                                  34        17-8.12(d)
                                                  35        Adds 17, Art.
                                                               VIII, Div. 3
                                                  36        17-9.2(1)
                                                  37        17-9.3
                                                  38        17-9.4
                                                  39        17-9.5
                                                  40        17-9.8
                                                  41        17-9.10
                                                  42        17-9.11(b)
                                                               Adds 17-9.12
                                                  43        (d), (e), and
                                                               (f)
                                                  44        17-9.14(b)
                                                  45        17-9.15(a)
                                                  46        17-9.17
                                                  47        17-9.18
                                                  48        Adds 17-9.24
                                                  49        Repeals 17-8.6
20044            08-24-88                           1         2-37.7
20052            08-24-88                           1         Adds
                                                               31-30
20059            09-14-88                           1         Adds
                                                               1-7(b)
20061            09-14-88                           1         2, Art. IV, Div.
                                                               2
20064            09-14-88                           1         Adds
                                                               2, Art. X
20073            09-28-88           10-01-88         1         2-42
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               2, Art. V-a
                                                  3         5-10
                                                  4         15-10(a)(2)
                                                  5         44-24
                                                  6         44-34
20074            09-28-88           10-01-88         1         Repeals 42, Art.
                                                               I
20075            09-28-88           10-01-88         1         34-20(b)
                                                  2         34-24(e)(1)
20076            09-28-88           10-01-88         1         5A-3(4)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               5A-3(6)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               5A-5.1
                                                  4         5A-14(a)
                                                  5         7-10
                                                  6         7-20(b)
                                                  7         7-24(e)
                                                  8         10-10(a)
                                                  9         10-15
                                                  10        10-37(d)
                                                  11        15D-4(c)
                                                  12        17-9.4
                                                  13        18-32
                                                  14        19-82.1
                                                  15        28-4(b)(2)
                                                  16        Renumbers 31-29
                                                               as 31-30
                                                  17        45-3.3
                                                  18        45-3.9
                                                  19        45-6.4(h)
                                                  20        50-7(b)
                                                  21        50-116
                                                  22        50-137(a)
20077            09-28-88           01-01-89         1         49-18.1(g)
                                  10-01-88         2         49-18.2(c)
                                  01-01-89         3         49-18.4(b)
                                  10-01-88         4         49-18.4(e)
                                  01-01-89         5         49-18.5
                                  10-01-88         6         49-18.11
20088            10-12-88                           1         34-32
20095            10-12-88           01-01-89         1         Adds
                                                               42, Art. I
20112            10-26-88           01-01-89         1         15C-1
                                                  2         15C-2
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               15C-2.1
                                                  4         15C-3
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               15C-10(c)
                                                  6         15C-12
                                                  7         15C-13
                                                  8         Adds
                                                               15C-14.1
20148            12-14-88                           1         28-114.1
20161            01-11-89                           1         32-82
20168            01-11-89                           1         Adds
                                                               28-76.4
20169            01-11-89                           1         Adds
                                                               28-158.1
20196            02-08-89                           1         28-44
                                                  2         28-45(a)
                                                  3         28-50(c)
                                                  4         28-59
20199            02-08-89                           1         9A-11
20200            02-08-89                           1         Adds 2-37.1.3
                                                               thru 2-37.1.9
20201            02-08-89                           1         13-5
20210            02-22-89                           1         25A-15
20211            02-22-89                           1         Adds
                                                               9B-2 (a)(9)
20215            02-22-89                           1         49-7(c)(2)
                                                  2         49-13(a)
                                                  3         49-16(c)
                06-01-89                           4         49-18.7
                06-01-89                           5         49-24
                06-01-89                           6         49-26(b) and (c)
                                                  7         49-42(a)
                                                  8         49-47
                                  04-01-89         9         49-52
                                                  10        49-53
                                                  11        49-56
                                                  12        49-60(f)
                                  06-01-89         12        49-60(g)
                                  06-01-89         13        49-61(c)
                                                  14        49-62
                                                  15        Repeals 49-18.4
                                                               (b)
                                                               Adds
20216            02-22-89                           1         2-140 and
                                                               2-141
20241            03-08-89           06-08-89         1         Ch. 39B
                                    Repealed by                Repeals Ch. 22
                                  21310 on 06-10-  2         and Ch. 33
                                    92
20251            03-22-89                           1         Adds
                                                               34-36 (b)(11)(C)
20256            03-22-89                           1         Adds
                                                               2, Art. IV-a
20260            03-22-89           06-08-89         1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 40B
                                                               Adds
20266            04-12-89                           1         2, Art. XXV, 2-
                                                               159 and 2-160
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         2, Art. XXVI,
                                                               2-161 and
                                                               2-162
20267            04-12-89                           1         2, Art. X
20269            04-12-89                           1         28-2(a)(5)
                                                  2         28-19(b)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               28-76.5
                                                  4         28-81
                                                  5         28-81.1(a)
                                                  6         28-88(a)
                                                  7         28-89
                                                  8         28-95
                                  06-01-89         9         28-96
                                  06-01-89         10        Adds
                                                               28-96.1
                                                  11        28-100
                                                  12        Retitles
                                                               28-107
                                                  13        Retitles
                                                               28-108
                                                  14        28-110
                                                  15        28-119
                                                  16        28-129
                                                  17        28-130.2(b)
                                                  18        28-130.9(a)
                                                  19        Repeals 28-114
20279            04-26-89                           1         2-96
                                                               Adds
20291            04-26-89                           1         41A-2(11) and
                                                               renumbers (12)
                                                               thru (24)
                                                  2         41A-13(a)
20301            05-10-89           07-01-89         1         Adds 5-56
20302            05-10-89           09-01-89         1         8-6
20316            05-24-89           06-01-89         1         Adds 7-13.1
                                  06-01-89         2         7-22
                                  06-01-89         3         7-22.2
                                  06-01-89         4         Adds 7-28.1
                                  06-01-89         5         Renumbers 7-31
                                                               as 7-21.1
                                  06-01-89         6         Adds 7-31.1
20329            06-14-89                           1         Adds
                                                               28, Art. XVII
20335            06-14-89           10-01-89         1         49-47
20336            06-14-89           07-01-89 thru    1         32-11.3
                                    08-31-90
20354            06-28-89 (by       08-12-89         1         Adds
                 election)                                     40A-32
20414            08-23-89           09-06-89         1         34-43
20417            08-23-89                           1         Adds 10-42.1
20418            08-23-89                           1         2-150(c)
20419            08-23-89                           1         2-155(h)
20420            08-23-89           09-01-89         1         2-153
20433            09-13-89                           1         Adds
                                                               27-3.1
20443 (by        09-20-89           11-07-89         1         40A-9(d)
election)
                                                  2         40A-16(a)
                                                  3         40A-21(a)
                                                  4         40A-22(a)
                                                  5         40A-23
20448            09-27-89           10-01-89         1         15-3
                                  10-01-89         2         15-11
                                  01-01-90         3         18-11
                                  10-01-89         4         19-28
                                  10-01-89         5         28-4(b)
                                  10-01-89         6         28-5
                                  10-01-89         15        Repeals 15-10
20449            09-27-89           10-01-89         1         49-18.1(c)(5)
                                                  2         49-18.1(c)(6)
                                                  3         49-18.1(g)
                                                  4         49-18.4(b)
                                                  5         49-18.4(e)
                                                  6         49-18.5
                                                  7         49-18.11
20454            10-11-89                           1         31A-10
20455            09-27-89                           1         45-2.3(a)
                                                  2         Adds 45-2.3.1
                                                  3         45-2.4
                                                  4         45-2.9(a)
                                                  5         45-2.10(c)(1)
                                                  6         45-3.1
                                                  7         45-3.2(a)
                                                  8         45-3.5
                                                  9         45-3.10
                                                  10        45-3.12
                                                  11        45-4.5
                                                  12        45-5.6
                                                  13        45-5.7(c)
                                                  14        45-5.8
                                                  15        45-6.2(b)
                                                  16        45-6.4(b)
                                                  17        45-6.4(j)
                                                  18        45-7.3(a)
                                                  19        45-7.5
                                                  20        Adds 45-7.5.1
                                                  21        45-7.6
                                                  22        45-7.7
                                                  23        45-7.8
                                                  24        Adds 45-8.1.1
20456            09-27-89                           1         2-102(2)
                                                  2         2-105(a)
20457            09-27-89                           1         Adds
                                                               2-17.2
20462            09-27-89                           1         2-161(a)
20470            10-11-89                           1         27-8
                                                  2         Retitles
                                                               27, Art. IV
                                                  3         27-13
                                                  4         27-15
                                                  5         27-16
20475            10-11-89           12-13-89         1         28-44
20482            10-25-89                           1         2, Art. V
20488            10-25-89                           1         Ch. 8
                                                               Adds
                                                               2, Art. XXVII,
20526            12-13-89                           1         Secs
                                                               2-163 thru
                                                               2-166
                                                  2         34-40
20527            12-13-89                           1         2, Art. VIII-a
                                                               Renumbers
20552            01-24-90                           1         41A-2 (14) thru
                                                               (24) as (15)
                                                               thru (25)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               41A-2(14)
                                                  3         41A-4(c)
                                                  4         41A-5(a)
                                                  5         41A-8
                                                  6         41A-11
                                                  7         41A-21(b)
20559            02-21-90                           1         2-24(a)
                                                  2         2-24(e)
                                                  3         2-34
                                                  4         2-36
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               2-37.14
                                                               Adds
                                                               2, Art. XIV,
20570            02-28-90                           1         Secs
                                                               2-130 thru
                                                               2-132
20578            03-14-90                           1         27-11(c)
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         27-11 (g), (h),
                                                               (i), and (j)
20583            03-14-90                           1         7-7
                                                  2         Adds 7-9
20599            04-11-90                           1         7A-17
                                                  2         7A-18
                                                  3         7A-19
                                                  4         7A-20
                                                  5         18-10
                                                  6         18-12
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               18-12.1
                                                  8         18, Art. II
                                                  9         18, Art. III
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               18-40
                                                  11        27-4(b)
                                                  12        Adds
                                                               31-7(e)
                                                  13        40-5
20606            04-11-90                           1         Adds
                                                               28-42.1
20612            4-25-90            5-1-90           1         Amends
                                                               5A-3(4)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               5A-5.1(b)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               5A-8
                                                  4         Amends 7-10
                                                  5         Amends 7-18(g)
                                                  6         Amends 7-20(b)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               14-4
                                                  8         Amends 16-1.307
                                                               (a)
                                                  9         Amends 17-9.23
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               24-2
                                                  11        Adds
                                                               24-4
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               39B-9
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               41A-6(a)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               42A-5(a)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               43A-18(b)
20613            04-25-90                           1         39A-2
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               39A-4(k)
                                                  3         39A-5(j)
                                                  4         39A-5(p)(3)
                                                  5         39A-5(q)(4)
                                                  6         39A-5(q)(5)
                                                  7         39A-5(r)(2)
                                                  8         39A-5(s)
                                                  9         Adds
                                                               39A-5(u)
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               39A-6(a)(14)
                                                  11        39A-6(b)(1)(A)
                                                  12        39A-6(b)(5)
                                                  13        39A-6(c)(1)
                                                  14        39A-6(d),(e),
                                                               (f),(g),(h)
                                                  15        39A-6(k), (l),
                                                               (m)
20636            5-23-90                            1         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
20652            6-13-90                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 20A
20653            6-13-90                            1         Amends
                                                               49-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-7(e)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-12
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-13
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.10
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.15(a)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-24(b), (c)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-30(a)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-33(b)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-56
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               49-59(d)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               49-60(f)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               49-62
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               49-63(c)
                                                  16        Repeals 49-36
                                                  17        Repeals 49-57,
                                                               49-58
20663            6-27-90                            1         Adds
                                                               6-6
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               6A-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               6A-7
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               6A-8(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               6A-10(d)
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               14-2.1
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               14-3(a)(14)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               14-9(d)
                                                  9         Adds
                                                               14-11(b)(7)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               14-11(c)
20664            7-27-90                            1         Amends 16-
                                                               27.420A
20665            7-27-90                            1         Amends
                                                               2-140
20679            7-11-90                            1         Adds
                                                               27-16(f), (g)
20680            7-11-90            8-1-90 until 7-  1         Adds
                                    31-91                      32-9.1
                                                               Extends eff.
20699            8-8-90             Expires 8-31-91  1         date of
                                                               32-11.3
20716            9-12-90                            1         Amends
                                                               34-28
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-31
20736            9-26-90            10-1-90          1         Amends
                                                               15C-2(b)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               18-9(c)(9)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-96.1(c)
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               48-11
20737            9-26-90            10-1-90          1         Amends
                                                               49-9(e)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)(5)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)(6)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-18.11
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-18.16
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               49-24(b)
20743            9-26-90            10-1-90          3         Amends
                                                               43-26
                                                  4         Repeals Ch. 15
20745            9-26-90            12-1-90          1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 10
20766            10-24-90           12-1-90          1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 10A
20780            11-7-90                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 20A
20781            11-7-90                            1         Adds
                                                               31-31
20787            11-14-90                           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 39C
20788            11-14-90           12-1-90          1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 10B
20795            11-14-90                           1         Adds
                                                               31-32
20811            11-14-90                           1         Amends
                                                               31A-4(5)
20818            11-28-90                           1         Adds
                                                               2-11.3
20836            12-12-90                           1         Amends 16-1.215
                                                               (d)
                                                  2         Amends 16-1.215
                                                               (e)
                                                  3         Amends 16-1.215
                                                               (f)
                                                  4         Amends 16-19.104
20838            12-12-90           1-1-91           1         Amends
                                                               18-11
20858            1-23-91                            1         Adds
                                                               5-3(c)
20872            2-13-91                            1         Repeals 2-133,
                                                               2-134
20909            3-27-91                            1         Amends
                                                               42-1(1)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               42-2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               42-3(b)(7)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               42-4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               42-5(a)
20910            3-27-91                            1         Amends
                                                               2-37.10
20951            5-22-91                            1         Amends
                                                               2-11.2
20960            6-12-91            11/5/91; 2, 1/1/ 1         Amends
                                    92                         Ch. 40A
                                  1/1/92           2         Repeals
                                                               40A-26
20963            6-12-91            Expires 8-31-96  1         Amends
                                                               32-11.3
20964            6-12-91            Expires 8-31-96  1         Amends
                                                               32-9.1(d)
                                                  2         Amends Ord.
                                                               20680
                                                               Renumbers
20965            6-12-91                            1         28-2(3)-(24) as
                                                               (4) - (25), Adds
                                                               28-2(3)
                                                               Renumbers
                                                  2         28-2(9)-(25) as
                                                               (10)-(26), Adds
                                                               28-2(9)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-4(a)
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               28-5.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-19(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-130.10
20966            6-12-91                            1         Adds
                                                               31-33
20987            6-26-91                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 29
20988            6-26-91                            1         Amends
                                                               34-39(c)
20989            6-26-91                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 15B
20994            6-26-91                            1         Amends 2-37.1.3
                                                               (2)
                                                  2         Amends 2-37.1.4
                                                  3         Amends 2-37.1.5
                                                  4         Amends 2-37.1.6
                                                  5         Amends 2-37.1.7
                                                               (a)
                                                  6         Amends 2-37.1.8
                                                  7         Amends 2-37.1.9
                                                               (a)
21004            6-26-91            7-1-91           1         Amends
                                                               28-130.9
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-130.12
21009            8-14-91                            1         Amends 2-155(h)
21010            8-14-91                            1         Amends 2-153(e)
21011            8-14-91                            1         Amends
                                                               13-5
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               13-5.1
21012            8-14-91                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XXI
21021            8-14-91                            1         Amends
                                                               6-6.1
21025            8-28-91            1, 8-26-91       1         Adds 1.9
                                  4, 5, 9-1-91     2         Amends
                                                               18-12(d)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-17(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-22(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-25(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               27-16
21026            8-28-91            9-1-91           1         Amends
                                                               15C-1(5)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15C-2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               15C-3
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               15C-8
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               15C-12
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               15C-13
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               15C-14
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               15C-14.1
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               15C-15(b)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               15C-15(e)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               15C-16(c)
21030            8-28-91                            1         Adds
                                                               31-35
21035            8-28-91                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 15A, Art. I
21037            9-11-91                            1         Amends
                                                               32-21
                                                  2         Amends 32-22.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               32-35
                                                               Changes name of
                                                               Ch. 16 and
21038            9-11-91            10-1-91          1         incorporates
                                                               into Uniform
                                                               Fire Code
                                                               Amends
21045            9-11-91            1-1-92           1         49-60(f),
                                                               49-60(g)
21055            9-25-91                            1         Amends
                                                               20A-4(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               20A-5(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               20A-5(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               20A-12(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               20A-14(a)
21056            9-25-91                            1         Amends
                                                               15D-4(d)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-6(c)
21057            9-25-91            10-1-91          1         Amends
                                                               15C-2
                                                  2         Amends 27-18(a)
21058            9-25-91            10-1-91          1         Amends
                                                               18-2(4)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-3(b)(2)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-4(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               18-11
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               Ch. 18, Art. IV
                                                               Adds
21059            9-25-91            10-1-91          1         Ch. 2, Art.
                                                               XXVIII
21060            9-25-91            10-1-91          1         Adds
                                                               2-168
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               2-169
21061            9-25-91            10-1-91          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)(5)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)(6)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.2(e)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-18.12
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-49(a)
21080            10-9-91                            1         Amends 7-9(c)
21091            10-23-91                           1         Amends
                                                               2-164(a)
21108            11-13-91                           1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 19, Art. IX
21109            11-13-91           1-1-92           1         Amends
                                                               41-2(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               41-2(d)
21118            11-13-91           2-3-93 per Ord.  1         Amends
                                    21155                      8-1.1(a)
21129            11-13-91                           1         Amends 2-79
21131            11-13-91                           1         Amends
                                                               37-32(d)
21132            11-20-91                           1         Adds
                                                               8-28
21144            12-11-91                           1         Amends
                                                               5A-3(4)(E)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               5A-6
21153            12-11-91                           1         Amends
                                                               2-95
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-126
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-130
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-140
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-150
                                                  6         Amends 2-153
                                                  7         Amends 2-155
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               2-157
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               2-161
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               24-7
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               27-6
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               37-31
                                                  13        Amends 46-14
21154            12-11-91                           1         Amends
                                                               27-6(a)
21155            12-11-91                           1         Amends Ord.
                                                               21118
21157            12-11-91                           1         Amends
                                                               2-17.2(a)
21162            1-8-92                             1         Amends
                                                               19-28
21163            1-8-92                             1         Amends
                                                               18-31
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-32
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-33
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-35
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-36
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               18-37
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               18-38
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               18-39
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               18-40
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               18-42
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               18-43
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               18-45
21172            1-22-92                            1         Amends
                                                               50-4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               50-79
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               50-84.1
                                                  4         Repeals 50-
                                                               5 through 50-35
                                                  5         Repeals 50-78
21175            1-22-92                            1         Amends
                                                               15D-10
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-16
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               15D-18
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               15D-23.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               15D-27
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               15D-28(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               15D-29
                                                  8         Adds 15D-29.1
21176            1-22-92                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 32, Art. VI
21184            1-22-92                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 14
21185            1-22-92                            1         Amends
                                                               2-96
21186            1-22-92                            1         Amends
                                                               18-2(41)
                                                               Renumbers
                                                               28-2 (a)(3)
                                                  2         through(26) as
                                                               (4) through
                                                               (27), Adds
                                                               28-2(a)(3)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-2(a)(20)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-8
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-10(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-70
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               36-11
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               43-7
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               43-32
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               43-94(b)
                                                               Renumbers
                                                               28-2(a)(6)
21194            2-12-92                            1         through (27) as
                                                               (7) through (28)
                                                               Adds
                                                               28-2(a)(6)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-26(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-94
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-95
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-96
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-96.1
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               28-114.1
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               28-114.2
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               28-115
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               28-116
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               28-117(a)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               28-130.9(b)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               28-130.11
21200            2-26-92                            1         Amends
                                                               27-6
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-7
21215            3-11-92                            1         Amends
                                                               19-83.2
21237            3-25-92                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
21238            3-25-92                            1         Repeals
                                                               15D-23.1(f)
21251            4-8-92                             1         Amends
                                                               19-28
21262            4-8-92                             1         Amends 2-122.2
21282            5-13-92                            1         Amends
                                                               48A-6(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               48A-6(b)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               48A-9(e)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               48A-9(i)
21304            5-27-92                            1         Amends
                                                               34-37(d)
                                                  2         Retitles
                                                               34-40
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-40(c)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-40(h)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-40(m)
21309            6-10-92                            1         Amends
                                                               31-33
21310            6-10-92                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 39B
                                                  2         Repeals Ord.
                                                               20241
                                                  3         Repeals Ch. 22
                                                               and Ch. 33
21311            6-10-92                            1         Adds 15D-10.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-27
21334            6-24-92                            1         Amends
                                                               49-9(c)
21352            6-24-92                            1         Amends
                                                               6-6.1
21354            6-24-92                            1         Amends
                                                               2-84
21363            8-12-92                            1         Repeals Ch. 26
                                                               Creates
21381            8-19-92            Expires 8-19-93  1         Ch. 31, Art. I;
                                                               31-1 thru
                                                               31-40
                                                               Adds Ch. 31,
                                                  2         Art. II;
                                                               31-41 thru 31-76
21385            8-26-92                            1         Amends
                                                               6-6.1
21406            8-26-92                            1         Amends 7-22.2(b)
                                                               Replaces and
                                                               retitles
                                                  2         Ch. 7, Art. III;
                                                               adds new 7-33
                                                               thru 7-41
                                                               Repeals Ch. 42,
21407            8-26-92                            1         Art. I; 42-
                                                               1 thru 42-12
21409            9-9-92             4-16-93          1         Amends
                                                               49-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-41
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-42
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-45
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-46(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-48(a),(b)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-52(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-53
21421            9-23-92                            1         Amends
                                                               2-37.12
21429            9-23-92            10-1-92          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
21430            9-23-92            10-1-92          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.2(e)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.3
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-18.11
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               49-18.12
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               49-35(b)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               49-48(a)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               49-49(c)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               49-49(d)
21431            9-23-92            10-1-92          1         Amends 7-24(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               15D-4(c)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-11
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               24-2
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               24-4(e)(1)
                                                  8         Amends 45-6.4(h)
                                                  9         Amends 45-7.2(f)
                                                  25        Repeals 24-4(i)
21435            9-23-92                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 48A
21443            10-14-92                           1         Adds
                                                               31-36
21450            10-28-92                           1         Repeals Ch. 23
                                                               and 31-57
21491            12-9-92            1-1-93           1         Amends
                                                               49-60(f)(7)
21514            12-9-92                            1         Amends
                                                               2-95
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-126
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-130
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-140
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-150
                                                  6         Amends 2-153
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               24-7
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               37-31
21515            12-9-92                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XX
                                                  2         Amends 2-155
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-157
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XXVI
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               13-5.1
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               27-6
                                                  7         Amends 39B-15
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               Ch. 46, Art. II
21528            1-13-93                            1         Amends 7-1
                                                  2         Amends 7-10
                                                  3         Amends 7-17
                                                  4         Amends 7-24
                                                  5         Amends 7-26
                                                  6         Amends 7-27
                                                  7         Amends 7-28
                                                  8         Adds 7-32.1
                                                  9         Adds 7-32.2
21540            1-13-93            3-15-93          1         Amends
                                                               41-9
                                                               Adds Art. V,
                                                  2         41-10,
                                                               41-11
21564            2-10-93                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
21582            2-24-93            5-1-93           1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 40A
21586            2-24-93                            1         Amends 7-9
21587            2-24-93            3-1-93           1         Amends
                                                               15D-2(b)
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 28, Art. XI,
21598            3-10-93                            1         Div. 5B,
                                                               28-121.7 thru
                                                               28-121.11
21606            3-24-93                            1         Amends
                                                               49-2(c),(d)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-25
21612            3-24-93                            1         Amends
                                                               28-76.4
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 28, Art. XI,
                                                  2         Div. 7,
                                                               28-129 thru
                                                               28-130.13
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-114.12
                                                               Amends
21613            3-24-93            3-15-93          1         Ch 41, Art. V,
                                                               41-10 thru
                                                               41-12
21614            3-24-93                            1         Amends
                                                               41-2(a)
21629            4-14-93                            1         Amends
                                                               41A-5(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               41A-10
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               41A-13
21632            4-14-93                            1         Amends
                                                               18-4(a)(2)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-8
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               18-9(c)(6)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-13
21663            5-12-93                            1         Adds
                                                               49-18.7(h)
21664            5-12-93                            1         Amends 39B-15(c)
21667            5-12-93                            1         Adds
                                                               31-34
21674            5-26-93                            1         Amends
                                                               2-27
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-28
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               2-81
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-38(f)(4)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-40(o)
21721            6-23-93                            1         Repeals 37-18
21735            6-23-93                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 6
21765            8-11-93                            1         Amends
                                                               2-130
                                                               Repeals Ch. 46,
21768            8-11-93                            1         Art II; 46-13
                                                               thru 46-18
21789            8-25-93                            1         Amends
                                                               28-114.12
21804            9-8-93                             1         Amends
                                                               13-5.1
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               13-5.2
21819            9-22-93            10-1-93          1         Amends 10-17(e)
                                                  2         Amends 10A-17
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               15D-17(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(2)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               18-11
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               18-34
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               18-41
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               28-4
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               28-5
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               28-5.1(c)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               28-96.1
                                                  13        Amends 45-3.2(d)
                                                  14        Amends 45-3.2(f)
21823            9-22-93            10-1-93          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-168(c)
21824            9-22-93            10-1-93          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.11
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.16
21828            9-29-93                            1         Amends
                                                               6-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               6-6.1
21836            10-13-93                           1         Repeals Ch. 46
21837            10-13-93                           1         Amends
                                                               14-1(1)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               14-1(14)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               14-1(15)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               14-2
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               14-2.3
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               14-3
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               14-3.1
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               14-4
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               14-9
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               14-11
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               14-12
21838            10-13-93                           1         Amends
                                                               41A-2(15)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               41A-2(19)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               41A-4(e)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               41A-5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               41A-6
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               41A-8
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               41A-11
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               41A-17
21854            10-13-93                           1         Amends
                                                               27-6(a)
                                                  2         Amends 27-7
21856            10-13-93                           1         Repeals 2-37.1.3
                                                               thru 2-37.1.9
21861 (As
amended by Ord.  10-27-93           11-1-93          1         Amends
21949 on 1-12-                                                 Ch. 15D, Art. I
94)
21862            10-27-93           11-1-93          1         Amends
                                                               49-42
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-45(c)
21874            10-27-93                           1         Amends
                                                               44-17
21877            10-27-93                           1         Amends
                                                               2-37.2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-37.4
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-37.6
21878            10-27-93                           1         Amends
                                                               30-4
21933            10-8-93                            1         Amends
                                                               8-1.4(a)
21934            12-8-93                            1         Amends Ch. 42A
21961            1-26-94                            1         Adds 2-121(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               8-14
21962            1-26-94                            1         Amends
                                                               19-19
21972            2-9-94                             1         Amends
                                                               2-102(2)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-105(a)
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art.
                                                  3         XXVI,
                                                               2-161 thru
                                                               2-162
21973            2-9-94                             1         Amends
                                                               13-1
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               13-1.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               27-5.1
22036            4-27-94            6-1-94           1         Adds
                                                               31-37
22026            4-20-94            7-1-94           1         Amends
                                                               2-17.2(d)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-18
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-37.12
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-39
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-42
                                                               Amends
                                                  6         Ch. 2, Art. V-b,
                                                               2-46 thru
                                                               2-47
                                                               Amends
                                                  7         Ch. 2, Art. V-c,
                                                               2-48 thru 2-49
                                                               Amends
                                                  8         Ch. 2, Art. V-e,
                                                               2-52 thru
                                                               2-53
                                                               Adds
                                                  9         Ch. 2, Art. VI,
                                                               2-61 thru
                                                               2-62
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. VII-
                                                  10        a,
                                                               2-73 thru
                                                               2-74
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art.
                                                  11        VIII-a,
                                                               2-81 thru
                                                               2-85
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               2-105(a)
                                                               Adds
                                                  13        Ch. 2, Art. XV,
                                                               2-133 thru
                                                               2-134
                                                               Amends
                                                  14        Ch. 2, Art. XVI,
                                                               2-136 thru
                                                               2-137
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art.
                                                  15        XVII,
                                                               2-138 thru
                                                               2-139
                                                               Amends
                                                  16        Ch. 2, Art. XIX,
                                                               2-142 thru
                                                               2-143
                                                  17        Amends 2-148(c)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               9A-2(b)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               9A-3(a)(9)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               9A-12
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               9B-6
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               9B-7
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               14-6(a)
                                                  24        Amends 15A-12
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               18-2(12)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               18-2(13)
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               18-2(40)
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               18-12(e)
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               18-18(a)
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               19-44
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               19-96
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               19-113
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               19-123(d)
                                                  37        Amends
                                                               27-6(d)
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               28-19
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               28-24
                                                  40        Amends
                                                               28-29
                                                  41        Amends
                                                               28-76.4(a)
                                                  42        Amends
                                                               28-113
                                                  43        Amends
                                                               28-114.12(a)
                                                  44        Amends
                                                               28-127
                                                  45        Amends
                                                               28-128
                                                  46        Amends
                                                               28-128.6
                                                  47        Amends
                                                               28-128.7
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 28, Art. XI,
                                                  48        Div. 6B,
                                                               28-128.8 thru
                                                               28-128.16
                                                  49        Amends
                                                               28-130.7(e)
                                                  50        Amends
                                                               28-130.12(a)
                                                  51        Amends
                                                               28-156
                                                  52        Amends
                                                               28-164
                                                  53        Amends
                                                               28-194
                                                  54        Amends 29-2(2)
                                                  55        Amends
                                                               30-2(h)
                                                  56        Amends
                                                               34-1
                                                  57        Amends
                                                               34-6
                                                  58        Amends
                                                               34-8(b)
                                                  59        Amends
                                                               34-9(c)
                                                  60        Amends
                                                               34-13(a)
                                                  61        Amends
                                                               34-13(d)
                                                  62        Amends
                                                               34-22(k)
                                                  63        Amends
                                                               34-22(s)
                                                  64        Amends
                                                               34-28(c)
                                                  65        Amends
                                                               34-31(a)
                                                  66        Amends
                                                               34-32(b)
                                                  67        Amends
                                                               34-37(a)
                                                  68        Amends
                                                               34-38(c)(2)
                                                  69        Amends
                                                               34-43(d)
                                                  70        Amends
                                                               34-43(i)
                                                  71        Amends
                                                               34-44
                                                  72        Amends
                                                               34-45(c)
                                                  73        Amends 35-4(c)
                                                  74        Amends
                                                               36-46
                                                  75        Amends
                                                               36-49
                                                  76        Amends 39-2(4)
                                                  77        Amends 39-2(5)
                                                  78        Amends 39-4(a)
                                                  79        Amends
                                                               39C-19(b)
                                                  80        Amends
                                                               41A-7(a)
                                                  81        Amends
                                                               42A-7(c)
                                                  82        Amends
                                                               43-32
                                                  83        Amends
                                                               43-35
                                                  84        Amends
                                                               43-36
                                                  85        Amends
                                                               43-37
                                                  86        Amends
                                                               43-44
                                                  87        Amends
                                                               43-49
                                                  88        Amends
                                                               43-50
                                                  89        Amends
                                                               43-54
                                                  90        Amends
                                                               43-55
                                                  91        Amends
                                                               43-56
                                                  92        Amends
                                                               43-63
                                                  93        Amends
                                                               43-66
                                                  94        Amends
                                                               43-68
                                                  95        Amends
                                                               43-74
                                                  96        Amends
                                                               43-79
                                                  97        Amends
                                                               43-116(b)
                                                  98        Amends
                                                               43-120
                                                  99        Amends
                                                               43-121(c)
                                                  100       Amends
                                                               43-126.3(2)
                                                  101       Amends
                                                               43-126.5(d)
                                                  102       Amends
                                                               43-135
                                                  103       Adds 43-139.2
                                                  104       Amends
                                                               43-142
                                                  105       Amends
                                                               43-143
                                                  106       Amends
                                                               43-145
                                                  107       Amends
                                                               44-34(3)
                                                  108       Amends
                                                               47-14
                                                  109       Amends
                                                               47-17
                                                  110       Amends
                                                               47-20
                                                  111       Amends
                                                               49-18.13
                                                  112       Amends
                                                               49-27(a)
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. V-a, 2-43
                                                               thru 2-44;
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. VII, 2-71
                                                  137       thru 2-72;
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. XXV, 2-159
                                                               thru 2-160;
                                                               Repeals Ch. 14A;
                                                               Repeals 19-1.1
                                                               Amends
22038            4-27-94                            1         Ch. 15C, Art. I,
                                                               15C-1 thru
                                                               15C-16
22040            4-27-94                            1         Amends
                                                               17-9.2(j)
22061            5-25-94                            1         Amends
                                                               3-1
22064            5-25-94                            1         Adds
                                                               31-38
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               31-39
22067            6-1-94                             1         Amends
                                                               32-22
                                                  2         Amends 32-22.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               32-23
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               32-24
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               32-25
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               32-26
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               32-27
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               32-28
                                                  9         Adds
                                                               32-28.1
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               32-28.2
22072            6-8-94                             1         Amends
                                                               19-28
22073            6-8-94                             1         Amends
                                                               32-9.1
22094            6-22-94                            1         Amends 17-9.17
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               30-2.1
22140            8-10-94                            1         Repeals
                                                               6A-3
22141            8-10-94                            1         Amends 15A-12(b)
22153            8-10-94                            1         Amends
                                                               2-37.2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-37.4
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-37.7
22154            8-10-94                            1         Amends
                                                               27-3(20)
                                                               Amends
                                                  2         Ch. 27, Art. V,
                                                               27-17 thru 27-23
                                                               Adds
22172            8-24-94                            1         Ch. 2, Art. XXV,
                                                               2-159 thru 2-
                                                               160.1
22174            8-24-94                            1         Amends 2-122.1
22195            9-14-94                            1         Amends
                                                               34-4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-6
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-9(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-19
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-20
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               34-22(k)
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               34-22(v)
                                                  8         Adds
                                                               34-23(r)
                                                  9         Adds
                                                               34-24(g)
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               34-24.1
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               34-28(b)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               34-30(c)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               34-35(b)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               34-38(g)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               34-38(h)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               34-38(i)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               34-39(a)
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 27, Art.
22205            9-28-94            10-1-94          1         VII,
                                                               27-29 thru
                                                               27-43
22206            9-28-94            10-1-94          1         Amends
                                                               9A-4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               14-4(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(4)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               18-11
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               24-4
                                                  10        Amends 27-18(a)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               28-170
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               39B-9
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               41A-6(a)
22207            9-28-94            10-1-94          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-168(c)
22208            9-28-94            10-1-94          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.11
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.14
22214            9-28-94                            1         Amends 2-122.4
22216            9-28-94                            1         Amends
                                                               43-115
                                                               Renumbers 45-1.5
22222            10-12-94           1-1-95           1         (1) thru (20) as
                                                               (2) thru (21)
                                                           Adds 45-1.5(1)
                                                  2         Amends 45-7.2(a)
                                                  3         Amends 45-7.2(b)
                                                  4         Adds 45-7.2.1
22259            11-9-94                            1         Amends
                                                               2-95(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-126(a)
                                                  3         Amends 2-147
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-161(a)
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               8-1.5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               8-9
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               37-31(b)
                                                  10        Amends 39B-15(a)
22268            11-16-94                           1         Amends 2-159
                                                  2         Amends 2-160.1
22277            12-14-94                           1         Amends
                                                               2-17.2
22295            12-14-94                           1         Amends
                                                               18-4(e)
22296            1-11-95                            1         Amends
                                                               34-4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-5(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-9(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-10
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-11(g)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               34-11(i)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               34-12(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               34-13
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               34-16
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               34-17
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               34-18(a)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               34-21
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               34-22(e)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               34-22(h)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               34-22(r)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               34-23(a)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               34-23(n)
                                                  18        Adds
                                                               34-23(q)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               34-30(d)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               34-32(a)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               34-35(b)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(2)
                                                               Amends
                                                  23        34-36(b)(16) and
                                                               renumbers as
                                                               34-36(b)(17)
                                                  24        Adds
                                                               34-36(b)(16)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               34-38(a)
                                                               Repeals 34-2,
                                                  26        34-22(l), and
                                                               34-43
22306            1-11-95                            1         Amends
                                                               18-8(b)(3)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(6)
22318            1-25-95                            1         Repeals Ord.
                                                               22296
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-4
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-5(c)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-9(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-10
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               34-11(g)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               34-11(i)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               34-12(b)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               34-13
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               34-16
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               34-17
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               34-18(a)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               34-21
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               34-22(e)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               34-22(h)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               34-22(r)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               34-23(a)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               34-23(n)
                                                  19        Adds
                                                               34-23(q)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               34-30(d)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               34-32(a)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               34-35(b)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(2)
                                                               Amends
                                                  24        34-36(b)(16) and
                                                               renumbers as
                                                               34-36(b)(17)
                                                  25        Adds
                                                               34-36(b)(16)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               34-38(a)
                                                               Repeals 34-2,
                                                  27        34-22(l), and
                                                               34-43
22321            1-25-95                            1         Amends
                                                               13-5.2(c)
                                                               Renumbers 7-1(8)
22324            2-8-95                             1         thru (18) as (9)
                                                               thru (19), and
                                                               adds 7-1(8)
22333            2-8-95                             1         Amends 45-7.2(c)
22334            2-8-95                             1         Amends
                                                               18-12
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-12.1(b)
22340            2-22-95                            1         Amends
                                                               28-129
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-130.9(a)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               28-130.9(f)
22345            2-2-95             5-6-95           1         Amends
                                                               40A-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               40A-4(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               40A-14(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               40A-14(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               40A-15(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               40A-16(d)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               40A-18(b)
                                                  8         Adds
                                                               40A-20.1
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               40A-21(b)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               40A-21(c)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               40A-21(g)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               40A-27
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               40A-28
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               40A-33(a)(3)
                                                               Renumbers
                                                               40A-33(a)(4)
                                                  15        thru (6) as (5)
                                                               thru (7), and
                                                               adds new (4)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               40A-33(f)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               40A-33(l)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               40A-33(m)(2)
                                                  19        Adds
                                                               40A-33(p)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               40A-34(b)
22354            3-8-95                             1         Amends
                                                               2-151
22355            3-8-94                             1         Adds
                                                               31-17
22356            3-8-95             3-8-95           1         Adds
                                                               2-3.1
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. IV-
                                                  2         a,
                                                               2-38 thru
                                                               2-40
22368            3-22-95                                     Amends
                                                               11-1
22402            5-10-95                            1         Adds
                                                               1-10
22403            5-10-95                            1         Amends
                                                               2-37.4
22404            5-10-95                            1         Amends
                                                               32-9.1
22413            5-10-95                            1         Amends
                                                               18-14
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-14.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-21
                                                  4         Repeals 43-1
22414            5-10-95                            1         Amends
                                                               2-17.2
                                                               Amends
                                                  2         Ch. 2, Art. XIV,
                                                               2-130,
                                                               2-131
                                                               Amends
                                                  3         Ch. 2, Art. XXI,
                                                               2-150 thru
                                                               2-152
                                                               Amends
                                                  4         Ch. 2, Art.
                                                               XXIII, 2-155, 2-
                                                               156
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art.
                                                  5         XXIV,
                                                               2-157,
                                                               2-158
                                                               Amends
                                                  6         Ch. 24, Art. II,
                                                               24-7,
                                                               24-8
22416            5-10-95                            1         Adds
                                                               14-2.4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               14-9(a)
22434            5-24-95                            1         Amends
                                                               2-33
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-34
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-35
                                                  4         Amends 2-37
                                                  5         Amends 2-37.1.1
                                                  6         Amends 2-37.1.2
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               2-42
22438            5-24-95                            1         Amends 7-22
22442            6-14-95                            1         Amends
                                                               5A-5(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               5A-6
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               5A-14(a)
22494            6-28-95                            1         Adds
                                                               7A-19.1
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               7A-19.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-12
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-17
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-18
22495            6-28-95                            1         Amends
                                                               8-1.4
22496            6-28-95                            1         Amends
                                                               13-5(c)
22537            9-13-95                            1         Amends
                                                               6-4
22563            9-27-95            10-1-95          1         Amends
                                                               2-168
22564            9-27-95            10-1-95          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.10
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.12
22565            9-27-95            10-1-95          1         Amends
                                                               15D-5(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-11
22569            9-27-95            9-1-95           1         Amends
                                                               19-28(a)
22570            9-27-95                            1         Amends
                                                               8-1.5
                                                               Amends
22571            9-27-95            10-1-95, except  1         Ch. 15C, Art. I,
                                    15C-2(b), 1-1-96           15C-1 thru
                                                               15C-17
22584            10-11-95                           1         Adds 2-122(c)
22612            12-6-95            12-6-95          1         Amends
                                                               2-164
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-165
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               13-5.2
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-40(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-40(d)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               34-40(e)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               34-40(f)
22619            12-13-95                           1         Amends
                                                               6-13
22643            12-13-95                           1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
22665            2-7-96                             1         Amends
                                                               2-168
22669            2-14-96                            1         Amends
                                                               13-7
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               13-8
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               13-28.1
22676            2-14-96                            1         Amends 2-122(c)
22695            2-28-96                            1         Amends
                                                               27-4(b)
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 27, Art.
                                                  2         VII,
                                                               27-29 thru
                                                               27-43
22709            3-13-96                            1         Amends 2-159
                                                  2         Amends 2-160.1
22710            3-13-96                            1         Amends 45-7.2.1
22718            4-10-96                            1         Amends
                                                               2-164
22731            4-10-96                            1         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
22762            5-22-96                            1         Amends
                                                               28-26
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-103
22763            5-22-96                            1         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(f)
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 28, Art.
                                                  5         XVIII,
                                                               28-200 thru
                                                               28-202
22764            5-22-96            9-1-96           1         Creates
                                                               Ch. 9, Art. I
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         Ch. 9, Art. II,
                                                               9-7 thru
                                                               9-10
                                                               Amends
22765            5-22-96            Reconsidered 6-           Chs. 10,
                                    12-96                      10A, and
                                                               45
22789            6-26-96                            1         Amends
                                                               17-1.5(2)
                                                               Renumbers
                                                               17-1.5(3) thru
                                                  2         (32) as (4) thru
                                                               (33); Adds
                                                               17-1.5(3)
                                                  3         Amends new
                                                               17-1.5(17)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               17-6.2
                                                  5         Amends 17-6.3
                                                  6         Amends 17-6.4
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 17, Art.
                                                  7         VIII, Div. 1,
                                                               17-8.1 thru 17-
                                                               8.9
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               17-9.2
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               17-9.3
                                                  10        Amends 17-9.4
                                                  11        Amends 17-9.5
                                                  12        Amends 17-9.7
                                                  13        Amends 17-9.15
                                                               Renumbers 10-5
22805            6-26-96                            1         (1) thru (23) as
                                                               (2) thru (24);
                                                               Adds new 10-5(1)
                                                  2         Amends 10-36
                                                  3         Adds 10-49.1
                                                  4         Amends 10A-5
                                                  5         Amends 10A-36
                                                  6         Amends 45-4.4
22842            8-14-96                            1         Repeals Ch. 20
22850            8-28-96                            1         Amends
                                                               32-11.3(b)
                                                               Amends Ord.
                                                  2         20336, 5 (eff.
                                                               date of
                                                               32-11.3)
                                                               Amends Ord.
22851            8-28-96                            1         20680, 5 (eff.
                                                               date of
                                                               32-9.1)
22873            9-11-96                            1         Adds
                                                               2-37.15
22894            9-25-96                            1         Amends
                                                               5A-6
22906            9-25-96            10-1-96          1         Amends Ord.
                                                               19860, 1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(2)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               27-33
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-4(b)
22907            9-25-96            10-1-96          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
22910            10-9-96                            1         Amends
                                                               15C-2(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15C-7
22925            10-23-96                           1         Amends 2-122.2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15A-1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               15A-3
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               15A-11
                                                  5         Amends 15A-12(a)
                                                  6         Amends 31A-3
22926            10-23-96                           1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
                                                               Amends
22927            10-23-96                           1         Ch. 19, Art. X,
                                                               19-119 thru
                                                               19-131
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.13
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-47(c)
22958            11-13-96           1-15-97          1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 40B
22964            12-11-96                           1         Amends
                                                               28-4(d)
23032            2-12-97                            1         Amends 2-122.4
23078            4-9-97                             1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
                                    5-1-97 until 5-            Readopts and
23079            4-9-97             1-2000           1         amends
                                                               31-33
23106            5-14-97                            1         Amends
                                                               48A-5
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               48A-29
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               48A-33
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               48A-35
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               48A-36
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               48A-36.1
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               48A-36.2
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               48A-40
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               48A-41
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               48A-42(a)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               48A-43
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               48A-44
                                                               Repeals Vehicle
                                                  13        Tow Service Rule
                                                               No. 1
23123            5-14-97                            1         Amends
                                                               8-4
23124            5-14-97                            1         Amends
                                                               13-5.2
23126            5-14-97                            1         Adds 7-21.2
23135            5-28-97                            1         Adds
                                                               2-1.1
23137            5-28-97                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 14
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               41A-2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               41A-13
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               41A-14.1
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               41A-14.2
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               41A-16
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               41A-18.1
23152            5-28-97                            1         Amends 45-1.5
                                                  2         Amends 45-2.4
                                                  3         Amends 45-5.1
23158            6-11-97                            1         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                               Adds
23159            6-11-97            6-16-97          1         Ch. 12,
                                                               12-1 thru
                                                               12-19
23227            8-27-97                            1         Adds
                                                               1-11
23263            9-24-97                            1         Amends
                                                               13-28.1
23264            9-24-97                            1         Amends
                                                               5A-6
                                                               Amends
23267            9-24-97                            1         Ch. 39C,
                                                               39C-1 thru
                                                               39C-21
23289            9-24-97                            1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.6(d)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.7(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.7(c)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.14
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.16
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-60(d)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-61(c)(5)
23294            10-8-97                            1         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
23345            11-12-97                           1         Amends
                                                               2-26.2
                                                               Amends
23386            12-10-97                           1         Ch. 2, Art. IX,
                                                               2-95 thru
                                                               2-100
                                                               Adds
23456            2-25-98                            1         Ch. 44, Art. VI,
                                                               44-40 thru
                                                               44-47
23519            5-27-98                            1         Amends
                                                               1-10
                                                               Readopts
                                                               Ch. 12, with
23534            6-10-98            6-16-98          1         amendments to
                                                               12-2,
                                                               12-3,
                                                               12-10
23555            6-24-98                            1         Amends
                                                               44-34
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               44-35
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               44-35.1
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               44-36
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               44-37
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               44-37.1
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               44-39
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 44, Art.
                                                  8         VII,
                                                               44-48 thru
                                                               44-56
23556            6-24-98                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-59
23616            8-12-98                            1         Amends
                                                               28-42.1
                                                               Adds
23631            9-9-98                             1         Ch. 33,
                                                               33-1 thru
                                                               33-8
23632            9-9-98                             1         Amends
                                                               7A-16
                                                               Adds
23666            9-23-98            10-1-98          1         Ch. 2, Art. VII,
                                                               2-71 and
                                                               2-72
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XVII
23670            9-23-98            10-1-98          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
23694            10-28-98           11-18-98         1         Amends
                                                               2-37.12
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-39
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-42
                                                               Adds
                                                  4         Ch. 2, Art. V-a,
                                                               2-43 thru
                                                               2-45
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. V-b
                                                  6         Amends 2-49
                                                               Adds
                                                  7         Ch. 2, Art. VII-
                                                               b,
                                                               2-75 and 2-75.1
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               2-105(a)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               2-134
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XVI
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XVII
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art.
                                                  12        XVII-a,
                                                               2-139.1 and
                                                               2-139.2
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art.
                                                  13        XXVI-a,
                                                               2-162.1 and
                                                               2-162.2
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               9B-6(a)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               9B-7
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               14-6(a)
                                                  17        Amends 15A-12
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               18-2(13)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               18-2(40)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               27-6(d)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               28-24(a)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               28-127
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               28-128
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               28-128.6
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               28-128.7
                                                               Amends
                                                  26        Ch. 28, Art. XI,
                                                               Div. 6B
                                                  27        Amends 35-4(c)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               41A-7(a)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               42A-7(c)
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               43-63
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               43-121(c)
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               43-126.5(d)
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               49-27(a)
                                                  42        Repeals 2-26.3
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. III,
                                                               Div. 1 (existing
23713            11-11-98                           1         2-21 thru
                                                               2-26.3) and
                                                               Div. 2 (new
                                                               2-26.4 thru
                                                               2-26.14)
23723            12-9-98                            1         Amends
                                                               5A-6
23736            12-9-98                            1         Amends
                                                               2-95.1
23822            3-24-99                            1         Amends
                                                               28-27.1
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 28, Art. XI,
23863            4-28-99                            1         Div. 5C,
                                                               28-121.12
                                                               through
                                                               28-121.18
23864            4-28-99                            1         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(k)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               28-114.1(l)
23869            4-28-99                            1         Adds 7-15.1
                                                               Readopts
                                                               Ch. 12, with
23907            6-9-99             6-16-99          1         amendments to
                                                               12-1,
                                                               12-2
23915            6-23-99                            1         Amends
                                                               44-35
23917            6-23-99                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-59
23934            6-23-99                            1         Amends
                                                               17-1.5(31)
                                                  2         Amends 17-8.12
                                                  3         Amends 17-9.18
23986            8-18-99            9-1-99           1         Adds
                                                               13-28.2
23989            8-25-99                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XX
24000            8-25-99            11-29-99         1         Amends
                                                               18-4(e)
24003            8-25-99                            1         Amends
                                                               13-5.1
24027            9-22-99                            1         Amends
                                                               5A-6
24033            9-22-99                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 19, Art. IX
24046            9-22-99                            1         Amends
                                                               2-26.4(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-26.5(4)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-26.5(8)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-26.6
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-26.9
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               2-26.10(b)
24050            9-22-99            10-1-99          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
24051            9-22-99            10-1-99          1         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(f)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               17-9.3(b)
                                                  4         Amends 17-9.6(a)
                                                  5         Amends 17-9.7(c)
                                                  6         Amends 17-9.8(b)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               41A-6(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               43-112
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               43-115
24052            9-22-99            10-1-99          1         Amends
                                                               34-16(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-17
24053            9-22-99            10-1-99          1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. V-b
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-127
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-128
24057            10-13-99                           1         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(h)
                                                               Renumbers
                                                               27-3(13) through
24086            10-27-99                           1         (23) as
                                                               27-3(14) through
                                                               (24); adds
                                                               27-3(13)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-3(15)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               27-3(24)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               27-6
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               27-7
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               27-8
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               27-9
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               Ch. 27, Art. IV
24089            11-10-99                           1         Amends 10A-5
24141            12-8-99                            1         Amends
                                                               8-1.5(a)
24142            12-8-99                            1         Amends
                                                               18-4(a)(2)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               18-4(a)(4)
                                    [                          Repeals and
24175            1-26-00            48A-36(d) eff.   1         reenacts
                                    2-1-01]                    Ch. 48A
24194            2-23-00                            1         Amends
                                                               2-140(c)
24206            3-8-00                             1         Amends
                                                               14-3(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               14-11
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               41A-5(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               41A-10
24219            4-12-00                            1         Adds
                                                               2-20.1
24233            4-26-00                            1         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(h)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(k)
                                                               Readopts
24235            4-26-00            5-1-00           1         31-33, with an
                                                               amendment to
                                                               31-33(f)
                                                               Amends
24243            4-26-00                            1         2-27 through 2-
                                                               37.1.2
                                                               Readopts
24281            6-14-00            6-16-00          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
24298            6-28-00                            1         Amends
                                                               27-13
24299            6-28-00                            1         Repeals 18-4(a)
                                                               (4)
24312            6-28-00            7-3-00           1         Amends 45-1.5
                                                               (21)
                                                               Amends Ch. 45,
                                                  2         Art. VI (45-6.1
                                                               through 45-6.5)
                                                               Adds
24316            6-28-00            1-1-01           1         Ch. 12A (
                                                               12A-1 through
                                                               12A-43)
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                  2         Art. XII and Ch.
                                                               31A, Art. I
24386            9-13-00                            1         Amends 7-21.2
24410            9-27-00            10-1-00          1         Amends
                                                               2-18
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-27(4)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-28
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XV
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                  6         Art. V (2-41 and
                                                               2-42)
24411            9-27-00            10-1-00          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(a)(7)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-168(c)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-168(d)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               24-4(f)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               24-4(h)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               28-114.1
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               28-114.2
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               28-130.9
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               42A-8
24414            9-27-00            10-1-00          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.11
24415            9-27-00                            1         Amends
                                                               2-84
                                    [Sec.
                                    41A-5(a)(4) and            Amends
                                  (9) and          2         Ch. 41A
                                    41A-7.1 eff. 1-
                                    15-01]
24457            11-15-00                           1         Amends
                                                               27-4
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         Ch. 27, Art. IV-
                                                               a
                                                  3         Repeals 27-10
24481            12-13-00                           1         Amends
                                                               27-11
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-13(n)
                                                               Renumbers
                                                  3         27-13(o) as
                                                               27-13 (p); adds
                                                               27-13(o)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               Ch. 27, Art. VII
24482            12-13-00                           1         Amends 7-5
                                                  2         Amends 7-29
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               32-6
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               32-6.1
24483            12-13-00                           1         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(f)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(m)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(n)
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               28-114.1(o)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-114.2(a)
                                                               Renumbers
                                                               12A-2(16)
                                                               through (30) as
24485            12-13-00           1-1-01           1         12A-2(17)
                                                               through (31);
                                                               adds
                                                               12A-2(16)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               12A-19(b)(2)
24492            1-10-01                            1         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
                                                               Amends Ord.
                                                               24440 to extend
                                                               effective date
24494            1-10-01                            1         of Sec.
                                                               14-3(a)(6) and
                                                               (9) and Sec.
                                                               14-6.1
                                                               Amends
24495            1-24-01            3-1-01           1         Ch. 43, Art.
                                                               VIII
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               Ch. 43, Art. IX
24539            2-28-01                            3         Amends 45-6.1(a)
                                                               (3)
24541            2-28-01            3-5-01           1         Amends
                                                               14-1
                                  3-5-01           2         Amends
                                                               14-2
                                  5-15-01          3         Amends
                                                               14-6.1
                                  3-5-01           4         Amends
                                                               14-10
                                  3-5-01           5         Amends
                                                               14-11
                                  3-5-01           6         Amends
                                                               14-14
                                  3-5-01           7         Repeals 14-3(a)
                                                               (3) and (4)
24554            3-28-01                            1         Amends
                                                               42A-7(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               42A-13(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               43-127(d)
24588            4-11-01                            1         Adds
                                                               2-37.16
                                                  2         Amends 7-17(b)
24607            5-9-01                             1         Amends 7-21.2
                                                               Readopts
24611            5-23-01            6-16-01          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
24622            5-23-01                            1         Amends
                                                               34-25(b)
24637            6-13-01            7-1-01           1         Amends
                                                               1-5
24661            6-27-01            7-1-01           1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 15D, Art. II
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               Ch.15D, Art. III
24699            8-22-01            8-27-01          1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 41A
24720            9-12-01                            1         Amends
                                                               12A-3
24721            9-12-01                            1         Amends
                                                               12A-15
24743            9-26-01            10-1-01          1         Amends
                                                               15C-2(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-5
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-2
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-3(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               18-10
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               18-11
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               18-32
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               18-33
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               18-34
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               18-35
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               18-38
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               18-39
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               18-40
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               18-48
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               18-49
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               28-4
24744            9-26-01            10-1-01          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)(3)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)(4)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
24745            9-26-01            10-1-01          1         Amends
                                                               49-2
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               49-21.1
24763            10-24-01                           1         Amends
                                                               13-3
24824            1-23-02                            1         Amends 2-159
                                                  2         Amends 2-160
                                                  3         Repeals 2-160.1
24835            1-23-02                            1         Amends
                                                               30-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               30-2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               30-2.1
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               30-4(a)(2)
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               30-5
24859            2-27-02                            2         Amends
                                                               5-1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               5-15(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               5-16(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               5-19(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               5-22(b)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               5-25
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               5-28
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               5-29
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               5-31(a)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               5-33
                                                  12        Amends 5-53
                                                  13        Amends 5-54
                                                  14        Amends 5-55(a)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               Ch. 28, Art. XII
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               31-9(b)
24867            3-27-02                            1         Amends
                                                               28-55
                                                  2         Repeals 28-57
24882            4-10-02                            1         Amends
                                                               28-103
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(m)
                                                               Renumbers and
                                                  4         amends
                                                               28-114.1(n)
                                                               Renumbers and
                                                  5         amends
                                                               28-114.1(o)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-114.2(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               28-114.2(d)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               28-114.2(g)
24927            5-8-02                             1         Amends
                                                               15B-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15B-3
                                  10-1-02          3         Adds
                                                               Ch. 46
24929            5-8-02                             1         Amends
                                                               24-4(e)
24930            5-8-02             5-13-02          1         Amends
                                                               34-19(a)(3)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-19(a)(5)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-19(b)(8)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-22(t)(4)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-23(p)(5)
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               34-24(e)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               34-38(a)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               34-38(i)
                                                  9         Adds
                                                               34-38(j)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               34-39(a)(4)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               34-39(b)(1)
                                                  12        Adds
                                                               34-39(g)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               34-40(a)(4)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               34-42(a)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               34-43(a)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               34-43(c)
                                                               Amends Ord.
                                                  17        24873, 5 (eff.
                                                               date of
                                                               34-24.1)
                                                               Readopts
24943            5-22-02            6-16-02          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
24946            5-22-02            6-1-02           1         Amends
                                                               13-3
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               13-4
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               13-5
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               13-5.2
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               13-8
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               13-16(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               13-17
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               13-18(a)
24961            6-12-02                            1         Amends
                                                               27-2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               27-8
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               27-9
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               27-13
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               27-14
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               27-16.1
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               27-16.2
24978            6-26-02                            1         Amends
                                                               13-3(c)
                                                  2         Repeals 13-19
25002            8-14-02            9-1-02           1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. IX
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               14-2.3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               14-2.4(c)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               14-3.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               41A-14(c)
25041            9-25-02                            1         Adds
                                                               2-17.3
25051            9-30-02                            1         Amends
                                                               34-9(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-39(f)(4)
25047            9-30-02            10-1-02          1         Amends
                                                               2-26.7(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-26.7(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-27(4)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-28
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-37.16
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. V
                                                  7         Amends 2-49
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               2-98
                                                  9         Amends 2-148(c)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               14-4(c)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               41A-6(c)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               43-121(c)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               43-126.5(d)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               49-1(24)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               49-1(26)
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. IV-a, 2-38
                                                               thru 2-40;
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                  106       Art. VII-a, 2-73
                                                               thru 2-74;
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. VII-b, 2-75
                                                               thru 2-75.1
25048            9-30-02            10-1-02          1         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(f)
                                                  3         Amends 10-17(g)
                                                  4         Amends 10-17(h)
                                                  5         Amends 10-20
                                                  6         Amends 10-26
                                                  7         Amends 10A-17
                                                  8         Amends 10A-26
                                                  9         Amends 10B-17(f)
                                                  10        Amends 10B-20
                                                  11        Amends 10B-26
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               14-4
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               15D-9.10
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               15D-9.16
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               15D-9.31(c)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               15D-58(b)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               17-9.3(b)
                                                  19        Amends 17-9.4(a)
                                                  20        Amends 17-9.5
                                                  21        Amends 17-9.6
                                                  22        Amends 17-9.7
                                                  23        Amends 17-9.8(b)
                                                  24        Amends 17-9.11
                                                  25        Amends 17-9.23
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               19-28
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               24-2
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               24-4(e)
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               41A-6
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               43A-17
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               43A-18
                                                  33        Amends 45-3.2(f)
                                                  34        Amends 45-3.3
                                                  35        Amends 45-3.9
                                                  36        Amends 45-6.4(h)
                                                  37        Amends 45-7.2
                                                  38        Amends 50-159.1
                                                               (c)
25049            9-30-02            10-1-02          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.6
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.7
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.16
25092            10-23-02                           2         Amends
                                                               41A-13(g), (h)
25124            12-11-02           3-1-03           1         Amends
                                                               5-33
25142            12-11-02           12-15-02         1         Amends
                                                               34-19(b)(10)
25168            1-22-03            3-1-03           1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 41
25174            2-12-03                            1         Amends
                                                               6-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               6-4
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               6-6.1
25200            2-26-03                            1         Amends 45-7.2.1
25203            3-5-03                             1         Amends
                                                               12A-10
25213            3-26-03            4-15-03          1         Adds
                                                               28-63.3
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               31-35
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               50-156
                                                               Repeals Ch. 42,
                                                  4         Art. I-a, 42-13
                                                               thru 42-16
25214            3-26-03                            1         Amends
                                                               49-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-42(f)
25215            4-2-03                             1         Amends 10-36(a)
                                                  2         Amends 10A-36(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               15D-46(a)
                                                  4         Amends 45-4.4(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               48A-29(a)
                                                               Readopts
25231            4-9-03             5-1-03           1         31-33, with an
                                                               amendment to
                                                               31-33(f)
25236            4-9-03                             1         Amends
                                                               12A-19
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               12A-26
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               12A-29
25256            5-28-03                            1         Amends
                                                               49-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-42(f)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-42(g)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-45(f)
                                                               Readopts
25269            5-28-03            6-16-03          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
25274            5-28-03                            1         Amends
                                                               28-42.1
25296            6-18-03                            1         Amends
                                                               41A-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               41A-2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               41A-3
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               41A-14.2
25322            6-25-03                            1         Adds
                                                               6-14
25331            6-25-03                            1         Amends 45-4.4(c)
25365            9-10-03                            1         Amends 45-3.10
25371            9-24-03                            1         Amends
                                                               1-5
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               7A-2(3)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               7A-19.1
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               7A-19.2(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-12
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               18-17
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               18-18(a)
25384            9-24-03            10-1-03          1         Amends
                                                               2-168
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               19-28
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-4(b)(6)
25385            9-24-03            10-1-03          1         Amends
                                                               49-10
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.3
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.6
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.7
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.8
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-18.16
25386            9-24-03                            1         Amends
                                                               34-22(t)
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
25387            9-24-03                            1         Art. XXII, 2-153
                                                               thru 2-154
25388            9-24-03                            1         Amends 7-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               7-1.2
                                                  3         Amends 7-2
                                                  4         Amends 7-7
                                                  5         Amends 7-10
                                                  6         Amends 7-11
                                                  7         Amends 7-18(f)
                                                  8         Amends 7-18.1
                                                  9         Amends 7-18.2
                                                  10        Amends 7-20
                                                  11        Amends 7-22
                                                  12        Amends 7-22.1(a)
                                                  13        Amends 7-23
                                                  14        Amends 7-24
                                                  15        Amends 7-25
                                                  16        Amends 7-26
                                                  17        Amends 7-27
                                                  18        Amends 7-28
                                                  19        Amends 7-28.1(f)
                                                  20        Amends 7-29
                                                  21        Amends 7-32
                                                  22        Amends 7-32.1(c)
                                                  23        Amends 7-32.2
                                                  24        Amends 10B-48(c)
25389            9-24-03            10-22-03         1         Amends
                                                               34-17
                                  10-22-03         2         Amends
                                                               34-19
                                  10-1-03          3         Adds
                                                               34-31
                                  10-1-03          4         Amends
                                                               34-38(f)(4)
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 34, Art.
                                  10-1-03          5         VII,
                                                               34-42 thru
                                                               34-45
25409            10-22-03                           1         Adds
                                                               43-140.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               43-141
25424            10-22-03                           1         Amends
                                                               9A-3
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               9A-8
25425            10-22-03                           1         Amends
                                                               39A-5(p)(3)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               39A-6(j)
25438            11-12-03                           1         Adds
                                                               43-148
25439            11-12-03           1-15-04          1         Adds
                                                               31-40
25443            12-8-03                            1         Amends
                                                               2-26.4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-26.6
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-26.10
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-26.12
25457            12-8-03            12-15-03         1         Amends 45-1.3
                                                  2         Amends 45-2.10
                                                  3         Amends 45-2.12
                                                  4         Amends 45-3.2
                                                  5         Amends 45-3.12
                                                  6         Amends 45-3.13
                                                  7         Amends 45-4.1
                                                  8         Amends 45-4.3
                                                  9         Amends 45-4.4
                                                  10        Amends 45-6.1
                                                  11        Amends 45-6.2
                                                  12        Amends 45-6.3
                                                  13        Amends 45-6.5
                                                  14        Amends 45-7.2
                                                  15        Amends 45-7.3
                                                  16        Amends 45-8.1
                                                  17        Amends 45-8.2
                                                  18        Amends 45-8.3
                                                  19        Amends 45-8.5
                                                  20        Amends 45-8.6
25464            12-8-03                            1         Adds
                                                               2-16
25465            12-8-03                            1         Amends
                                                               6-4
25478            1-14-04                            1         Amends
                                                               2-140
25495            2-11-04                            1         Amends
                                                               2-17.2
25496            2-11-04                            1         Amends
                                                               13-3
                                                               Adds
25501            2-25-04                            1         Ch. 2, Art. XXI-
                                                               a, 2-152.1 thru
                                                               2-152.2
25511            2-25-04                            1         Adds
                                                               2-37.17
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. VII-
25517            2-25-04                            1         a,
                                                               2-73 thru
                                                               2-74
25518            2-25-04                            1         Amends
                                                               13-5.2
25521            3-3-04             6-1-04           1         Adds
                                                               31-41
25522            3-3-04             9-1-04           1         Amends
                                                               27-3
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-4
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               27-5
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               27-11
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               27-27
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               27-28
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               Ch. 27, Art. VII
                                                  8         Repeals Ch. 27,
                                                               Art. V
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 43, Art. VI,
25539            3-24-04                            1         Div. 1,
                                                               43-112 thru
                                                               43-119
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               43-126.3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               43-126.6
25564            4-14-04                            1         Amends
                                                               37-80
                                                               Amends
25565            4-14-04                            1         Ch. 2, Art. XXI-
                                                               a
25570            4-28-04                            1         Amends
                                                               39A-6(f)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               39A-6(h)
                                                               Readopts
25628            6-9-04             6-16-04          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
25630            6-9-04             6-13-04          1         Amends
                                                               34-43
                                                               Adds
25635            6-23-04            10-1-04          1         Ch. 18, Art. V,
                                                               18-55 thru
                                                               18-66
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               19-34.1
25651            6-23-04                            1         Amends
                                                               2-26.2
25655            6-23-04                            1         Amends
                                                               13-5.2
25663            6-23-04            6-23-04          1         Amends
                                                               34-10
25693            8-11-04                            1         Amends
                                                               43-140.1
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               43-140.2
25695            8-11-04            11-10-04         1         Amends
                                                               40A-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               40A-2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               40A-3
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               40A-4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               40A-6
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               40A-7
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               40A-7.1
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               40A-16(d)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               40A-21(c)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               40A-28
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               40A-35
25754            9-22-04            10-1-04          1         Amends
                                                               2-168
                                                  2         Amends 7-10
                                                  3         Amends 7-18(g)
                                                  4         Amends 7-20
                                                  5         Amends 7-24
                                                  6         Amends 7-32
                                                               Adds Ch. 17,
                                                  7         Art. IX, Div. 3,
                                                               17-9.25 thru 17-
                                                               9.29
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               18-11(b)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               24-2
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               24-4
                                                  12        Amends 29-6
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               42A-8
25755            9-22-04            10-1-04          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.7
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.12
25756            9-22-04            10-1-04          1         Amends
                                                               28-103
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-114.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-114.2(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-114.2(b)
25774            10-13-04                           1         Amends
                                                               27-43
25808            11-10-04                           1         Amends
                                                               2-17.2
25812            12-8-04                            1         Amends
                                                               48A-5
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               Ch. 48A, Art. VI
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               48A-50
25818            12-8-04                            1         Amends
                                                               40A-1(45)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               40A-12
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               40A-26
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               40A-33
                                                               Amends
25819            12-8-04                            1         Ch. 2, Art. IV,
                                                               Div. 1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-37.4
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-37.15
25833            12-8-04                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-45(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. IV-
25834            12-8-04                            1         a,
                                                               2-38 thru
                                                               2-40
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-42
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               Ch. 14B
25836            12-8-04                            1         Repeals
                                                               12A-43
25906            2-23-05                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 12A, Art. VI
25909            2-23-05                            1         Amends
                                                               41A-6(a)
                                                               Repeals Ch. 15A,
25921            3-9-05                             6         Art. II, 15A-
                                                               8 thru 15A-13
25927            3-9-05             4-1-05           1         Amends
                                                               7A-20
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               13-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-12.1
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-16
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               18-28.1
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               27-4
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 27, Art. IV-
                                                  7         b,
                                                               27-16.12 thru
                                                               27-16.23
25979            5-11-05                            1         Amends
                                                               18-14.1
                                                               Readopts
25998            5-25-05            6-16-05          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
26007            6-8-05                             1         Amends
                                                               8-1.4
26022            6-8-05                             1         Amends
                                                               30-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               30-2
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               30-3.1
                                                               Repeals and
26023            6-8-05             8-1-05           1         reenacts
                                                               Ch. 17
                                                               Repeals and
26024            6-8-05                             1         replaces
                                                               Ch. 7
26093            8-24-05                            1         Amends
                                                               13-5.2
26134            9-28-05            10-1-05          1         Amends
                                                               15C-2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(f)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               18-34
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               28-4
26135            9-28-05            10-1-05          1         Amends
                                                               49-10
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.6(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.12
26136            10-12-05                           1         Amends
                                                               42A-5
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               42A-7
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               42A-8
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               42A-10
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               42A-12.1
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               42A-13
                                                  7         Repeals Ch. 35
26164            11-9-05            11-14-05         1         Amends 45-6.1
26182            12-14-05                           1         Amends
                                                               34-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-20
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               Ch. 34, Art. VI
26200            12-14-05           2-1-06           1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 15C, Art. I
                                                               Amends
26225            1-25-06                            1         Ch. 2, Art.
                                                               VIII-a
26246            1-25-06                            1         Amends
                                                               8-1.4
                                                               Amends
26263            2-22-06            3-1-06           1         Ch. 43, Art.
                                                               VIII
26264            2-22-06            4-1-06           1         Amends
                                                               5-31
26265            2-22-06            5-1-06           1         Adds
                                                               28-41.1
26274            3-8-06                             1         Amends
                                                               1-5.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-12.1
26293            3-8-06             4-1-06           1         Amends
                                                               28-4
                                                               Adds
26305            4-12-06            8-1-06           1         Ch. 28, Art.
                                                               XIX, 28-203 thru
                                                               28-217
26309            4-26-06                            1         Amends
                                                               28-5.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-130.9
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-130.13
                                                               Readopts 31-33,
26336            4-26-06            5-1-06           1         with an
                                                               amendment to
                                                               31-33(f)
26342            5-10-06                            1         Adds
                                                               31-39.1
                                                               Readopts
26376            6-14-06            6-16-06          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
26455            9-27-06                            1         Amends
                                                               27-3
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               Ch. 27, Art. II
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               Ch. 27, Art. IV
                                                               Amends
                                                  4         Ch. 27, Art. IV-
                                                               a
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               27-31
26478            9-27-06            10-1-06          1         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               50-137
26479            9-27-06            10-1-06          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                  10-1-06          2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                  10-1-06          3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                  10-1-06          4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                  10-1-06          5         Amends
                                                               49-18.6(d)
                                  1-1-07           6         Amends
                                                               49-18.7(a)
                                  1-1-07           7         Amends
                                                               49-18.7(b)
                                  10-1-06          8         Amends
                                                               49-18.12
                                  10-1-06          9         Adds
                                                               49-18.17
                                  10-1-06          10        Amends
                                                               49-27
                                  10-1-06          11        Amends
                                                               49-61(c)
26480            9-27-06            10-1-06          1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 18, Art. IV
                                                               Adds
26492            10-25-06           11-1-06          1         Ch. 5, Art. I;
                                                               amends
                                                               5-4
                                    [except 5-63(a)            Adds Ch. 5, Art.
IT+>                               eff. 12-1-06]    2         II, 5-57 thru 5-
                                                               63
                                                  3         Adds 10-47.1
                                                  4         Adds 10A-46.1
                                                  5         Adds 45-5.12
26500            10-25-06                           1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
26517            12-13-06                           1         Amends
                                                               2-11.1
26518            12-13-06                           1         Amends
                                                               49-21.1(b)
26537            12-13-06           1-1-07           1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 40B, Art. I
26556            1-24-07            2-1-07           1         Amends
                                                               17-1.5(b)(6)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               17-1.5(b)(17)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               17-1.6
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               17-2.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               17-9.2(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               17-9.2(e)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(i)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(r)(2)
                                                  9         Adds
                                                               17-10.2(s)
26585            2-28-07                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 18, Art. II
26598            2-28-07            4-1-07           1         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(f)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(h)(4)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               5A-8
                                                  4         Amends 10A-17(a)
                                                  5         Amends 10A-20
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               17-2.2(c)(6)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               17-2.2(d)(5)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(d)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(e)(1)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(f)(4)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(g)(2)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(h)(2)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(i)(1)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               18-57
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               24-4(b)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               24-4(d)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               24-4(e)(1)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               27-42(b)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               27-42(d)
                                                  20        Amends 45-2.11
                                                               (b)
                                                  21        Amends 45-3.3
                                                  22        Amends 45-7.2
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               50-116
26608            3-28-07                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 18, Art. IV
26693            3-28-07                            1         Amends
                                                               34-38
26738            5-23-07            6-1-07           1         Amends
                                                               31-35
26761            5-23-07            6-1-07           1         Amends
                                                               31-16
26766            5-23-07            10-1-07          1         Adds
                                                               5A-15
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               30-3.1
                                                               Readopts
26800            6-13-07            6-16-07          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
26804            6-13-07                            1         Amends
                                                               2-11.3
                                                               Amends
26809            6-20-07            6-25-07          1         Ch. 43, Art. VI,
                                                               Div. 1 (title)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               43-115(a)
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 43, Art. VI,
                                                  3         Div. 4,
                                                               43-126.15 thru
                                                               43-126.31
26811            6-27-07                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XIV
26919            9-12-07            10-1-07          1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 15C, Art. I
26925            9-26-07                            1         Amends
                                                               19-120(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               19-123(d)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-1
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.13
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               Ch. 49, Art. IV
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-56(b)
26955            9-26-07                            1         Amends
                                                               27-4(b)
26960            9-26-07            10-1-07          1         Amends
                                                               18-2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-7
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-9
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               18-11
26961            9-26-07            10-1-07          1         Amends
                                                               49-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-6
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-7(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.3
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-18.12
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-18.16
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               49-35
26967            10-10-07                           1         Adds
                                                               13-28.2
26988            11-5-07            10-29-07         1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 28, Art. XIX
26992            11-12-07                           1         Amends
                                                               15D-14
                                                               Adds
27026            11-28-07                           1         Ch. 44, Art.
                                                               VIII,
                                                               44-57
27091            2-27-08                            1         Amends 10A-5
                                                  2         Amends 10A-18
                                                  3         Amends 10A-19(a)
                                                  4         Amends 10A-25
                                                  5         Amends 10A-32
                                                  6         Amends Ch. 10A,
                                                               Art. IV
                                                  7         Amends 10A-44
                                                  8         Amends 10A-49
                                                  9         Amends 10A-50
                                                  10        Amends 10A-52(a)
                                                  11        Amends 10A-54
27092            2-27-08                            1         Amends
                                                               18-11
27098            2-27-08                            1         Amends
                                                               34-40(g)
27101            2-27-08            6-1-08           1         Adds
                                                               28-41.2
                                                               Adds Ch. 28,
27102            2-27-08                            1         Art. XIX, Div.
                                                               3, 28-218 thru
                                                               28-219
27139            4-16-08            4-21-08          1         Amends
                                                               41A-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               41A-2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               41A-3
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               41A-4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               41A-5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               41A-7
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               41A-7.1
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               41A-8
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               41A-9
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               41A-10
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               41A-10.1
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               41A-10.2
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               41A-11
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               41A-15
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               41A-16
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               41A-17
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               41A-18.1
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               41A-20
                                                  19        Adds
                                                               41A-20.1
27146            4-23-08                            1         Amends
                                                               15A-3
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 15A, Art.
                                                  2         II,
                                                               15A-8 thru 15A-
                                                               13
27147            5-14-08            5-19-08          1         Amends
                                                               27-3(33)
27185            5-14-08                            1         Amends
                                                               27-42
27189            5-28-08            1-1-09           1         Amends
                                                               28-4
27190            5-28-08                            1         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(s)
                                                               Amends
27201            5-28-08            6-2-08           1         Ch. 43, Art. VI,
                                                               Div. 4
27202            5-28-08            6-2-08           1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 40B
27203            5-28-08            7-1-08           1         Amends
                                                               18-11(b)
                                                               Amends
27210            6-11-08                            1         Ch. 28, Art. XI,
                                                               Div. 4
                                                               Amends
                                                  2         Ch. 28, Art. XI,
                                                               Div. 5A
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-130.9(a)
                                                               Readopts
27222            6-11-08            6-16-08          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
27223            6-11-08                            1         Amends
                                                               12A-5
27227            6-25-08                            1         Amends
                                                               43-32
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               43-62
27248            6-25-08            9-1-08           1         Adds
                                                               Ch. 48B
27249            6-25-08            8-24-08          1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 40B
                                    7-1-08 [except
                                    7-4.9 eff. 9-25-
27250            6-25-08            08;              1         Amends
                                    7-4.10 and                 7-1.1
                                    7-4.11 eff. 10-
                                    25-08]
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               7-2.6(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               7-2.7
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               7-3.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               7-3.4
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               7-4.2
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               7-4.6
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               7-4.7
                                                  9         Adds
                                                               7-4.9
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               7-4.10
                                                  11        Adds
                                                               7-4.11
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               Ch. 7, Art. V
                                                  13        Adds
                                                               7-7.6
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               7-8.1
27264            8-13-08                            1         Amends
                                                               5A-15
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               30-3.1(f)
                                    10-15-08 [except
                                    12B-19(a) eff.
                                    1-15-09;                   Adds
27293            8-27-08            12B-14,          1         Ch. 12B
                                    12B-15, and
                                    12B-16 eff. 5-1-
                                    10]
27294            8-27-08                            1         Amends
                                                               28-24.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-60
27295            8-27-08                            1         Amends 45-1.5(1)
                                                  2         Amends 45-7.2.1
27353            9-24-08            10-1-08          1         Amends
                                                               2-168
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               5A-5.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               5A-8
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               15D-5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               17-2.2(c)(6)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(d)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(e)(1)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(g)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(h)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(i)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(j)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(l)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               18-11(a)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               18-11(b)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               24-4
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               50-159(e)
                                                  18        Amends 50-159.1
                                                               (c)
                                                               Adds
27354            9-24-08            10-1-08          1         Ch. 15D, Art.
                                                               IV,
                                                               15D-71
27355            9-24-08            10-1-08          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.6
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.11
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.12
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.14
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.16
27362            10-22-08           10-27-08         1         Adds
                                                               13-28.3
27436            12-10-08                           1         Amends
                                                               5-31
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               5-33
27438            12-10-08                           1         Amends
                                                               13-3
27440            12-10-08           4-10-09          1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 41
27458            1-14-09            2-1-09           1         Amends
                                                               27-4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-31
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               27-33
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               27-34
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               27-36
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               27-44
                                                               Adds
                                                  7         Ch. 27, Art.
                                                               VIII, 27-45 thru
                                                               27-58
27487            2-11-09            2-16-09          1         Amends
                                                               15D-13
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-15
                                                               Amends
                                                  3         Ch. 15D, Art.
                                                               II, Div. 2
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               15D-29
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               15D-31
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               15D-33
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               15D-35
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               15D-37
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               15D-42
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               15D-45
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               15D-46(d)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               15D-47
                                                               Amends
                                                  13        Ch. 15D, Art.
                                                               II, Div. 5
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               15D-57
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               15D-58
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               15D-64
27504            3-25-09                            1         Amends
                                                               12A-3
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               12A-4
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               12A-12
                                                               Readopts
27527            4-22-09            5-1-09           1         31-33, with an
                                                               amendment to
                                                               31-33(f)
27538            5-13-09            5-18-09          1         Amends
                                                               31-33
27553            5-27-09                            1         Amends
                                                               28-96.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-114.2(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-114.12
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               28-130.9
                                                               Readopts
27565            6-10-09            6-16-09          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
                                                               Adds
27629            8-26-09            10-1-09          1         Ch. 48C,
                                                               48C-1 thru
                                                               48C-51
27659            9-23-09                            1         Amends
                                                               43-126.30
27695            9-23-09            10-1-09          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(a)(9)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-168(c)
                                                  4         Amends 10-17(b)
                                                  5         Amends 10-17(e)
                                                  6         Amends 10-20
                                                  7         Amends 10-26
                                                  8         Amends 10A-17(a)
                                                  9         Amends 10A-17(c)
                                                  10        Amends 10A-20
                                                  11        Amends 10A-26
                                                  12        Amends 10B-17(a)
                                                  13        Amends 10B-17(b)
                                                  14        Amends 10B-17(d)
                                                  15        Amends 10B-20
                                                  16        Amends 10B-26
                                                  17        Adds 13-28.4
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               15D-9(a)(13)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               15D-9.10
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               15D-9.16
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               15D-21(a)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               15D-23(c)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               15D-30
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               15D-36
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               15D-58(b)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               17-2.2(d)(5)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(d)(2)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(e)(1)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(f)(4)
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(g)
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(h)
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(i)
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(j)
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(l)
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(2)
                                                  37        Amends
                                                               27-32
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               27-42(c)
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               27-42(e)
                                                  40        Amends 45-2.4(a)
                                                  41        Amends 45-3.2(g)
                                                  42        Amends 45-3.3
                                                  43        Amends 45-3.9
                                                  44        Amends 45-7.2(c)
                                                  45        Amends
                                                               48A-6(b)(9)
                                                  46        Amends
                                                               48A-14
                                                  47        Amends
                                                               48A-20
27697            9-23-09            10-1-09          1         Amends
                                                               2-26.7(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-26.7(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-27(4)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-28
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. V
                                                  6         Amends 2-49
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               2-51
                                                               Amends
                                                  8         Ch. 2, Art. VII-
                                                               a
                                                               Adds
                                                  9         Ch. 2, Art. VII-
                                                               b,
                                                               2-75 thru 2-75.1
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               2-98
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XV
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XV-
                                                  12        a,
                                                               2-135 thru
                                                               2-135.1
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XV-
                                                  13        b,
                                                               2-135.2 thru
                                                               2-135.3
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               2-139.2
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XIX
                                                  16        Amends 2-148(c)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               9A-2(b)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               9A-3(a)(9)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               9A-12
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               14-3(a)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               14-4(c)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               14-6
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               14B-2
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               14B-3(4)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               14B-3(8)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               14B-5
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               18-2(12)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               18-12(d)(3)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               19-1
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               19-10
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               19-18
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               19-32
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               19-33
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               19-34.1(c)
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               19-44
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               19-60
                                                  37        Amends
                                                               19-84(d)
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               19-94
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               19-96
                                                  40        Amends
                                                               19-97
                                                  41        Amends
                                                               19-99
                                                  42        Amends
                                                               19-118(12)
                                                  43        Adds
                                                               28-2(a)(4.1)
                                                  44        Amends
                                                               28-2(a)(8)
                                                  45        Amends
                                                               28-19
                                                  46        Amends
                                                               28-76.4(a)
                                                  47        Amends
                                                               28-113
                                                  48        Amends
                                                               28-114.12(a)
                                                  49        Amends
                                                               28-130
                                                  50        Amends
                                                               28-130.2(b)
                                                  51        Amends
                                                               28-130.5
                                                  52        Amends
                                                               28-130.12(d)
                                                  53        Amends
                                                               28-164
                                                  54        Amends 28-204
                                                  55        Amends 28-205
                                                  56        Amends 28-207(f)
                                                  57        Amends 28-207(g)
                                                  58        Amends 28-207(j)
                                                  59        Amends 28-208(b)
                                                  60        Amends 28-209
                                                  61        Amends 28-210(b)
                                                  62        Amends 28-212(b)
                                                  63        Amends 28-215(a)
                                                  64        Amends
                                                               40-1
                                                  65        Amends
                                                               40-3
                                                  66        Amends
                                                               Ch. 40, Art. II
                                                  67        Amends
                                                               41A-5(a)
                                                  68        Amends
                                                               41A-6(c)
                                                  69        Amends
                                                               41A-7
                                                  70        Amends
                                                               42A-7(c)
                                                  71        Amends
                                                               43-121(c)
                                                  72        Amends
                                                               43-126.5(d)
                                                  73        Amends
                                                               43-126.16(5)
                                                  74        Amends
                                                               47-14
                                                  75        Amends
                                                               47-17(a)
                                                  76        Amends
                                                               47-20
                                                  77        Amends
                                                               48B-14(c)
                                                  78        Amends
                                                               49-1(24)
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. V-e, 2-52
                                                  100       thru 2-53; 14B-
                                                               4; Ch. 19, Art.
                                                               III, 19-47 thru
                                                               19-59
27698            9-23-09            10-1-09          1         Amends
                                                               19-121
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.7(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.7(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.12
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-18.13
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-47(a)
27700            10-14-09                           1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-60
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
27705            10-14-09                           1         Art. XXI-a, 2-
                                                               152.1 thru 2-
                                                               152.2
27706            10-28-09                           1         Amends
                                                               13-3
27721            11-9-09            11-15-09         1         Amends
                                                               48A-43
27747            11-9-09                            1         Amends
                                                               6-4(g)
27748            11-9-09            4-1-10           1         Amends
                                                               12A-2
                                                               Adds Ch. 12A,
                                                  2         Art. III-A, 12A-
                                                               15.2 thru 12A-
                                                               15.12
27749            11-9-09            12-1-09          1         Adds
                                                               15A-4.1
27751            12-9-09            2-1-10           1         Amends
                                                               27-3
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-4
                                                               Adds
                                                  3         Ch. 27, Art. IX,
                                                               27-59 thru 27-72
27775            12-9-09                            1         Amends
                                                               43-115
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               43-115.1
27803            2-10-10                            1         Amends
                                                               48C-38
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               48C-42
27819            2-24-10                            1         Adds
                                                               12A-3(h)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               12A-4(e)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               12A-7(e)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               12A-8(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               12A-12(c)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               12A-19(a)(1)
27823            3-10-10                            1         Amends
                                                               13-3
27831            3-10-10            4-10-10          1         Amends 5-58
                                                  2         Amends 5-59
                                                  3         Adds 5-61.1
27833            4-7-10                             1         Amends
                                                               13-5.1
27834            4-7-10                             1         Amends 12A-15.2
                                                               (10)
                                                  2         Amends 12A-15.2
                                                               (11)
                                                  3         Amends 12A-15.3
27865            4-28-10                            1         Amends
                                                               2-37.2(c)
27888            5-26-10                            1         Adds
                                                               7-4.12
                                                               Readopts
27911            6-9-10             6-16-10          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
27922            6-23-10                            1         Adds
                                                               27-16.11(d)
27934            8-11-10                            1         Amends
                                                               18-11(c)(2)
                                                           Amends
                                                               18-11(c)(5)
27960            8-11-10            8-15-10          1         Adds
                                                               31-32.1
27963            8-25-10                            1         Adds
                                                               30-3.2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               30-5(a)
27980            9-8-10                             1         Amends
                                                               2-26.2
27993            9-22-10                            1         Amends
                                                               32-9.1
28019            9-22-10            10-1-10          1         Amends
                                                               5A-5.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               5A-8
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-3
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-8(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               18-11(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               27-32
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(c)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               28-114.1(d)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               28-114.1(e)
                                                  12        Retitles
                                                               Ch. 44, Art. III
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               44-22
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               44-32
                                                  15        Repeals 44-33
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
28020            9-22-10            10-1-10          1         Art. XX, 2-147
                                                               thru 2-149
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                  2         Art. XXV, 2-159
                                                               thru 2-160.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               12A-2(24)
                                                               Repeals Ch. 39B,
                                                  4         Art. III, 39B-15
                                                               thru 39B-16
28024            9-22-10                            1         Amends
                                                               34-4
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               34-5(e)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-10(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-11(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-14
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               34-15
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               34-16
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               34-17
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               34-19
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               34-20
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               34-21
                                                  12        Adds
                                                               34-21.1
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               34-22
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               34-23
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               34-24.1
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               34-25
                                                  17        Adds
                                                               34-31.1
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               34-32
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               34-36
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               34-38(c)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               34-38(f)(1)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               34-39(b)(5)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               34-39(f)
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               34-40(c)(5)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               34-40(f)(2)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               34-43
28025            9-22-10            10-1-10          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.9
28046            10-26-10           1-1-11           1         Amends
                                                               17-1.5(b)(6)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               17-1.5(b)(16)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               17-9.2
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(i)
                                                               Adds
                                                  5         Ch. 29A,
                                                               29A-1 thru
                                                               29A-15
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               42A-5
28048            11-10-10                           1         Amends
                                                               31-38
28065            12-8-10            12-13-10         1         Amends
                                                               31-17
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               31-17.1
28066            12-8-10                            1         Amends
                                                               43-136
28075            12-8-10            1-1-11           1         Amends
                                                               31-35
                                                               Amends
28084            1-12-11                            1         Ch. 19, Art. X,
                                                               19-119 thru
                                                               19-131.2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-1
                                                               Amends
                                                  3         Ch. 49, Art. IV,
                                                               49-41 thru
                                                               49-55.7
28110            1-26-11            1-31-11          1         Adds
                                                               5-35
28126            2-9-11                             1         Amends
                                                               42A-7
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               42A-8
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               42A-10
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               42A-11.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               42A-12
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               42A-13
                                                               Repeals Ch. 2.
28127            2-9-11                             1         Art. XXIII, 2-
                                                               155 thru 2-156
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               19-83.4(a)
28169            4-13-11                            1         Amends
                                                               15A-4.1
                                                               Readopts
28217            5-25-11            6-16-11          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
28220            6-1-11                             1         Amends
                                                               17-8.2(h)(2)
28221            6-1-11                             1         Amends
                                                               3-1
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 15A, Art.
                                                  2         III,
                                                               15A-14 thru
                                                               15A-17
28239            6-8-11                             1         Amends
                                                               15A-4.1
28241            6-22-11                            1         Amends
                                                               32-10
                                                               Adds
28287            6-22-11            1-1-12           1         Ch. 50, Art. XI,
                                                               50-144 thru
                                                               50-151.3
28335            8-24-11                            1         Amends
                                                               7-2.7
28423            9-28-11            10-1-11          1         Amends
                                                               13-28.3
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-32
                                                               Amends
28424            9-28-11            10-1-11          1         Ch. 2, Art. V-c,
                                                               2-48 thru 2-49
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-62
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-72
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art.
                                                  4         VIII-a, Div. 1,
                                                               2-81 thru
                                                               2-85
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XV-
                                                  5         c,
                                                               2-135.4 thru
                                                               2-135.5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               2-139.2
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               19-113
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               28-24
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               28-29
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               28-130.7
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               28-130.12
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               28-156
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               28-194
                                                  14        Amends 28-203(4)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               29A-5(c)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               30-2
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               34-2(b)
                                                               Amends
                                                  18        Ch. 36, Art. II,
                                                               36-43 thru 36-54
                                                  19        Amends 39-4
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               42A-7(c)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               43-121(c)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               43-126.5(d)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               43-135(7)
28425            9-28-11                            1         Amends
                                                               34-22(t)(1)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(16)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-37(d)(2)
28426            9-28-11            10-1-11          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.16(a)
28444            10-26-11                           1         Amends
                                                               6-4(g)
28456            11-7-11                            1         Amends
                                                               5A-15
                                                               Amends
28461            11-7-11                            1         Ch. 19, Art. IX,
                                                               19-118 thru
                                                               19-118.8
28488            12-14-11                           1         Amends
                                                               17-2.2(d)(1)
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 17, Art.
                                                  2         VIII,
                                                               17-8.1 thru
                                                               17-8.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(e)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(s)
28512            12-14-11                           1         Amends
                                                               44-57
28565            2-22-12                            1         Amends
                                                               6-4(f)
28583            3-28-12                            1         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
28622            4-18-12            4-23-12          1         Amends
                                                               49-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-21.1
                                                               Readopts
28639            4-25-12            5-1-12           1         31-33, with
                                                               amendment to
                                                               31-33(f)
                                                               Adds
28654            5-23-12            6-25-12          1         Ch. 28, Art. XX,
                                                               28-220 thru
                                                               28-234
                                                               Readopts
28670            5-23-12            6-16-12          1         Ch. 12, with
                                                               amendments to
                                                               12-2
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. III,
28684            6-27-12                            1         Div. 1,
                                                               2-21 thru
                                                               2-26.3
28705            6-27-12            9-15-12          1         Amends
                                                               2-27
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-30
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-31
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-32
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-33
                                                               Amends
                                                  6         Ch. 2, Art.
                                                               VIII-a,
                                                               2-81 thru 2-94
                                                               Adds
28706            6-27-12            10-1-12          1         Ch. 8A,
                                                               8A-1 thru
                                                               8A-40
                                                               Amends
                                                  2         Ch. 33,
                                                               33-1 thru
                                                               33-8
28739            8-8-12                             1         Amends
                                                               40A-1(21)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               40A-9
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               40A-12
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               40A-26
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               40A-33
28792            9-19-12            10-1-12          1         Adds
                                                               24-4(j)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-104
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-106
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-107
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-108
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-109
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               28-114
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               28-114.2(b)
28794            9-19-12                            1         Amends
                                                               34-4(32)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-25(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(12)
28795            9-19-12            10-1-12          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.3
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.7(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.7(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.12
28799            9-26-12                            1         Amends
                                                               6-4(g)
28831            10-24-12                           1         Amends
                                                               28-103(a)
                                                               Renumbers
                                                               28-114.1(n) thru
                                                  2         (o) as
                                                               28-114.1(o) thru
                                                               (p); adds new
                                                               28-114.1(n)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-114.1(o)
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               28-114.1(q)
28833            11-14-12                           1         Amends
                                                               5A-15
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 28, Art. VI,
28870            12-12-12                           1         Div. 5,
                                                               28-58.1 thru
                                                               28-58.2
28871            1-9-13                             1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-45(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-60
28940            3-27-13                            1         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60
                                                               Amends Ch. 29,
28953            3-27-13                            1         Art. IV, 29-25
                                                               thru 29-30
                                                               Amends
29016            5-22-13            5-31-13          1         Ch. 29A,
                                                               29A-1 thru
                                                               29A-15
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               42A-2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               42A-3(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               42A-4(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               42A-5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               42A-8
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               42A-13
                                                  8         Repeals Ch. 29,
                                                               29-1 thru 29-32
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 50, Art.
29023            6-12-13            10-1-13          1         XII,
                                                               50-152 thru
                                                               50-172
                                                               Readopts Ch. 12,
                                                               with amendments
                                                               to
                                                               12-1,
29036            6-12-13            6-16-13          1         12-2,
                                                               12-8,
                                                               12-14,
                                                               12-18,
                                                               12-19
29039            6-12-13            6-17-13          1         Amends
                                                               18-11(c)
29070            8-14-13            9-30-13          1         Adds
                                                               31-13.1
29071            8-14-13                            1         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 32, Art. II,
29102            8-28-13                            1         Div. 1,
                                                               32-11.5 thru
                                                               32-20
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 32, Art. II,
                                                  2         Div. 2,
                                                               32-21 thru
                                                               32-28.3
29149            9-18-13            10-1-13          1         Amends
                                                               13-28.3
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(2)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               24-4
29150            9-18-13            10-1-13          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.7(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.7(b)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.12
29177            10-23-13           10-28-13         1         Amends
                                                               17-2.2(c)(6)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               17-2.2(d)(5)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(d)(2)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(e)(1)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(f)(4)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(g)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(h)(2)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(i)(1)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(j)(1)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(l)(1)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(s)(1)
29208            12-11-13                           1         Corrects
                                                               6-4(g)(1)(F)
29244            1-22-14            1-27-14          1         Amends
                                                               28-158.1
                                                               Amends
29245            1-22-14            4-22-14          1         Ch. 42,
                                                               42-1 thru
                                                               42-15
29246            1-22-14                            1         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60
29261            1-22-14                            1         Amends
                                                               6-4(g)(5)
29306            3-26-14                            1         Amends
                                                               27-31
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-38(b)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               27-44
29307            3-26-14            1-1-15           1         Adds Ch. 9C, 9C-
                                                               1 thru 9C-7
29320            4-23-14                            1         Amends
                                                               34-24.1
29358            5-28-14                            1         Amends
                                                               12-2
29373            6-11-14                            1         Amends
                                                               9-2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               9-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               9-7(a)(4)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               9-8
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               9-9
29394            8-6-14                             1         Amends
                                                               13-5.2
29395            8-13-14                            1         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
                                                               Retitles and
29403            8-13-14                            1         amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XXIV
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               7-2.5
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               7-2.7(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               7-5.3
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               7-5.4
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               7-8.1(h)
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               7-8.1(i)
                                                  8         Adds
                                                               7-8.4
                                                  9         Adds
                                                               27-3(6.1)
                                                               Retitles
                                                  10        Ch. 27, Art. IV-
                                                               b
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               27-16.12
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               27-16.16(b)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               27-16.18(g)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               27-16.18(i)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               27-16.21(b)
29437            9-10-14            10-10-14                  Amends
                                                               Ch. 16
29477            9-17-14            10-1-14          1         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(g)(1)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               5A-5.1(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               5A-8(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               6A-5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               9A-4
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               14-4(a)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(2)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               18-11(c)(4)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               41A-6(a)
                                                  12        Amends Ch. 52,
                                                               303.5.3
29478            9-17-14            10-1-14          1         Amends
                                                               2-37.2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-42(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. V-e
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-135.3
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               39A-2(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               39A-4(k)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               39A-5(u)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               43-121(c)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               43-126.5(d)
29479            9-17-14            10-1-14          1         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(i)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.4(f)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.5(a)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(b)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               49-18.12
29480            9-24-14                            1         Amends
                                                               34-4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-22(o)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-23(m)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-24(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-25(f)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               34-27(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               34-28(d)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               34-35
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               34-38(c)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               34-38(i)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               34-39
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               34-40(c)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               34-43(a)
29491            10-8-14                            1         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                               Amends
29543            11-12-14                           1         Ch. 28, Art.
                                                               XIV,
                                                               28-158.1
29544            11-12-14                           1         Amends
                                                               15D-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-4
                                                               Amends title of
                                                  3         Ch. 15D, Art. I,
                                                               Div. 2
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               15D-5.1
29595            12-10-14                           1         Amends
                                                               17-1.6
                                                               Amends Ch. 5,
29596            12-10-14           4-30-15          1         Art. II, 5-57
                                                               thru 5-63
                                                  2         Repeals Ch. 10
                                                  3         Repeals Ch. 10A
                                                  4         Repeals Ch. 10B
                                                  5         Repeals Ch. 45
                                                               Adds
                                                  6         Ch. 47A,
                                                               47A-1.1 thru
                                                               47A-4.7
29613            1-28-15                            1         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
29618            1-28-15                            1         Amends
                                                               27-16.16(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-16.18(g)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               27-16.21(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               27-16.23(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-2(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-2(e)
29644            2-18-15                            1         Amends
                                                               40A-1(42)
29645            2-25-15                            1         Amends
                                                               2-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-95(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-126(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-130(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-140(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               2-150(b)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               2-157(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               2-161(b)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               6A-5
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               12A-10(b)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               12A-12
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               12A-24(b)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               13-5.1(b)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               13-35
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               24-7(b)
                                                  16        Amends 28-218(b)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               37-27
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               37-31(c)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               37A-7(a)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               49-56(h)(4)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               49-62(e)
29660            2-25-15                            1         Amends
                                                               12A-25
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               12A-26
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               12A-27(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               12A-28(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               12A-29(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               12A-32
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               12A-38
                                                  8         Adds
                                                               12A-40.1
                                                  9         Adds
                                                               12A-43
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 15A, Art. I-
29663            2-25-15            3-1-15           1         a,
                                                               15A-7.1 thru
                                                               15A-7.2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15A-8
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               15A-9
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               15A-9.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               15A-10(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               15A-11(a)
                                                            
 
Ordinance Number Specified Passage Effective Date Ordinance City Code Section
                 Date                              Section
Ordinance Number Specified Passage Effective Date  Ordinance City Code Section
                 Date                               Section
29691            3-25-15                            1         Amends
                                                              29A-5(a)
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              29A-5(e)
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              29A-6(1)
                                                    4         Amends
                                                              29A-8(a)
                                                    5         Amends
                                                              29A-11(a)
                                                    6         Amends
                                                              29A-11(d)
29706            4-8-15             4-30-15         1         Amends
                                                              47A-1.6
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              47A-2.1.2
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              47A-2.2.4
                                                    4         Amends
                                                              47A-2.2.8
                                                    5         Amends
                                                              47A-2.3.2
29721            4-22-15            4-30-15         1         Amends 5-58(2)
                                                    2         Amends 5-58(3)
                                                    3         Amends 5-58(7)
                                                    4         Amends 5-61
                                                    5         Amends 5-62(a)
                                                    6         Amends 5-63
29753            5-27-15                            1         Amends
                                                              8A-2(4)
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              8A-2(6)
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              8A-2(8)
                                                    4         Amends
                                                              8A-2(12)
                                                    5         Amends
                                                              8A-2(13)
                                                    6         Amends
                                                              8A-2(15)
                                                    7         Amends
                                                              8A-2(16)
                                                    8         Adds
                                                              8A-2(17.1)
                                                    9         Amends
                                                              8A-2(18)
                                                    10        Adds
                                                              8A-2(18.1)
                                                    11        Amends
                                                              8A-2(19)
                                                    12        Adds
                                                              8A-2(22)
                                                    13        Amends
                                                              8A-4(b)
                                                    14        Amends
                                                              8A-5
                                                    15        Amends
                                                              8A-6
                                                    16        Amends
                                                              8A-7
                                                    17        Amends
                                                              8A-8
                                                    18        Amends
                                                              8A-9
                                                    19        Amends
                                                              8A-10(a)
                                                    20        Amends
                                                              8A-10(b)
                                                    21        Amends
                                                              8A-10(c)
                                                    22        Amends
                                                              8A-11
                                                    23        Amends
                                                              8A-12
                                                    24        Amends
                                                              8A-13
                                                    25        Amends
                                                              8A-15(b)
                                                    26        Amends
                                                              8A-16
                                                    27        Amends
                                                              8A-19(b)(3)
                                                    28        Amends
                                                              8A-19(c)
                                                    29        Amends
                                                              8A-19(d)(2)
                                                    30        Amends
                                                              8A-19(d)(6)
                                                    31        Amends
                                                              8A-19(d)(7)
                                                    32        Amends
                                                              8A-19(d)(8)
                                                    33        Adds
                                                              8A-21.1
                                                    34        Amends
                                                              8A-22(b)
                                                    35        Adds
                                                              8A-22(e)(5)
                                                    36        Amends
                                                              8A-23(b)
                                                    37        Amends
                                                              8A-23(e)(1)
                                                    38        Amends
                                                              8A-23(e)(4)
                                                    39        Amends
                                                              8A-24(a)
                                                    40        Amends
                                                              8A-33(a)
                                                    41        Amends
                                                              8A-33(c)(1)
                                                    42        Amends
                                                              8A-34(b)
                                                    43        Amends
                                                              8A-34(c)
                                                    44        Amends
                                                              8A-34(d)
                                                    45        Amends
                                                              8A-34(f)
                                                    46        Amends
                                                              8A-34(g)(2)
                                                    47        Amends
                                                              8A-34(i)
                                                    48        Amends
                                                              8A-34(j)
                                                    49        Adds
                                                              8A-34(n)
                                                    50        Amends
                                                              8A-35(f)
                                                    51        Amends
                                                              8A-36
                                                    52        Amends
                                                              8A-37
                                                    53        Amends
                                                              8A-38
                                                    54        Amends
                                                              8A-39(a)
                                                    55        Amends
                                                              8A-39(b)
                                                    56        Amends
                                                              8A-40
                                                    57        Amends
                                                              27-31
29754            6-3-15                             1         Repeals Ch. 9C
29770            6-10-15                            1         Amends
                                                              12A-26(a)(8)
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              12A-26(g)
29879            9-22-15            10-1-15         1         Amends
                                                              5A-3
                                                    2         Repeals 5A-5.1
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              5A-8(b)
                                                    4         Amends
                                                              5A-14(a)
                                                    5         Amends
                                                              7-2.6(a)
                                                    6         Amends
                                                              7-4.11(c)
                                                    7         Amends
                                                              7-6.2(e)
                                                    8         Amends
                                                              15D-5(b)
                                    sec. 12: 4-1-16 9-14      Amends
                                                              Ch. 16
                                                    15        Amends
                                                              18-2(41)
                                                    16        Amends
                                                              18-3(a)
                                                    17        Amends
                                                              18-3(b)
                                                    18        Amends
                                                              18-9
                                                    19        Amends
                                                              18-57
                                                    20        Amends
                                                              27-32(a)
                                                    21        Amends
                                                              27-42(c)
                                                    22        Amends
                                                              27-42(e)
                                                    23        Amends 27-62(a)
                                                    24        Amends 27-72(c)
                                                    25        Amends
                                                              43A-3
                                                    26        Amends
                                                              43A-17(c)
                                                    27        Amends
                                                              43A-18(b)
                                                    28        Amends
                                                              48B-8(a)
                                                    29        Amends
                                                              49-18.1(c)
                                                    30        Amends
                                                              49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                    31        Amends
                                                              49-18.1(g)
                                                    32        Amends
                                                              49-18.1(i)
                                                    33        Amends
                                                              49-18.2
                                                    34        Amends
                                                              49-18.4(b)
                                                    35        Amends
                                                              49-18.4(e)
                                                    36        Amends
                                                              49-18.4(f)
                                                    37        Amends
                                                              49-18.5(a)
                                                    38        Amends
                                                              49-18.5(b)
                                                    39        Amends
                                                              49-18.7(a)
                                                    40        Amends
                                                              49-18.7(b)
                                                    41        Amends
                                                              49-18.9
                                                    42        Amends
                                                              50-82
                                                    43        Amends
                                                              50-101
                                                    44        Amends
                                                              50-116
                                                    45        Amends
                                                              50-137(a)
                                                    46        Amends
                                                              50-149(a)
29880            9-22-15                            1         Amends
                                                              44-35
29881            9-22-15            10-1-15         1         Amends
                                                              2-139
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              18-1
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              18-2(44)
29882            9-22-15            10-1-15         1         Amends
                                                              Ch. 2, Art. V-e
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              43-121(c)
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              43-126.5(d)
29883            9-22-15                            1         Amends
                                                              34-9
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              34-22
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              34-23
                                                    4         Amends
                                                              34-32
29906            10-28-15                           1         Amends
                                                              43-111
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              43-112
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              43-115
                                                    4         Amends
                                                              43-115.1
                                                    5         Adds
                                                              43-115.3
                                                    6         Amends
                                                              43-116
                                                              Amends Ch. 2,
29920            11-10-15                           1         Art. XXV,
                                                              2-159 thru
                                                              2-160
29942            11-10-15                           1         Amends
                                                              Ch. 46 (title)
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              46-1
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              46-4
                                                    4         Amends
                                                              46-6
                                                              Renumbers and
                                                    5         amends
                                                              46-6.1
                                                    6         Amends
                                                              46-7
                                                    7         Amends
                                                              46-10(a)
                                                              Reinstates 31-33
29985            1-13-16            1-18-16         1         with amendment to
                                                              31-33(f)
29986            1-13-16                            1         Amends
                                                              7-2.6(a)
29993            1-27-16            4-1-16          1         Amends
                                                              43-137
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              43-139(c)
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              43-139(k)
                                                    4         Amends
                                                              43-140.2
                                                    5         Amends
                                                              43-141(f)
                                                    6         Adds
                                                              43-141(h)
                                                    7         Adds
                                                              43-141(i)
30022            2-24-16                            1         Amends
                                                              28-44
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              28-45
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              28-50(c)
                                                    4         Amends
                                                              28-59
                                                    5         Amends
                                                              28-60
30089            5-25-16                            1         Amends
                                                              2-20.1
30090            5-25-16                            1         Amends
                                                              43A-1
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              43A-2
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              43A-3
                                                    4         Adds
                                                              43A-3.1
                                                    5         Amends
                                                              43A-6(e)
                                                    6         Adds
                                                              43A-9(e)
                                                    7         Amends
                                                              43A-11(c)
                                                    8         Adds
                                                              43A-15(c)
                                                    9         Adds
                                                              43A-16(c)
                                                    10        Amends
                                                              43A-19
                                                    11        Amends
                                                              43A-20
                                                    12        Amends
                                                              43A-21
                                                              Adds Ch. 43A,
                                                    13        Art. IV,
                                                              43A-26
                                                              Readopts Ch. 12,
30106            5-25-16                            1         with amendment to
                                                              12-2
30134            6-22-16            7-1-16          1         Amends
                                                              17-1.1
                                                    2         Amends
                                                              17-1.5
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              17-1.6(a)
                                                    4         Amends
                                                              17-2.1
                                                    5         Amends
                                                              17-2.2(b)
                                                    6         Amends
                                                              17-2.2(c)
                                                    7         Deletes
                                                              17-2.2(d)
                                                    8         Amends
                                                              17-3.1
                                                    9         Amends
                                                              17-3.2
                                                    10        Amends
                                                              17-4.1
                                                    11        Amends
                                                              17-4.2(c)
                                                    12        Amends
                                                              17-5.1
                                                    13        Amends
                                                              17-5.2(c)
                                                    14        Adds
                                                              17-5.2(e)
                                                    15        Amends
                                                              17-6.1
                                                    16        Amends
                                                              17-6.2(b)
                                                    17        Amends
                                                              17-6.2(c)(2)
                                                    18        Adds
                                                              17-6.2(d), (e)
                                                    19        Amends
                                                              17-7.1
                                                    20        Amends
                                                              17-8.1
                                                    21        Amends
                                                              17-8.2(b)
                                                    22        Amends
                                                              17-8.2(c)(1)(E)
                                                    23        Amends
                                                              17-8.2(g)
                                                    24        Amends
                                                              17-8.2(h)(1)A)
                                                    25        Amends
                                                              17-8.2(i)(4)(M)
                                                    26        Amends
                                                              17-9.1
                                                    27        Amends
                                                              17-9.2
                                                    28        Amends
                                                              17-10.1
                                                    29        Amends
                                                              17-10.2(i)(2)
                                                    30        Deletes
                                                              17-10.2(c)(8)
                                                    31        Amends
                                                              17-10.2(k)
                                                    32        Amends
                                                              17-10.2(s)
                                                    33        Amends
                                                              17-11.2
                                                    34        Amends
                                                              17-12.1
                                                    35        Amends
                                                              17-13.1
                                                              Adds Ch. 17, Art.
                                                    36        XIV,
                                                              17-14.1 thru
                                                              17-14.2
30135            6-22-16            10-1-16         1         Amends
                                                              Ch. 16
30136            6-22-16                            1         Adds
                                                              7A-2(14.1)
                                                    2         Adds
                                                              7A-3.1
                                                    3         Amends
                                                              31-40
 
Ordinance Number Specified Passage Effective Date Ordinance City Code Section
                 Date                              Section
Ordinance Number Specified Passage Effective Date   Ordinance City Code
                 Date                                Section   Section
                                                               Amends Ch. 40A,
30162            8-17-16            1-1-17           1         40A-1 thru
                                                               40A-35
30180            9-14-16                            1         Amends
                                                               47A-1.4
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               47A-1.6
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               47A-2.1.2
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               47A-2.1.8
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               47A-2.2.1
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               47A-2.3.2
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               47A-2.3.3
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               47A-2.3.5
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               47A-2.4.8
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               47A-2.5.1(c)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               47A-2.5.2(b)
                                                               Retitles
30215            9-21-16            10-1-16          1         Ch. 2, Art.
                                                               XXVIII
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art.
                                                  2         XXVIII,
                                                               2-167 thru
                                                               2-169
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               15D-5(b)(1)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               15D-9(a)(13)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               15D-9.2(c)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               15D-9.10
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               15D-9.16
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               15D-9.31(c)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               15D-21(a)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               15D-23(c)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               15D-30
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               15D-36
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               15D-58(b)
                                                  14 - 17   Amends
                                                               Ch. 16
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(2)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               18-11(c)(5)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               48A-6(b)(9)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               48A-8(c)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               48A-14
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               48A-20
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               48A-29(i)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               48C-6(b)(9)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               48C-8(c)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               48C-15
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               48C-21
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               48C-30(h)
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(i)
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  37        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(f)
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(a)
                                                  40        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(b)
                                                  41        Amends
                                                               49-18.7(a)
                                                  42        Amends
                                                               49-18.7(b)
                                                  43        Amends
                                                               49-18.9
30216            9-28-16                            1         Amends
                                                               34-4(21)
                                                  2         Retitles
                                                               34-17
                                                  3         Retitles
                                                               34-19
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-45(c)
30217            9-28-16                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
30236            9-28-16            1-1-17           1         Retitles
                                                               Ch. 27
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               27-3.1
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               27-4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               27-5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               27-11
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               27-12
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               27-15
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               27-15.1
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               27-16
                                  sec. 11: 9-28-16 11        Amends
                                                               27-16.3(b)
                                  sec. 12: 9-28-16 12        Amends
                                                               27-16.4(c)
                                  sec. 13: 9-28-16 13        Amends
                                                               27-16.8(d)
                                  sec. 14: 9-28-16 14        Amends
                                                               27-16.8(e)(4)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               27-16.13(a)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               27-16.14
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               27-16.15
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               27-16.16
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               27-16.17(a)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               27-16.18
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               27-16.19(e)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               27-16.19(f)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               27-16.20
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               27-16.22
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               27-16.23
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               27-24
                                                  27        Adds
                                                               27-27(e)
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 27, Art.
                                                  28        VII,
                                                               27-29 thru
                                                               27-44.1
                                                               Repeals Ch. 27,
                                                  29        Art. VIII, 27-45
                                                               thru 27-58
                                                               Repeals Ch. 27,
                                                  30        Art. IX, 27-59
                                                               thru 27-72
30239            9-28-16                            1         Amends
                                                               2-44
                                                               Amends
                                                  2         Ch. 2, Art. V-c,
                                                               2-48 thru 2-49
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-53
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-139.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-139.2
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-24
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               28-29
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               28-194
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               28-201(c)
                                                  10        Amends 28-203(4)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               28-130.7(e)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               28-130.12(a)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               29A-5(c)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               30-2(8)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               36-45
                                                  16        Amends 39-4(a)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               42A-7(c)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               43-63
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               43-121(c)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               43-126.5(d)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               43-135(7)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               49-27(a)
30240            9-28-16                            1         Amends
                                                               2-72
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               5-3(d)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               47A-3.2(c)
30246            10-26-16                           1         Amends
                                                               20A-2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               20A-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               20A-4
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               20A-4.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               20A-5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               20A-7(c)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               20A-10(d)
30258            11-9-16            3-1-17           1         Amends
                                                               41-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               41-2(a)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               41-2(f)
30391            3-22-17            7-1-17           1         Amends
                                                               2-37.9
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               12A-1
                                                  3         Adds 12A-1.1
                                                  4         Adds 12A-1.2
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               12A-2(12)
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               12A-2(15.1)
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               12A-2(16.1)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               12A-2(20)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               12A-2(22)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               12A-2(24)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               12A-3
                                                  12        Retitles
                                                               12A-4
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               12A-4(b)(4)(A)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               12A-4(c)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               12A-4(d)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               12A-5
                                                  17        Adds 12A-5.1
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               12A-7
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               12A-9
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               12A-10(a)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               12A-10(g)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               12A-11
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               12A-12(b)
                                                  25        Adds
                                                               12A-12(d)
                                                  26        Adds 12A-12.1
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               12A-13
                                                  28        Amends 12A-15.1
                                                  29        Amends 12A-15.3
                                                  30        Amends 12A-15.4
                                                  31        Amends 12A-15.8
                                                               (g)
                                                  32        Adds 12A-15.8(h)
                                                  33        Amends 12A-15.9
                                                               (b)
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               12A-18
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               12A-19(a)(1)
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               12A-21(d)
                                                  37        Repeals 12A-22
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               12A-25(a)
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               12A-25(c)(6)
                                                  40        Adds
                                                               12A-25(d)
                                                  41        Amends
                                                               12A-26
                                                  42        Amends
                                                               12A-27(a)
                                                  43        Amends
                                                               12A-28(a)
                                                  44        Adds
                                                               12A-30(a)(5)
                                                  45        Amends
                                                               12A-30(b)
                                                  46        Adds 12A-35.1
                                                  47        Amends
                                                               12A-37
                                                  48        Adds 12A-37.1
                                                  49        Adds 12A-38.1
                                                  50        Adds
                                                               12A-41(c)
                                                  51        Amends
                                                               12A-42(a)
                                                  52        Adds 12A-42.1
                                                  53        Adds
                                                               12A-44
                                                  54        Adds
                                                               12A-45
                                                  55        Amends
                                                               15A-1
                                                               Retitles
                                                  56        Ch. 15A, Art. I-
                                                               a
                                                  57        Amends
                                                               15A-7.1
                                                  58        Amends
                                                               15A-7.2
                                                               Adds
                                                               Ch. 15A, Art. I-
                                                  59        b,
                                                               15A-7.3 thru
                                                               15A-7.5
                                                               Amends Ch. 2,
30431            4-12-17                            1         Art. XX,
                                                               2-147 thru
                                                               2-149
30472            5-24-17                            1         Amends
                                                               12B-2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               12B-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               12B-4
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               12B-5(e)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               12B-6(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               12B-7(a)
                                                  7         Retitles Ch.
                                                               12B, Art. III
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               12B-20
                                                               Amends Ch. 2,
30483            6-14-17                            1         Art. XXIII,
                                                               2-155 thru
                                                               2-156
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-157(e)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               7-1.1
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               7-2.4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               7-2.5
                                                  6         Retitles
                                                               7-3.1
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               7-3.1(a)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               7-4.1(b)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               7-4.2
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               7-4.10(b)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               7-4.11
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               7-4.12
                                                  13        Adds
                                                               7-4.13
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               7-5.4
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               7-8.2
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               7-8.3
30489            6-14-17                            1         Amends 12A-15.2
                                                  2         Amends 12A-15.7
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               15A-4.1
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               20A-3(13)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               20A-3(22)
30555            8-9-17                             1         Amends
                                                               8-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               8-1.1(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               8-1.1(c)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               8-1.1(d)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               8-1.2(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               8-1.4
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               8-1.5
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               8-2
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               8-4
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               8-6(a)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               8-8
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               8-9(a)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               8-9(e)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               8-20
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               8-20.1
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               8-21
30620            8-23-17                            1         Amends
                                                               43-135
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               43-139(c)(10)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               43-139(c)(21)
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               43-139.1
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               43-140(d)(1)
                                                               Readopts Ch. 12,
30650            9-13-17                            1         with amendment
                                                               to
                                                               12-2
30653            9-20-17            10-1-17          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               6-10
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               6A-5
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               9A-4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               14-4(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               17-2.2(6)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               17-8.2(3)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               17-9.2
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(d)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(e)(1)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(f)(4)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(g)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(h)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(i)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(j)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(l)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(s)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(2)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               41A-6(a)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(i)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               49-18.2
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(f)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(a)
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(b)
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               49-18.9
30654            9-20-17            10-1-17          1         Amends
                                                               2-27(4)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-28
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-37.16
                                                               Amends ch. 2,
                                                  4         art. V-c,
                                                               2-48 thru
                                                               2-49
                                                               Amends ch. 2,
                                                  5         art. XV-b,
                                                               2-135.2 thru
                                                               2-135.3
                                                               Amends ch. 2,
                                                  6         art. XVII-a,
                                                               2-139.1 thru
                                                               2-139.2
                                                               Amends ch. 2,
                                                  7         art. XIX,
                                                               2-142 thru
                                                               2-143
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               12A-45(e)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               28-2(a)(8)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               28-24
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               28-29
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               28-103
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               28-113
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               28-114.12(a)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               28-130
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               28-130.2(b)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               28-130.5
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               28-130.12(d)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               28-194
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               28-201(c)
                                                  21        Amends 28-203(4)
                                                  22        Amends 28-204
                                                  23        Amends 28-208(b)
                                                  24        Amends 28-212(b)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               29A-5(c)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               30-2(8)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               36-45
                                                  28        Amends 39-4(a)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               42A-7(c)
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               43-63
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               43-121(c)
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               43-126.5(d)
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               43-135(9)
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               49-27(a)
30657            9-27-17            10-1-17          1         Amends
                                                               34-1
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               34-22(u)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-23(a)
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               34-23(r)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-30(c)
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               34-38(k)
30675            10-25-17                           1         Amends
                                                               2-51
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-74
30687            11-8-17            2-1-18           1         Amends
                                                               7-1.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               7-3.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               7-4.7
30694            11-8-17                            1         Amends
                                                               39A-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               39A-2
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               39A-3
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               39A-4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               39A-5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               39A-6
                                                               Amends Ch. 27,
30714            12-13-17           [sec. 27-53 eff. 1         Art. VIII,
                                    2-1-18]                    27-45 thru
                                                               27-54
30715            12-13-17                           1         Amends
                                                               15A-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15A-7
30769            2-14-18                            1         Amends
                                                               13-3(a)
30789            2-28-18                            1         Amends
                                                               8-1.4(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               8-1.4(f)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               8-1.4(h)
30828            4-11-18                            1         Amends
                                                               2-17.3(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-27
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-29
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-30(d)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-31
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               2-32
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               2-33
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               15B-1
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               15B-3(1)
30842            4-25-18            7-1-18           1         Adds
                                                               5-31.1
                                                  2         Adds 5-64
30879            6-13-18            1-1-19           1         Amends
                                                               18-2
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               18-5.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-12.1(c)
                                                               Adds Ch. 18,
                                                  4         Art. IV-a,
                                                               18-52 thru
                                                               18-54
30900            6-27-18                            1         Amends
                                                               7-2.5
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               7-2.6
30901            6-27-18                            1         Adds
                                                               7-1.1(8.1)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               7-4.14
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               7-5.3
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               7-5.4
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               7-5.5
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               7-5.6(b)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               7-5.6(c)
                                                  8         Adds
                                                               7-5.11
                                                               Adds Ch. 7, Art.
                                                  9         V-a,
                                                               7-5.12 thru
                                                               7-5.16
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               7-8.1(e)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               7-8.2(b)
                                                               Amends Ch. 2,
30905            6-27-18                            1         Art. XIV,
                                                               2-130 thru
                                                               2-132
30935            6-27-18                            1         Amends
                                                               28-41.1
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               28-41.1.1
                                                               Adds Ch. 43,
30936            6-27-18                            1         Art. X,
                                                               43-157 thru
                                                               43-175
30938            8-8-18                             1         Amends
                                                               17-1.5(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(f)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(h)(2)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(l)(2)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(s)(1)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(s)(4)
30969            8-22-18                            1         Amends
                                                               2-17.2
30976            9-12-18                            1         Amends
                                                               12-2
30993            9-18-18            10-1-18          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-57(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(2)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(2)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-26(f)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)(2)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(i)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)(2)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)(3)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)(4)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)(5)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(f)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(f)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(a)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(b)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(c)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               49-18.7(a)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               49-18.7(b)
                                                               Amends Ch. 2,
30994            9-18-18                            1         Art. V-a,
                                                               2-43 thru
                                                               2-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-51
                                                               Adds Ch. 2, Art.
                                                  3         V-f,
                                                               2-54 thru
                                                               2-55
                                                               Amends Ch. 2,
                                                  4         Art. VII-b, 2-75
                                                               thru 2-75.1
                                                               Amends Ch. 9B,
                                                  5         Art. II,
                                                               9B-6 thru
                                                               9B-9
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               13-8(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               19-113(a)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-18.5(c)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-18.5(d)
31048            11-28-18                           1         Amends
                                                               28-41.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-41.1.1(e)
31049            11-28-18                           1         Adds
                                                               2-30(d)(8)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-37.12(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-37.12(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-37.12(i)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-47
                                                               Amends Ch. 2,
                                                  6         Art. VIII, 2-76
                                                               thru 2-80
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               2-102
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               2-105
                                                  9         Retitles Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. XXVI
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               2-161
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               2-162
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               2-162.2
                                                  13        Adds
                                                               2-162.3
                                                  14        Adds
                                                               2-162.4
                                                               Readopts with
31135            2-27-19            3-4-19           1         amendments
                                                               31-33
31142            3-27-19                            1         Retitles
                                                               Ch. 20A
                                                               Classifies
                                                  2         20A-1 thru
                                                               20A-21 as Art. I
                                                               Adds Ch. 20A,
                                                  3         Art. II,
                                                               20A-22 thru
                                                               20A-33
31143            3-27-19                            1         Amends
                                                               6-4(f)
                                                               Repeals and
31144            3-27-19            6-1-19           1         reserves
                                                               Ch. 29A
                                                               Amends Ch. 42A,
                                                  2         42A-1 thru 42A-
                                                               41
                                                               Amends Ch. 20,
31181            4-24-19            8-1-19, 8-1-21   1         20-1 thru
                                                               20-12
                                                               Amends Ch. 2,
31192            4-24-19            10-1-19          1         Art. XXII,
                                                               2-153 thru
                                                               2-154.1
                                                               Amends Ch. 37,
                                                  2         Art. III,
                                                               37-31 thru
                                                               37-38.2
31193            5-8-19                             1         Adds
                                                               19-38
                                                  2         Deletes 19-38
31209            5-22-19                            1         Amends
                                                               43-139(c)(19)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               43-139(d)(8)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               43-139(e)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               43-139(g)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               43-141(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               43-141(h)(1)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               43-141(i)(2)
                                                               Amends Ch. 24,
31215            5-22-19                            1         Art. I,
                                                               24-1 thru
                                                               24-6.1
31231            6-12-19                            1         Amends
                                                               18-2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-4(e)
                                  7-1-20           3         Amends
                                                               18-4(f)
                                  7-1-20           4         Adds
                                                               18-4(g)
                                  7-1-20           5         Adds
                                                               18-4(h)
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               18-9(c)(11)
31233            6-12-19                            1         Amends
                                                               15D-15(12)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-53(a)
31289            8-28-19                            1         Adds
                                                               15D-4(18.1)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               15D-5(c)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               15D-5(e)
31313            9-11-19                            1         Amends
                                                               43-46
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               43-67
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               43-68(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               43-71
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               43-78
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               43-94
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               43-95
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               43-135(22)
31332            9-18-19            10-1-19          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               6-10
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               7-2.6(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               7-2.7(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               7-4.11(c)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               7-5.5(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               7-5.15(a)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               7-6.2(e)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               15D-5(b)
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               15D-5.1(c)
                                                  11        Adds
                                                               15D-5.2
                                                  12 - 17   Amends
                                                               Ch. 16
                                  [sec. 18 eff. 7/ 18        Amends
                                    1/20]                      18-4(h)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(2)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(5)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               18-11(a)(5)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               18-11(a)(6)
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(2)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(3)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(4)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(5)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               18-57
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               18-62(b)
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               27-42(e)
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               43A-3(d)
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               43A-17(c)
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               43A-18(b)
                                                  34        Adds
                                                               44-37.2
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               48B-8(a)
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  37        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(i)
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)(4)
                                                  40        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)(5)
                                                  41        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(f)
                                                  42        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  43        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  44        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(f)
                                                  45        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(a)
                                                  46        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(b)
                                                  47        Amends
                                                               49-18.11
                                                  48        Amends
                                                               50-82
                                                  49        Amends
                                                               50-101
                                                  50        Amends
                                                               50-116
                                                  51        Amends
                                                               50-137(a)
                                                  52        Amends
                                                               50-149(a)(6)
31333            9-18-19            10/1/19          1         Amends
                                                               2-37.12
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-105(a)
                                                               Amends Ch. 2,
                                                  3         Art. XVI,
                                                               2-136 thru
                                                               2-137
                                                               Amends Ch. 2,
                                                  4         Art. XXVI-a,
                                                               2-162.1 thru
                                                               2-162.4
31350            10-23-19                           1         Amends
                                                               8-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               8-6
                                                               Amends Ch. 28,
31359            10-23-19                           1         Art. XIX, 28-203
                                                               thru 28-219
31360            10-23-19                           1         Amends
                                                               41-1(11)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               41-11(b)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               41-12(c)
31375            11-13-19                           1         Adds
                                                               17-1.5(b)(7)(D)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               32-10(d)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               50-157(14)
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               50-158(d)
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               50-160(c)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               50-169
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               50-172(e)
31376            11-13-19                           1         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(i)(3)
31383            11-13-19                           1         Amends
                                                               28-41.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-41.1.1(e)
31395            12-11-19           1/1/20           1         Amends
                                                               13-18
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               13-28.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               13-28.2
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               13-28.3
                                                  5         Deletes
                                                               13-28.4
31396            12-11-19           1/1/20           1         Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(2)
31403            12-11-19                           1         Amends
                                                               9-1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               9-6
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-159
31479            3-25-20                            1         Amends
                                                               28-41.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-41.1.1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               43-158
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               43-161(d)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               43-168(g)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               43-168(o)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               43-168(s)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               43-168(t)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               43-169(a)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               43-169(e)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               43-169(i)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               43-169(l)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               43-169(n)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               43-169(p)
                                                  15        Adds
                                                               43-169(r)
                                                  16        Adds
                                                               43-169(s)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               43-170(c)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               43-170(d)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               43-171
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               43-172
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               43-174(b)
31480            3-25-20                            1         Amends
                                                               49-1(8)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               49-1(40)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               49-1(54)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               49-1(72)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               49-1(85)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               49-1(90)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               49-41(a)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               49-43(a)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               49-43(b)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               49-43(c)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               49-46
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               49-48
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               49-51(c)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               49-51(e)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               49-51(f)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               49-51(h)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               49-51(k)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               49-51(n)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               49-52(a)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               49-55.3(b)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               49-55.3(c)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               49-55.3(d)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               49-55.3(f)(2)
31504            4-8-20                             1         Amends
                                                               8-1.4(a)
31505            4-8-20                             1         Amends
                                                               8-1.4(a)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               8-1.4(i)
31533            5-13-20                            1         Amends
                                                               2-8
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-9
                                                               Amends Ch. 28,
31540            5-27-20                            1         Art. XIX,
                                                               28-203 thru
                                                               28-219.1
31552            6-10-20                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
31554            6-10-20                            1         Amends
                                                               44-35(c)
31556            6-24-20                            1         Deletes 5-64(f)
31557            6-24-20                            1         Adds
                                                               42A-2(25.1)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               42A-6(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               42A-12(j)
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               42A-12(l)
31620            9-9-20                             1         Amends
                                                               6A-1(2)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               12B-21
31647            9-9-20                             1         Amends
                                                               12-2
31657            9-23-20            10-1-20          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(2)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-11(a)(6)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(2)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(3)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               18-11(c)(5)
                                                  8         Adds
                                                               28-24.2
                                                               Adds
                                                  9         Ch. 28, Art.
                                                               XXI,
                                                               28-235
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               32-26
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               41A-6(b)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               43-126.6(a)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               43-126.6(d)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(i)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(f)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(f)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(a)
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(b)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               49-18.7(a)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               49-18.7(b)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               49-18.11
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. VII-
31658            9-23-20            10-1-20          1         b,
                                                               2-75,
                                                               2-75.1
                                                               Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XV-
                                                  2         b,
                                                               2-135.2,
                                                               2-135.3
31689            11-11-20                           1         Amends
                                                               47A-1.5(19)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               47A-1.5(25)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               47A-1.6
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               47A-2.1.2(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               47A-2.1.8(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               47A-2.2.1(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               47A-2.2.4
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               47A-2.2.7(a)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               47A-2.2.8
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               47A-2.2.9
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               47A-2.3.1
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               47A-2.3.2
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               47A-2.3.3
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               47A-2.4.7
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               47A-2.5.2(a)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               47A-3.2(b)
31690            11-11-20                           1         Amends ch. 5,
                                                               5-1 thru 5-64
                                                               Amends ch. 45,
31695            11-11-20                           1         45-1 thru
                                                               45-15
31708            12-9-20                            1         Adds
                                                               42A-2(13.1)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               42A-2(16.1)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               42A-2(21.1)
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               42A-2(21.2)
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               42A-2(24.1)
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               42A-2(28)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               42A-6
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               42A-12(j)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               42A-12(l)
                                                               Amends ch. 42A,
                                                  10        art. IV,
                                                               42A-28.1 thru
                                                               42A-28.9
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               42A-40
31714            12-9-20                            1         Amends
                                                               28-42.1(a)(2)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-42.1(b)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               28-42.1(f)
31745            1-27-21                            1         Amends
                                                               34-2(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-2(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-4(5)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-4(23)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-4(26)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               34-4(35)
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               34-4(35.1)
                                                  8         Adds
                                                               34-4(39.1)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               34-4(43)
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               34-4(52.1)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               34-5(d)(3)(B)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               34-6
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               34-8(b)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               34-9(a)(1)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               34-11(a)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               34-11(h)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               34-13(b)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               34-13(c)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               34-15(a)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               34-18(a)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               34-20(a)
                                                  22        Adds
                                                               34-20(d)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               34-21(a)
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               34-22(i)
                                                  25        Adds
                                                               34-22(v)
                                                  26        Adds
                                                               34-22(w)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               34-23(d)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               34-24(a)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               34-24.1
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               34-27(a)
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               34-28(b)
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               34-30(c)
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               34-32(c)
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               34-35(a)
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(3)
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(5)
                                                  37        Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(7)
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(9)
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(12)
                                                  40        Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(16)(B)
                                                  41        Amends
                                                               34-38(b)
                                                  42        Amends
                                                               34-38(c)(5)
                                                  43        Amends
                                                               34-38(c)(15)
                                                  44        Amends
                                                               34-38(c)(16)
                                                  45        Amends
                                                               34-38(h)(5)
                                                  46        Amends
                                                               34-38(i)(1)
                                                  47        Amends
                                                               34-40(f)(2)
                                                               Adds ch. 2, art.
31746            1-27-21                            1         XXIX,
                                                               2-170,
                                                               2-171
                                                               Amends ch. 50,
31747            1-27-21                            1         art. XI,
                                                               50-144 thru
                                                               50-151.7
31770            2-10-21                            1         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
31841            4-28-21                            1         Amends
                                                               42A-12(j)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               42A-12(l)
                                                               Amends ch. 2,
31847            4-28-21                            1         art. XII,
                                                               2-120 thru 2-124
31867            5-26-21                            1         Amends
                                                               12B-2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               12B-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               12B-4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               12B-8(d)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               12B-14
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               12B-19(a)(3)
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               12B-22
                                                  8         Adds
                                                               12B-23
31872            5-26-21                            1         Amends
                                                               1-10
                                                  2         Retitles
                                                               ch. 2, art. IV
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-27(15)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-29
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-30(d)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               2-32
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               2-37.4(g)
31994            9-9-21                             1         Amends
                                                               12-2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               12-11(b)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               12-14(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               12-15
32002            9-22-21                            1         Amends
                                                               2-26.7(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-26.7(c)
                                                  3         Amends ch. 2,
                                                               art. V
                                                           2-41,
                                                               2-42
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-49
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               2-53(8)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               2-98
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               2-139.2(11)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               6-4(g)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               14-4(c)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               41A-6(c)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               43-121(c)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               43-126.5(d)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               43-126.16(5)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               49-1(32)
32003            9-22-21            10-1-21          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               6A-5
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               9A-4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               13-28.1(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               13-28.3
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               14-4(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               ch. 16
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               17-2.2(c)(6)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(d)(2)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(e)(1)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(f)(4)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(g)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(h)(2)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(h)(3)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(i)
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(l)(1)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(s)(1)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(1)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(2)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(3)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(4)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)(10)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               18-11(a)(5)
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               18-11(a)(6)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(2)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               18-11(b)(3)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               18-11(c)(2)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               41A-6(a)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(i)
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)(1)
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               49-18.3(b)
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  37        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(f)
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(a)
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(b)
                                                  40        Amends
                                                               49-18.7(a)
                                                  41        Amends
                                                               49-18.7(b)
                                                  42        Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  43        Amends
                                                               49-18.11
                                                  44        Amends
                                                               49-18.12
32004            9-22-21                            1         Amends
                                                               34-32(c)
32005            9-22-21                            1         Amends
                                                               34-25(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-25(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-25(g)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               34-25(h)
32017            10-13-21                           1         Amends
                                                               42A-12(j)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               42A-12(l)
32020            10-13-21                           1         Amends
                                                               24-3(c)(2)
32035            10-27-21                           1         Amends
                                                               34-4(35)
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               34-22.2
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               34-22.3
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               34-22.4
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               34-24.2
                                                               Amends ch. 27,
32057            12-8-21                            1         art. VIII,
                                                               27-45 thru 27-58
32058            12-8-21                            1         Amends
                                                               27-30(d)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-30(f)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               27-30(g)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               27-31
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               27-32
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               27-38(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               27-42
32069            12-8-21                            1         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                               Amends ch. 2,
32070            12-8-21                            1         art. XXI-a,
                                                               2-152.1 thru
                                                               2-152.4
                                                               Amends ch. 12A,
32072            12-8-21                            1         12A-1 thru
                                                               12A-62
32125            1-26-22                            1         Amends
                                                               41A-9
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               41A-14.3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               41A-16(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               41A-17(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               41A-20.1
32145            2-23-22                            1         Amends
                                                               ch. 48B (title)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               48B-1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               48B-2
                                                               Amends
                                                  4         ch. 48B, art. II
                                                               (title)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               48B-6(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               48B-7(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               48B-8(a)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               48B-9(a)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               48B-10(a)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               48B-12(a)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               48B-13
                                                               Amends
                                                  12        ch. 48B, art.
                                                               III (title)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               48B-15
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               48B-17(a)
                                                               Adds
                                                               ch. 48B, art.
                                                  15        IV,
                                                               48B-18 thru
                                                               48B-28
32148            2-23-22                            1         Corrects
                                                               17-10.2(i)(3)
                                                               Re-adopts and
32154            2-23-22            3-5-22           1         amends
                                                               31-33
32157            3-9-22                             1         Amends
                                                               20A-2
                                                  2         Adds
                                                               20A-3(21.1)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               20A-8(c)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               20A-14(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               20A-15(a)
32158            3-9-22                             1         Amends
                                                               34-22.3
32168            4-13-22                            1         Amends
                                                               8A-40(d)
32180            4-27-22                            1         Amends
                                                               47A-1.5
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               47A-1.6(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               47A-2.1.2(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               47A-2.4.11
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               47A-4.6
32181            4-27-22                            1         Amends
                                                               17-1.5(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               17-3.2(e)(2)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               17-6.2(b)(2)
                                                               Amends ch. 17,
                                                  4         art. VIII,
                                                               17-8.1 thru
                                                               17-8.2
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(c)(1)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(c)(9)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(d)(2)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(e)(1)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(g)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(r)(6)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(s)(1)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(s)(8)
32194            5-11-22            11-11-22         1         Amends
                                                               7-4.2(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               7-4.5
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               7-4.10(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               7-8.1(e)
32195            5-11-22                            1         Amends
                                                               20A-4.1
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               20A-5(h)
                                                               Amends ch. 20A,
                                                  3         art. II,
                                                               20A-22 thru
                                                               20A-34
                                                               Amends ch. 2,
32211            5-25-22                            1         art. VIII,
                                                               2-76 thru 2-80
32213            5-25-22                            1         Amends
                                                               42A-22
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               42A-28.2(a)(2)
32232            6-22-22                            1         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(d)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(g)(2)(A)
32235            6-22-22                            1         Amends
                                                               28-41.1.1
                                                               Amends ch. 43,
32236            6-22-22                            1         art. X,
                                                               43-157 thru
                                                               43-175
32239            6-22-22                            1         Amends
                                                               27-46(3)
                                                               Adds ch. 38A,
                                                  2         38A-1 thru
                                                               38A-10
32265            8-10-22                            1         Adds
                                                               15D-15(9.1)
                                                               Amends
                                                  2         15D-15(29) thru
                                                               (41)
                                                  3         Deletes
                                                               15D-15(30)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               15D-16
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               15D-17(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               15D-21(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               15D-22(a)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               15D-50
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               15D-52(a)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               15D-53
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               15D-55
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               15D-56
32291            9-14-22                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-81.1(a)
32310            9-28-22            10-1-22          1         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-26.2(f)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               5A-8(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(d)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(e)(1)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               17-10.2(g)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               18-3(a)(3)(F)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               18-4(g)(4)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               18-9(b)(7)(D)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               18-11(a)(5)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               18-11(a)(6)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               18-11(b)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               20A-34
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               27-53
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(i)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(f)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(f)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(a)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(b)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               49-18.9
32329            10-26-22                           1         Amends
                                                               27-46(3)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               27-53
32330            10-26-22                           1         Amends
                                                               13-10
32333            10-26-22                           1         Adds
                                                               28-61.1
32334            10-26-22                           1         Amends
                                                               18-55
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               18-56(b)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               18-58
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               18-59
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               18-61.1
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               18-61.2
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               18-61.3
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               18-62(a)
                                                  9         Adds
                                                               18-65.1
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               18-66(a)
32342            11-9-22                            1         Amends
                                                               34-9(a)
32344            11-9-22                            2         Amends
                                                               34-25(b)
32362            12-14-22                           1         Amends
                                                               ch. 27, art. V
                                                  1         Amends
                                                               15D-57(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-4(b)
32363            12-14-22           1-1-23           1         Amends
                                                               44-48
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               44-49(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               44-50
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               44-52(b)
32397            2-22-23                            1         Amends
                                                               8A-4(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               8A-6(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               8A-8
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               8A-9
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               8A-11(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               8A-14
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               8A-16(6)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               8A-18
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               8A-27
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               8A-40(k)
                                                  11        Adds
                                                               8A-41
                                                               Amends ch. 32,
32407            3-8-23                             1         art. IV,
                                                               32-32 thru
                                                               32-54
32466            5-24-23                            1         Amends
                                                               2-120(g)
32467            6-14-23                            1         Amends
                                                               47A-2.3.3(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               47A-2.4.8(f)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               47A-2.4.9(a)
32470            6-14-23                            1         Adds
                                                               28-2(4.2)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-2(14)
                                                  3         Adds
                                                               28-2(18.1)
                                                  4         Adds
                                                               28-2(20.1)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-4
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               28-5.1
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               28-19
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               28-76.2
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               28-81.1(a)
                                                  10        Retitles
                                                               28-88
                                                  11        Adds
                                                               28-88(c)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               28-129
                                                               Amends
32472            6-14-23                            1         ch. 12A,
                                                               12A-1 thru
                                                               12A-64
32473            6-14-23                            1         Amends
                                                               27-30(g)
                                                               Adds
                                                  2         ch. 42B,
                                                               42B-1 thru
                                                               42B-16
                                                               Adds
32484            6-28-23                            1         ch. 2, art. XXX,
                                                               2-172 thru
                                                               2-174
32485            6-28-23                            1         Retitles
                                                               ch. 42A, art. IV
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               42A-28.2(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               42A-28.3(d)
32488            6-28-23                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-114.2(b)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               28-193(3)
32556            9-20-23            10-1-23          1         Amends
                                                               2-168(b)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               7-2.7(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               7-4.11(c)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               7-5.5(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               7-5.15(a)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               8A-8(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               8A-20(e)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               12B-6(c)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               12B-13
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               15D-5(b)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               18-11
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               18-57
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               27-31(e)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               27-42(d)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               27-42(f)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               42B-5
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               43A-18(b)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               48B-21
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(i)
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(f)
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(f)
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(a)
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               49-18.5(b)
                                                  37        Amends
                                                               49-18.7(a)
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               49-18.7(b)
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  40        Amends
                                                               50-82
                                                  41        Amends
                                                               50-101
                                                  42        Amends
                                                               50-116
                                                  43        Amends
                                                               50-137
                                                  44        Amends
                                                               50-149(a)
32557            9-20-23                            1         Amends
                                                               2-53
                                                               Adds ch. 2, art.
                                                  2         XXXI,
                                                               2-175 thru
                                                               2-177
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               9B-6
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               9B-7
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               13-7
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               13-8(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               13-9
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               13-10
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               13-11
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               28-130(a)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               28-130.7(e)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               28-130.12(a)
32574            10-21-23                           1         Amends
                                                               31-27
32597            11-8-23                            1         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
32604            12-13-23                           1         Amends
                                                               34-4(21)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               34-4(35)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               34-6
                                                  4         Deletes
                                                               34-16(f)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               34-17(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               34-19(a)(3)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               34-19(b)(9)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               34-22.3(a)(1)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               34-22.4(a)
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               34-24.2
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               34-32(c)(5)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               34-36(b)(1)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               34-38(k)
32607            12-13-23                           1         Amends
                                                               41A-4(e)
32608            12-13-23                           1         Adds
                                                               7A-4.1
32655            2-14-24                            1         Amends
                                                               7A-2
32673            3-27-24                            1         Amends
                                                               17-2.2(c)
32676            3-27-24            5-1-24           1         Amends
                                                               49-18.14
32703            4-10-24                            1         Amends
                                                               15D-9.30
32704            4-10-24                            1         Amends
                                                               47A-2.4.8(f)(3)
32710            4-24-24                            1         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-59
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-99
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               28-101
32725            5-8-24                             1         Repeals 31-33
32726            5-8-24                             1         Amends
                                                               40B-2
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               40B-3
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               40B-6(d)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               40B-7(a)
32735            5-22-24            10-1-24          1         Amends
                                                               28-2(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-26(b)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               ch. 28, div. 4
                                                               Amends
32789            8-14-24                            1         Ch. 2, Art. V-a
                                                               (title)
                                                           Amends
                                                               2-43
                                                           Amends
                                                               2-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-49
32797            8-14-24                            1         Adds
                                                               28-76.6
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-130.9(a)
32801            8-14-24            8-14-24          1         Deletes 8-1.5(a-
                                                               1)
                                  1-1-25           2         Amends
                                                               40A-1
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               40A-3(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               40A-4(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               40A-4(d)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               40A-4(e)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               40A-6(b)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               40A-7
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               40A-7.1
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               40A-9(a)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               40A-35
32843            9-11-24                            1         Amends
                                                               7-5.5(a)
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               7-5.5(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               7-5.5(e)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               7-5.6(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               7-5.12
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               7-5.13(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               7-5.15
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               7-5.16(c)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               7-8.1(e)
32847            9-11-24                            1         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
32848            9-11-24                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
32863            9-18-24                            1         Amends 2-26.2(a)
                                                  2         Amends 2-26.2(f)
                                                  3         Amends 2-168(b)
                                                  4         Amends 18-9(c)
                                                  5         Adds 18-9.1
                                                  6         Amends 18-11(a)
                                                               (5)
                                                  7         Amends 18-11(b)
                                                               (2)
                                  4-1-25           8         Amends 18-35(a)
                                                  9         Amends 24-3(b)
                                                  10        Amends 24-3(e)
                                                  11        Amends 28-26(f)
                                                  12        Amends 28-114.12
                                                               (b)
                                                  13        Amends 28-114.12
                                                               (c)
                                                  14        Amends 28-121.15
                                                               (a)(3)
                                                  15        Amends 28-121.15
                                                               (a)(5)
                                                  16        Amends 28-121.15
                                                               (c)(5)
                                                  17        Amends 28-121.16
                                                               (d)
                                                  18        Amends 43-126.6
                                                               (a)
                                                  19        Amends 49-161(e)
                                                  20        Amends 49-18.1
                                                               (c)
                                                  21        Amends 49-18.1
                                                               (f)(1)
                                                  22        Amends 49-18.1
                                                               (g)
                                                  23        Amends 49-18.1
                                                               (i)
                                                  24        Amends 49-18.2
                                                               (c)
                                                  25        Amends 49-18.2
                                                               (f)
                                                  26        Amends 49-18.4
                                                               (b)
                                                  27        Amends 49-18.4
                                                               (e)
                                                  28        Amends 49-18.4
                                                               (f)
                                                  29        Amends 49-18.5
                                                  30        Amends 49-18.6
                                                  31        Amends 49-18.8
                                                  32        Amends 49-18.9
                                                  33        Amends 49-18.11
                                                  34        Amends 49-18.16
                                                               (a)
                                                  35        Amends 49-18.16
                                                               (b)
                                                  36        Amends 49-18.16
                                                               (e)
32864            9-18-24                            1         Amends Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. V-c (title)
                                                           Amends 2-48
                                                           Amends 2-49
                                                               Amends Ch. 2,
                                                  2         Art. XVII-a
                                                               (title)
                                                           Repeals 2-139.1
                                                           Repeals 2-139.2
                                                  3         Amends Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. XIX (title)
                                                           Amends 2-142
                                                           Amends 2-143
                                                  4         Amends 5-21
                                                  5         Amends 14B-5
                                                  6         Amends 20A-24(6)
                                                  7         Amends 20A-24
                                                               (10)
                                                  8         Amends 27-17(a)
                                                  9         Amends 28-19(a)
                                                  10        Amends 28-24
                                                  11        Amends 28-29
                                                  12        Amends 28-103
                                                  13        Amends 28-130(b)
                                                  14        Amends 28-130.2
                                                               (b)
                                                  15        Amends 28-130.5
                                                  16        Amends 28-130.12
                                                               (d)
                                                  17        Amends 28-194
                                                  18        Amends 28-201(c)
                                                  19        Amends 30-2
                                                  20        Amends 36-45
                                                  21        Amends 39-4(a)
                                                  22        Amends 42A-6(g)
                                                               (1)
                                                  23        Amends 42A-28.2
                                                               (g)
                                                  24        Amends 42A-28.8
                                                               (b)
                                                  25        Amends 42A-28.9
                                                  26        Amends 42A-40(d)
                                                  27        Amends 43-63
                                                  28        Amends 43-121(c)
                                                  29        Amends 43-126.5
                                                               (d)
                                                  30        Amends 43-126.16
                                                               (5)
                                                  31        Amends 43-135(9)
                                                  32        Amends 45-7
                                                  33        Amends 49-27(a)
32865            9-18-24                            1         Amends 34-9(a)
                                                  2         Amends 34-25(b)
32911            11-13-24                           1         Amends 2-11.2
32924            12-11-24                           1         Amends 12A-2(22)
                                                  2         Amends 12A-29(1)
                                                               Amends Ch. 12A,
                                                  3         Art. VII, 12A-46
                                                               thru 12A-48
32926            12-11-24                           1         Amends 2-26.2(g)
                                                               (1)
                                                  2         Amends 2-26.2(h)
                                                               (4)
32933            12-11-24           12-11-25         1         Amends 41-1
                                                           Amends 41-2
                                                           Amends 41-3
32960            1-8-25                             1         Amends 28-44
                                                  2         Amends 28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends 28-59
32971            1-22-25                            1         Amends 49-43(c)
                                                               (3)
                                                  2         Adds 49-43(c)(4)
33028            3-26-25                            1         Amends 44-35(c)
33031            3-26-25                            1         Amends 18-29
                                                  2         Amends 18-30
                                                  3         Amends 18-31
                                                  4         Amends 18-32
                                                  5         Amends 18-33
                                                  6         Adds 18-34(c)
                                                  7         Amends 18-35(b)
                                                  8         Repeals 18-36
                                                  9         Amends 18-38
                                                  10        Amends 18-39
                                                  11        Amends 18-41
                                                  12        Amends 18-44
                                                  13        Amends 18-45
                                                  14        Amends 18-46
                                                  15        Amends 18-48
                                                  16        Amends 18-49
                                                  17        Amends 18-50
33071            4-9-25                             1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-60(b)
33105            5-14-25                            1         Amends
                                                               32-11.3(b)
33115            5-14-25                            1         Amends
                                                               2-120(g)
33152            6-25-25                            1         Amends
                                                               28-44
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               28-45(a)
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               28-50(c)
33224            9-10-25                            2         Amends
                                                               1-5
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               2-26.7(a)
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               2-26.7(c)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               2-44
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               11-1
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               11-2
                                                  8         Repeals
                                                               11-18
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               11-19
                                                  10        Adds
                                                               13-2.1
                                                  11        Repeals Ch. 13A
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               14B-2(c)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               14B-3
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               14B-6
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               14B-7
                                                  16        Adds
                                                               14B-7.1
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               14B-8
                                                  18        Adds
                                                               17-2.2(d)
                                                  19        Deletes 17-10.2
                                                               (s)(7)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               18-2
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               18-4(c)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               18-4(e)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               18-5(d)
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               18-5(e)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               18-6(b)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               18-8(b)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               18-9(a)(1)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               18-32
                                                  30        Repeals Ch. 20
                                                  31        Repeals Ch. 25
                                                  32        Amends
                                                               Ch. 25A
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               27-11(d)(17)
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               27-30(b)
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               27-30(g)
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               27-31(c)
                                                  37        Amends
                                                               27-42(a)
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               27-42(b)
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               28-128.6
                                                  40        Deletes 31-13.1
                                                               (f)
                                                  41        Repeals 31-35
                                                  42        Amends
                                                               32-14
                                                  43        Amends
                                                               32-15(a)
                                                  44        Repeals 36-5
                                                  45        Repeals 36-27
                                                  46        Repeals 36-34
                                                  47        Repeals 36-49
                                                  48        Repeals Ch. 38
                                                  49        Repeals Ch. 39
                                                  50        Amends
                                                               43-126.17
                                                  51        Amends
                                                               43-126.18
                                                  52        Repeals 43-
                                                               126.23
                                                  53        Repeals 48-6
                                                  54        Repeals 48-8
                                                  55        Amends
                                                               48-11
                                                               Readopts with
33229            9-10-25                            1         amendments
                                                               Ch. 12
33232            9-17-25                            1         Amends
                                                               2-168
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               6A-5
                                                  3         Amends
                                                               9A-4
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               14-4(a)
                                                  5         Amends
                                                               14-4(b)
                                                  6         Amends
                                                               15D-9(a)
                                                  7         Amends
                                                               15D-9.2(c)
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               15D-9.10
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               15D-9.16
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               15D-9.26(h)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               15D-9.31(c)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               15D-21(a)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               15D-23(c)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               15D-30
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               15D-36
                                                  16        Amends
                                                               15D-46(i)
                                                  17        Amends
                                                               15D-57(a)
                                                  18        Amends
                                                               15D-58(b)
                                                  19        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(d)(2)
                                                  20        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(e)(1)
                                                  21        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(f)(4)
                                                  22        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(g)
                                                  23        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(h)(2)(A)
                                                  24        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(i)
                                                  25        Amends
                                                               17-10.2(s)(1)
                                                  26        Amends
                                                               18-9(c)
                                                  27        Amends
                                                               18-11(a)(5)
                                                  28        Amends
                                                               18-11(b)
                                                  29        Amends
                                                               19-121(a)
                                                  30        Amends
                                                               27-31(d)
                                                  31        Amends
                                                               27-53
                                                  32        Adds
                                                               27-53.1
                                                  33        Amends
                                                               28-4(b)
                                                  34        Amends
                                                               41A-6
                                                  35        Amends
                                                               47A-1.6
                                                  36        Amends
                                                               47A-2.1.2(b)
                                                  37        Amends
                                                               47A-2.2.8
                                                  38        Amends
                                                               48A-6(b)(9)
                                                  39        Amends
                                                               48A-8(c)
                                                  40        Amends
                                                               48A-14
                                                  41        Amends
                                                               48A-20
                                                  42        Amends
                                                               48A-29(i)
                                                  43        Amends
                                                               48A-43(a)
                                                  44        Amends
                                                               48A-44(b)
                                                  45        Amends
                                                               48C-6(b)(9)
                                                  46        Amends
                                                               48C-8(c)
                                                  47        Amends
                                                               48C-15
                                                  48        Amends
                                                               48C-21
                                                  49        Amends
                                                               48C-30(h)
                                                  50        Amends
                                                               49-10(f)
                                                  51        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(c)
                                                  52        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(f)(1)
                                                  53        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(g)
                                                  54        Amends
                                                               49-18.1(i)
                                                  55        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(c)
                                                  56        Amends
                                                               49-18.2(f)
                                                  57        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(b)
                                                  58        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(e)
                                                  59        Amends
                                                               49-18.4(f)
                                                  60        Amends
                                                               49-18.5
                                                  61        Amends
                                                               49-18.6(b)
                                                  62        Amends
                                                               49-18.6(d)
                                                  63        Amends
                                                               49-18.7
                                                  64        Amends
                                                               49-18.9
                                                  65        Amends
                                                               49-18.10
                                                  66        Amends
                                                               49-18.11
                                                  67        Amends
                                                               49-18.12
                                                  68        Amends
                                                               49-18.13
                                                  69        Amends
                                                               49-18.16(g)
                                                  70        Amends
                                                               49-49(b)
                                                  71        Amends
                                                               49-49(c)
                                                  72        Amends
                                                               50-164(d)
33233            9-17-25                            1         Amends
                                                               Ch. 2, Art. XIX
                                                  2         Amends
                                                               2-152.4(a)
                                                  3         Repeals Ch. 2,
                                                               Art. XXXI
                                                  4         Amends
                                                               13-7
                                                  5         Adds
                                                               13-9
                                                  6         Adds
                                                               13-10
                                                  7         Adds
                                                               13-11
                                                  8         Amends
                                                               20A-24(a)
                                                  9         Amends
                                                               20A-25
                                                  10        Amends
                                                               20A-26(a)
                                                  11        Amends
                                                               20A-27(a)
                                                  12        Amends
                                                               20A-27(d)
                                                  13        Amends
                                                               20A-27(h)(4)
                                                  14        Amends
                                                               20A-31(g)(1)
                                                  15        Amends
                                                               20A-33(b)
                                                            
 
 
VOLUME III
Volume III: Contains 10/25 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 33252, passed 9-24-2025
CHAPTER 51A
DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE:
ORDINANCE NO. 19455, AS AMENDED
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
51A-1.101.   Reserved.
Sec.
51A-1.102.   Applicability and purpose.
Sec.
51A-1.103.   Enforcement.
Sec.
51A-1.104.   Certificate of occupancy.
Sec.
51A-1.104.1.   Applications.
Sec.
51A-1.105.   Fees.
Sec.
51A-1.105.1.   Fee exemptions and refunds.
Sec.
51A-1.106.   Notification signs required to be obtained and posted.
Sec.
51A-1.107.   Special exceptions for the handicapped.
Sec.
51A-1.108.   Comprehensive plan.
Sec.
51A-1.109.   Apportionment of exactions.
ARTICLE II.
INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
Sec.
51A-2.101.   Interpretations.
Sec.
51A-2.102.   Definitions.
ARTICLE III.
DECISIONMAKING AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES.
Sec.
51A-3.101.   City plan and zoning commission.
Sec.
51A-3.102.   Board of adjustment.
Sec.
51A-3.103.   Landmark commission.
Sec.
51A-3.104.   Reserved.
Sec.
51A-3.105.   Building official.
ARTICLE IV.
ZONING REGULATIONS.
Division
51A-4.100. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
Sec.
51A-4.101.   New zoning districts established.
Sec.
51A-4.102.   Reserved.
Sec.
51A-4.103.   Zoning district map.
Sec.
51A-4.104.   Zoning district boundaries.
Sec.
51A-4.105.   Interpretation of district regulations.
Secs. 51A-4.106 thru 51A-4.109.   Reserved.
Division
51A-4.110. Residential District Regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.111.   Agricultural [A(A)] District.
Sec.
51A-4.112.   Single family districts.
Sec.
51A-4.113.   Duplex [D(A)] district.
Sec.
51A-4.114.   Townhouse [TH-1(A), TH-2(A), and TH-3(A)] districts.
Sec.
51A-4.115.   Clustered housing (CH) district.
Sec.
51A-4.116.   Multifamily districts.
Sec.
51A-4.117.   Manufactured home [MH(A)] district.
Secs. 51A-4.118 thru 51A-4.119.   Reserved.
Division
51A-4.120. Nonresidential District Regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.121.   Office districts.
Sec.
51A-4.122.   Retail districts.
Sec.
51A-4.123.   Commercial service and industrial districts.
Sec.
51A-4.124.   Central area districts.
Sec.
51A-4.125.   Mixed use districts.
Sec.
51A-4.126.   Multiple commercial districts.
Sec.
51A-4.127.   Urban corridor districts.
Division
51A-4.200. Use Regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.201.   Agricultural uses.
         (1)   Animal production.
         (2)   Commercial stable.
         (3)   Crop production.
         (4)   Private stable.
Sec.
51A-4.202.   Commercial and business service uses.
         (1)   Building repair and maintenance shop.
         (2)   Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility.
         (3)   Catering service.
         (4)   Commercial cleaning or laundry plant.
         (5)   Custom business services.
         (6)   Custom woodworking, furniture construction, or repair.
         (7)   Electronics service center.
         (8)   Job or lithographic printing.
         (8.1)   Labor hall.
         (9)   Machine or welding shop.
         (10)   Machinery, heavy equipment, or truck sales and service.
         (11)   Medical or scientific laboratory.
         (12)   Technical school.
         (13)   Tool or equipment rental.
         (14)   Vehicle or engine repair or maintenance.
Sec.
51A-4.203.   Industrial Uses.
         (0)   Alcoholic beverage manufacturing.
         (1)   Industrial (inside).
         (1.1)   Industrial (inside) for light manufacturing.
         (2)   Industrial (outside).
         (2.1)   Medical/infectious waste incinerator.
         (3)   Metal salvage facility.
         (3.1)   Mining.
         (3.2)   Gas drilling and production.
         (3.3)   Gas pipeline compressor station.
         (4)   Municipal waste incinerator.
         (4.1)   Organic compost recycling facility.
         (5)   Outside salvage or reclamation.
         (5.1)   Pathological waste incinerator.
         (6)   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant.
Sec.
51A-4.204.   Institutional and community service uses.
         (1)   Reserved
         (2)   Cemetery or mausoleum.
         (3)   Child or adult care facility.
         (4)   Church.
         (5)   College, university, or seminary.
         (6)   Reserved.
         (7)   Community service center.
         (8)   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions.
         (9)   Convent or monastery.
         (10)   Reserved.
         (11)   Foster home.
         (12)   Reserved.
         (13)   Halfway house.
         (14)   Hospital.
         (15)   Reserved.
         (16)   Library, art gallery, or museum.
         (17)   Public or private school.
Sec.
51A-4.205.   Lodging uses.
         (1)   Hotel or motel.
         (1.1)   Extended stay hotel or motel.
         (2)   Lodging or boarding house.
         (2.1)   Overnight general purpose shelter.
         (3)   Short-term rental lodging.
Sec.
51A-4.206.   Miscellaneous uses.
         (1)   Attached non-premise sign.
         (2)   Carnival or circus (temporary).
         (3)   Detached non-premise sign.
         (4)   Hazardous waste management facility.
         (5)   Placement of fill material.
         (6)   Temporary construction or sales office.
Sec.
51A-4.207.   Office uses.
         (1)   Alternative financial establishment.
         (2)   Financial institution without drive-in window.
         (3)   Financial institution with drive-in window.
         (4)   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
         (5)   Office.
Sec.
51A-4.208.   Recreation uses.
         (1)   Country club with private membership.
         (2)   Private recreation center, club or area.
         (3)   Public park, playground, or golf course.
Sec.
51A-4.209.   Residential uses.
         (1)   College dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
         (2)   Duplex.
         (3)   Group residential facility.
         (3.1)   Handicapped group dwelling unit.
         (4)   Manufactured home park, manufactured home subdivision, or
campground.
         (5)   Multifamily.
         (5.1)   Residential hotel.
         (5.2)   Retirement housing.
         (6)   Single family.
Sec.
51A-4.210.   Retail and personal service uses.
         (1)   Ambulance service.
         (2)   Animal shelter or clinic.
         (3)   Auto service center.
         (4)   Alcoholic beverage establishments.
         (5)   Business school.
         (6)   Car wash.
         (7)   Commercial amusement (inside).
         (8)   Commercial amusement (outside).
         (8.1)   Commercial motor vehicle parking.
         (9)   Commercial parking lot or garage.
         (9.1)   Convenience store with drive-through.
         (10)   Drive-in theater.
         (11)   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
         (12)   Furniture store.
         (13)   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
         (14)   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
         (14.1)   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or
more.
         (15)   Home improvement center, lumber, brick or building materials
sales yard.
         (16)   Household equipment and appliance repair.
         (16.1)   Liquefied natural gas fueling station.
         (17)   Liquor store.
         (18)   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
         (19)   Motor vehicle fueling station.
         (20)   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
         (21)   Outside sales.
         (21.1)    Paraphernalia shop.
         (22)   Pawn shop.
         (23)   Personal service use.
         (24)   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service.
         (25)   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service.
         (26)   Surface parking.
         (27)   Swap or buy shop.
         (28)   Taxidermist.
         (29)   Temporary retail use.
         (30)   Theater.
         (30.1)   Truck stop.
         (31)   Vehicle display, sales, and service.
Sec.
51A-4.211.   Transportation uses.
         (1)   Airport or landing field.
         (2)   Commercial bus station and terminal.
         (3)   Heliport.
         (4)   Helistop.
         (5)   Private street or alley.
         (6)   Railroad passenger station.
         (7)   Railroad yard, roundhouse, or shops.
         (8)   STOL (short takeoff or landing) port.
         (9)   Transit passenger shelter.
         (10)   Transit passenger station or transfer center.
Sec.
51A-4.212.   Utility and public service uses.
         (1)   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
         (2)   Electrical generating plant.
         (3)   Electrical substation.
         (4)   Local utilities.
         (5)   Police or fire station.
         (6)   Post office.
         (7)   Radio, television, or microwave tower.
         (8)   Refuse transfer station.
         (9)   Sanitary landfill.
         (10)   Sewage treatment plant.
         (10.1)   Tower/antenna for cellular communication.
         (11)   Utility or government installation other than listed.
         (12)   Water treatment plant.
Sec.
51A-4.213.   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
         (1)   Auto auction.
         (2)   Building mover’s temporary storage yard.
         (3)   Contractor’s maintenance yard.
         (4)   Freight terminal.
         (5)   Livestock auction pens or sheds.
         (6)   Manufactured building sales lot.
         (7)   Mini-warehouse.
         (8)   Office showroom/warehouse.
         (9)   Outside storage.
         (10)   Petroleum product storage and wholesale.
         (11)   Recycling buy-back center.
         (11.1)   Recycling collection center.
         (11.2)   Recycling drop-off container.
         (11.3)   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection.
         (12)   Sand, gravel, or earth sales and storage.
         (13)   Trade center.
         (14)   Vehicle storage lot.
         (15)   Warehouse.
Secs. 51A-4.214 thru 51A-4.216.   Reserved.
Sec.
51A-4.217.   Accessory uses.
         (1)   Accessory community center (private).
         (1.1)   Accessory electric vehicle charging station.
         (2)   Accessory game court (private).
         (3)   Accessory helistop.
         (3.1)   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
         (4)   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
         (5)   Accessory outside sales.
         (6)   Accessory outside storage.
         (6.1)   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (7)   Amateur communication tower.
         (7.1)   Day home.
         (7.2)   General waste incinerator.
         (8)   Home occupation.
         (8.1)   Live unit.
         (9)   Occasional sales (garage sales).
         (10)   Private stable.
         (11)   Swimming pool (private).
         (12)   Pedestrian skybridges.
Sec.
51A-4.218.   Limited uses.
Sec.
51A-4.219.   Specific use permit (SUP).
Sec.
51A-4.220.   Classification of new uses.
Sec.
51A-4.221.   Sexually oriented businesses.
Division
51A-4.300. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.301.   Off-street parking regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.302.   Parking [P(A)] district regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.303.   Off-street loading regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.304.   Off-street stacking space regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.305.   Handicapped parking regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.306.   Off-street parking in the central business district.
Sec.
51A-4.307.   Nonconformity as to parking or loading regulations.
Secs. 51A-4.308 thru 51A-4.309.   Reserved.
Division
51A-4.310. Off-Street Parking Reductions.
Sec.
51A-4.311.   Special exceptions.
Sec.
51A-4.312.   Tree preservation parking reduction.
Sec.
51A-4.313.   Administrative parking reduction.
Sec.
51A-4.314.   Reductions for providing bicycle parking.
Division
51A-4.320. Special Parking and Loading Regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.321.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-4.322.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-4.323.   Procedures for special parking or loading approval.
Sec.
51A-4.324.   Review by the director.
Sec.
51A-4.325.   Decision of the director.
Sec.
51A-4.326.   Notice.
Sec.
51A-4.327.   Appeals.
Sec.
51A-4.328.   Agreement required.
Sec.
51A-4.329.   Special parking license.
Sec.
51A-4.329.1.   Offenses.
Sec.
51A-4.329.2.   Revocation of certificate of occupancy.
Division
51A-4.330. Bicycle Parking Regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.331.   Applicability.
Sec.
51A-4.332.   General provisions.
Sec.
51A-4.333.   Spaces required.
Sec.
51A-4.334.   Location and design.
Sec.
51A-4.335.   Waivers.
Division
51A-4.340. Mechanized Parking.
Sec.
51A-4.341.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-4.342.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-4.343.   Procedures for mechanized parking approval.
Sec.
51A-4.344.   Mechanized parking license.
Sec.
51A-4.345.   General standards.
Division
51A-4.400. Yard, Lot, and Space Regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.401.   Minimum front yard.
Sec.
51A-4.402.   Minimum side yard.
Sec.
51A-4.403.   Minimum rear yard.
Sec.
51A-4.404.   Minimum lot area for residential use.
Sec.
51A-4.405.   Minimum lot width for residential use.
Sec.
51A-4.406.   Minimum lot depth for residential use.
Sec.
51A-4.407.   Maximum lot coverage.
Sec.
51A-4.408.   Maximum building height.
Sec.
51A-4.409.   Maximum floor area ratio.
Sec.
51A-4.410.   Schedule of yard, lot, and space regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.411.   Shared access development.
Sec.
51A-4.412.   Residential proximity slope.
Division
51A-4.500. Overlay and Conservation District Regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.501.   Historic overlay district.
Sec.
51A-4.502.   Institutional overlay district.
Sec.
51A-4.503.   D and D-1 liquor control overlay districts.
Sec.
51A-4.504.   Demolition delay overlay district.
Sec.
51A-4.505.   Conservation districts.
Sec.
51A-4.506.   Modified delta overlay district.
Sec.
51A-4.507.   Neighborhood stabilization overlay.
Sec.
51A-4.508.   Turtle Creek Environmental Corridor.
Sec.
51A-4.509.   Parking management overlay district.
Sec.
51A-4.510.   Accessory dwelling unit overlay.
Sec.
51A-4.511.   Neighborhood forest overlay.
Division
51A-4.600. Regulations of Special Applicability.
Sec.
51A-4.601.   Creation of a building site.
Sec.
51A-4.602.   Fence, screening and visual obstruction regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.603.   Use of conveyance as a building.
Sec.
51A-4.604.   Restrictions on access through a lot.
Sec.
51A-4.605.   Design standards.
Division
51A-4.700. Zoning Procedures.
Sec.
51A-4.701.   Zoning amendments.
Sec.
51A-4.702.   Planned development (PD) district regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.703.   Board of adjustment hearing procedures.
Sec.
51A-4.704.   Nonconforming uses and structures.
Sec.
51A-4.705.   Annexed territory temporarily zoned.
Sec.
51A-4.706.   Reserved.
Division
51A-4.800. Development Impact Review.
Sec.
51A-4.801.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-4.802.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-4.803.   Site plan review.
Division
51A-4.900. Affordable Housing.
Sec.
51A-4.901.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-4.902.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-4.903.   Application of division.
Sec.
51A-4.904.   Special exception.
Sec.
51A-4.905.   Procedures to obtain a density bonus.
Sec.
51A-4.906.   Review by the director.
Sec.
51A-4.907.   Decision by the director.
Sec.
51A-4.908.   Affordable housing instrument required.
Sec.
51A-4.909.   Operation of affordable housing program.
Sec.
51A-4.910.   Alternative ways to satisfy SAH unit obligation.
Division
51A-4.1000. Park Land Dedication.
Sec.
51A-4.1001.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-4.1002.   Applicability.
Sec.
51A-4.1003.   Definitions and interpretations.
Sec.
51A-4.1004.   Dedication.
Sec.
51A-4.1005.   Fee-in-lieu.
Sec.
51A-4.1006.   Park development fee.
Sec.
51A-4.1007.   Calculations, deductions, and credits.
Sec.
51A-4.1008.   Park land dedication standards.
Sec.
51A-4.1009.   Park land dedication fund.
Sec.
51A-4.1010.   Tree mitigation.
Sec.
51A-4.1011.   Appeals.
Sec.
51A-4.1012.   Review.
Division
51A-4.1100. Mixed-Income Housing.
Sec.
51A-4.1101.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-4.1102.   Applicability.
Sec.
51A-4.1103.   Definitions and interpretations.
Sec.
51A-4.1104.   Development bonus period.
Sec.
51A-4.1105.   Procedures to obtain a development bonus.
Sec.
51A-4.1106.   Development regulations.
Sec.
51A-4.1107.   Design standards.
Sec.
51A-4.1108.   Board of adjustment variances.
ARTICLE V.
FLOODPLAIN AND ESCARPMENT ZONE REGULATIONS.
Division
51A-5.100. Floodplain Regulations.
Sec.
51A-5.101.   Definitions and interpretations applicable to the floodplain
regulations.
Sec.
51A-5.102.   Designation or removal of FP areas.
Sec.
51A-5.103.   Compliance in undesignated floodplain areas.
Sec.
51A-5.103.1.   Vegetation alteration in floodplain prohibited.
Sec.
51A-5.104.   Uses and improvements permitted.
Sec.
51A-5.105.   Filling in the floodplain.
Sec.
51A-5.106.   Setback from natural channel required.
Sec.
51A-5.107.   Trinity river corridor development certificate process.
Division
51A-5.200. Escarpment Regulations.
Sec.
51A-5.201.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-5.202.   Development in escarpment zone prohibited.
Sec.
51A-5.203.   Permit required for development in geologically similar areas.
Sec.
51A-5.204.   Escarpment permit application and review.
Sec.
51A-5.205.   Slope stability analysis.
Sec.
51A-5.206.   Soil erosion control plan.
Sec.
51A-5.207.   Grading plan.
Sec.
51A-5.208.   Vegetation plan.
Sec.
51A-5.209.   Escarpment area review committee.
Sec.
51A-5.210.   Platting in the escarpment zone and in the geologically similar
area.
ARTICLE VI.
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
Sec.
51A-6.101.   Definitions applicable to the environmental performance standards.
Sec.
51A-6.102.   Noise regulations.
Sec.
51A-6.103.   Toxic and noxious matter.
Sec.
51A-6.104.   Glare.
Sec.
51A-6.105.   Vibration.
Sec.
51A-6.106.   Odors, smoke, particulate matter and other air contaminants.
Sec.
51A-6.107.   Nonconformance with the environmental performance standards.
Sec.
51A-6.108.   Municipal setting designation ordinance.
ARTICLE VII.
SIGN REGULATIONS.
Division
51A-7.100. Purposes and Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.101.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.102.   Definitions.
Division
51A-7.200. Provisions For All Zoning Districts.
Sec.
51A-7.201.   Application of division.
Sec.
51A-7.202.   Imitation of traffic and emergency signs prohibited.
Sec.
51A-7.203.   Roof and right-of-way signs.
Sec.
51A-7.204.   Other codes not in conflict, applicable.
Sec.
51A-7.205.   Athletic field signs, portable signs, special purpose signs,
movement control signs, and protective signs.
Sec.
51A-7.206.   Vehicular signs.
Sec.
51A-7.207.   Government signs.
Sec.
51A-7.208.   Creation of site.
Sec.
51A-7.209.   Signs displaying noncommercial messages.
Sec.
51A-7.210.   General maintenance.
Sec.
51A-7.211.   Signs attached to structures located on buildings.
Sec.
51A-7.212.   Street construction alleviation signs.
Sec.
51A-7.213.   Detached sign unity agreements.
Sec.
51A-7.214.   City kiosks.
Sec.
51A-7.215.   Animal shelter sign.
Sec.
51A-7.216.   Digital display on certain premise signs.
Division
51A-7.300. Provisions For Business Zoning Districts.
Sec.
51A-7.301.   Application of division.
Sec.
51A-7.302.   Reserved.
Sec.
51A-7.303.   General provisions applicable to signs in business zoning
districts.
Sec.
51A-7.304.   Detached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.305.   Attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.306.   Detached non-premise signs prohibited generally.
Sec.
51A-7.307.   Relocation of certain detached non-premise signs.
Sec.
51A-7.308.   Digital display on certain detached non-premise signs.
Division
51A-7.400. Provisions for Non-Business Zoning Districts.
Sec.
51A-7.401.   Application of division.
Sec.
51A-7.402.   General provisions applicable to signs in non-business zoning
districts.
Sec.
51A-7.403.   Detached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.404.   Attached signs.
Division
51A-7.500. Special Provision Sign Districts.
Sec.
51A-7.501.   Purpose of special provision sign districts.
Sec.
51A-7.502.   Creation of a special provision sign district.
Sec.
51A-7.502.1.   Non-premise signs in special provision sign districts.
Sec.
51A-7.503.   Modifications allowed in special provision sign districts.
Sec.
51A-7.504.   Special sign district advisory committee created.
Sec.
51A-7.505.   Permit procedures for special provision sign districts.
Sec.
51A-7.506.   Expiration of special provision sign districts.
Sec.
51A-7.507.   Temporary signs in special provision sign districts.
Division
51A-7.600. Permit Procedures.
Sec.
51A-7.601.   Administration of article by division of building inspection.
Sec.
51A-7.602.   Permits.
Sec.
51A-7.603.   Applications.
Sec.
51A-7.604.   Reserved.
Sec.
51A-7.605.   Extraordinarily significant signs.
Division
51A-7.700. Non-Conformance and Enforcement Procedures.
Sec.
51A-7.701.   Purpose of division.
Sec.
51A-7.702.   Removal and maintenance of certain non-conforming signs.
Sec.
51A-7.703.   Board of adjustment.
Sec.
51A-7.704.   Reserved.
Sec.
51A-7.705.   Determination of noncommercial and primarily political messages.
Sec.
51A-7.706.   Reserved.
Division
51A-7.800. Procedure For Changes and Amendments.
Sec.
51A-7.801.   Authority to amend; submission of proposed amendments to city plan
commission.
Sec.
51A-7.802.   Public hearings provided.
Sec.
51A-7.803.   Three-fourths vote of city council in certain cases.
Division
51A-7.900. Downtown Special Provision Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.901.   Designation of Downtown Special Provision Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.901.1.   Designation of subdistricts.
Sec.
51A-7.902.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.903.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.904.   Detached non-premise signs.
Sec.
51A-7.905.   Sign permit requirement.
Sec.
51A-7.906.   General provisions for all signs in the downtown sign district.
Special Provisions for Signs Within the General CBD, Main Street,
Convention Center, Retail, and Discovery Subdistricts
Sec.
51A-7.907.   General provisions.
Sec.
51A-7.908.   Videoboard sign.
Sec.
51A-7.909.   Attached non-premise district activity videoboard signs.
Sec.
51A-7.910.   Operational requirements for attached videoboard signs.
Sec.
51A-7.911.   Attached premise signs.
Sec.
51A-7.912.   Detached premise signs.
Sec.
51A-7.913.   Construction barricade signs.
Sec.
51A-7.914.   Banners on streetlight poles.
Sec.
51A-7.915.   Window art displays in vacant buildings.
Sec.
51A-7.916.   Noncommercial message nondiscrimination.
Sec.
51A-7.917.   Activity district changeable message signs.
Sec.
51A-7.918.   Kiosks.
Sec.
51A-7.919.   Movement control signs.
Sec.
51A-7.920.   District identification signs.
Sec.
51A-7.921.   Protective signs.
Sec.
51A-7.922.   Special purpose signs.
Sec.
51A-7.923.   Other temporary signs.
Secs. 51A-7.924 thru 51A-7.929.   Reserved.
Sec.
51A-7.930.   Supergraphic signs.
Sec.
51A-7.931.   Convention center complex accent lighting.
Sec.
51A-7.932.    Akard Station subdistrict.
Division
51A-7.1000. West End Historic Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1001.   Designation of West End Historic Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1002.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.1003.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.1004.   General requirements for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1005.   Attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1006.   Detached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1007.   Special purpose signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1007.1.   Purse Building subdistrict.
Sec.
51A-7.1007.2.   Antioch Church subdistrict.
Sec.
51A-7.1007.3.   MKT subdistrict.
Sec.
51A-7.1007.4.   Lawyers Building subdistrict.
Sec.
51A-7.1008.   Banners on streetlight poles.
Sec.
51A-7.1009.   Window art displays in vacant buildings.
Sec.
51A-7.1010.   Sign permit requirement.
Sec.
51A-7.1011.   Nondiscrimination between noncommercial messages.
Division
51A-7.1100. Provisions For Uptown Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1101.   Designation of Uptown Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1101.1.   Designation of a subdistrict.
Sec.
51A-7.1102.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.1103.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.1104.   Special provisions for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1105.   Special provisions for attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1106.   Special provisions for detached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1107.   Special provisions for non-premise detached signs in the public
right-of-way.
Sec.
51A-7.1108.   Special provisions for special purpose signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1109.   Sign permit requirement.
Division
51A-7.1200. Provisions for Arts District Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1201.   Designation of Arts District Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1202.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.1203.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.1204.   Arts District sign permit requirement.
Sec.
51A-7.1205.   Special provisions for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1205.1.   Operational requirements for signs with digital displays.
Sec.
51A-7.1206.   Public signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1207.   Attached private signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1208.   Detached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1209.   Building identification signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1210.   Cultural institution signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1211.   Application of the Highway Beautification Acts.
Sec. 51A-7.1212. thru 51A-7.1215.   Reserved.
Division
51A-7.1300. Provisions for Deep Ellum/Near East Side Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1301.   Designation of sign district.
Sec.
51A-7.1302.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.1303.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.1304.   Sign permit requirements.
Sec.
51A-7.1305.   Special provisions for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1306.   Special provisions for attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1307.   Special provisions for detached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1308.   Commercial parking lots.
Division
51A-7.1400. Jefferson Boulevard Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1401.   Designation of sign district.
Sec.
51A-7.1402.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.1403.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.1404.   Sign permit requirements.
Sec.
51A-7.1405.   General requirements for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1406.   Attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1407.   Detached signs.
Division
51A-7.1500. Provisions for Mckinney Avenue Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1501.   Designation of sign district.
Sec.
51A-7.1502.   Designation of subdistricts.
Sec.
51A-7.1503.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.1504.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.1505.   Sign permit requirements.
Sec.
51A-7.1506.   Special provisions for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1507.   Special provisions for attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1508.   Special provisions for detached signs.
Division
51A-7.1600. Farmers Market Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1601.   Designation of sign district.
Sec.
51A-7.1601.1.   Designation of sign subdistricts.
Sec.
51A-7.1602.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.1603.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.1604.   Sign permit requirements.
Sec.
51A-7.1605.   Special provisions for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1606.   Special provisions for attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1607.   Special provisions for detached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1608.   Special provisions for the Market Center sign subdistrict.
Division
51A-7.1700. Provisions for Victory Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1701.   Designation of Victory Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1702.   Designation of subdistricts.
Sec.
51A-7.1703.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.1704.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.1705.   Applicability of highway beautification acts.
Sec.
51A-7.1706.   Victory District sign permit requirements.
Sec.
51A-7.1707.   Imitation of traffic and emergency signs prohibited.
Sec.
51A-7.1708.   Other codes not in conflict, applicable.
Sec.
51A-7.1709.   Creation of site.
Sec.
51A-7.1710.   Detached sign unity agreements.
Sec.
51A-7.1711.   General maintenance.
Sec.
51A-7.1712.   Government signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1713.   Signs over the public right-of-way.
Sec.
51A-7.1714.   Commercial versus noncommercial messages.
Sec.
51A-7.1715.   Premise versus non-premise advertisement.
Sec.
51A-7.1716.   Movement control signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1717.   Signs in public places.
Sec.
51A-7.1718.   Protective signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1719.   Vehicular signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1720.   Street construction alleviation signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1721.   Attached signs on machinery or equipment.
Sec.
51A-7.1722.   District identification signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1723.   Detached signs in access easements.
Sec.
51A-7.1724.   Streamers, pennants, and inflatable signs prohibited.
Sec.
51A-7.1725.   General provisions for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1726.   Sign regulations for Subdistrict A (the entertainment complex
subdistrict).
Sec.
51A-7.1727.   Sign regulations for Subdistrict B (retail and entertainment
subdistrict).
Sec.
51A-7.1728.   Sign regulations for Subdistrict C (expressway adjacency
subdistrict).
Sec.
51A-7.1729.   Sign regulations for Subdistrict D (office and residential
subdistrict).
Sec.
51A-7.1730.   Non-conformance and board of adjustment authority.
Sec.
51A-7.1731.   Relocation of non-premise signs prohibited.
Division
51A-7.1800. Provisions for Southside Entertainment Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1801.   Designation of Southside Entertainment Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1802.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.1803.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.1804.   General provisions.
Sec.
51A-7.1805.   Attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1806.   Event signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1807.   Window display signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1808.   Detached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1809.   Construction barricade signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1810.   Movement control signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1811.   Protective signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1812.   Applicability of Highway Beautification Acts.
Division
51A-7.1900. Provisions for West Village Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1901.   Designation of West Village Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.1902.   Designation of subdistricts.
Sec.
51A-7.1903.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.1904.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.1905.   General provisions for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1906.   Detached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1907.   Attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1908.   Special provisions for special purpose signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1909.   Special provisions for facade-mounted banner signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1910.   Special provisions for kiosk signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1911.   Special provisions for newsstand signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1912.   Special provisions for signs attached to machinery or equipment.
Sec.
51A-7.1913.   Special provisions for movement control signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1914.   Special provisions for construction barricade signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1915.   Special provisions for other temporary signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1916.   Special provisions for district signs.
Sec.
51A-7.1917.   Special provisions for district identification signs.
Division
51A-7.2000. Provisions for West Commerce Street/Fort Worth Avenue Sign
District.
Sec.
51A-7.2001.   Designation of the West Commerce Street/Fort Worth Avenue Sign
District.
Sec.
51A-7.2002.   Designation of subdistricts.
Sec.
51A-7.2003.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.2004.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.2005.   Sign permit requirements.
Sec.
51A-7.2006.   Provisions applicable to all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2007.   Attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2008.   Detached signs.
Division
51A-7.2100. Reserved.
Division
51A-7.2200. Parkland Hospital Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.2201.   Designation of Parkland Hospital Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.2202.   Designation of corridors.
Sec.
51A-7.2203.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.2204.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-7.2205.   Sign permit requirements.
Sec.
51A-7.2206.   Imitation of traffic and emergency signs prohibited.
Sec.
51A-7.2207.   Creation of site.
Sec.
51A-7.2208.   Signs over the public right-of-way.
Sec.
51A-7.2209.   General provisions for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2210.   Movement control signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2211.   District identification signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2212.   Banner signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2213.   Branding signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2214.   Donor recognition signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2215.   Streamers, pennants, and inflatable seasonal decorations
prohibited.
Sec.
51A-7.2216.   Attached signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2217.   Window display signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2218.   Kiosk signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2219.   Construction barricade signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2220.   Temporary signs.
Division
51A-7.2300. Southwestern Medical District Sign District.
Sec.
51A-7.2301.   Designation of Southwestern Medical Special Provision Sign
District.
Sec.
51A-7.2302.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-7.2303.   Definitions and interpretations.
Sec.
51A-7.2304.   Southwestern Medical District identification sign permit
requirements.
Sec.
51A-7.2305.   Imitation of traffic and emergency signs prohibited.
Sec.
51A-7.2306.   Creation of site.
Sec.
51A-7.2307.   Government traffic signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2308.   Signs within and over the public right-of-way.
Sec.
51A-7.2309.   General provisions for all signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2310.   Prohibited signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2311.   Southwestern Medical District identification signs.
Sec.
51A-7.2312.   Banners.
Sec.
51A-7.2313.   Construction barricade signs.
ARTICLE VIII.
PLAT REGULATIONS.
Division
51A-8.100. Title and Purpose.
Sec.
51A-8.101.   Title.
Sec.
51A-8.102.   Policy.
Sec.
51A-8.103.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-8.104.   Function of commission.
Sec.
51A-8.105.   Jurisdiction.
Division
51A-8.200. Definitions.
Sec.
51A-8.201.   Definitions.
Division
51A-8.300. Reserved.
Division
51A-8.400. Procedures.
Sec.
51A-8.401.   When platting is required.
Sec.
51A-8.402.   Platting of street right-of-way prohibited.
Sec.
51A-8.403.   Platting process.
Sec.
51A-8.404.   Engineering plan approval procedure.
Sec.
51A-8.405.   Apportionment of exactions and park land dedication.
Division
51A-8.500. Subdivision Layout and Design.
Sec.
51A-8.501.   Compliance with zoning.
Sec.
51A-8.502.   Designation of abandoned, franchised, or licensed property.
Sec.
51A-8.503.   Lots.
Sec.
51A-8.504.   Blocks.
Sec.
51A-8.505.   Building lines.
Sec.
51A-8.506.   Street layout.
Sec.
51A-8.507.   Alleys.
Sec.
51A-8.508.   Parks and common areas.
Sec.
51A-8.509.   Fire and police access.
Sec.
51A-8.510.   Community unit development.
Sec.
51A-8.511.   Conservation easement.
Sec.
51A-8.512.   Shared access development.
Division
51A-8.600. Infrastructure Design and Construction.
Sec.
51A-8.601.   General standards.
Sec.
51A-8.602.   Dedications.
Sec.
51A-8.603.   Construction required.
Sec.
51A-8.604.   Street engineering design and construction.
Sec.
51A-8.605.   Sanitation collection access required.
Sec.
51A-8.606.   Sidewalks.
Sec.
51A-8.607.   Median openings, extra lanes, and driveways.
Sec.
51A-8.608.   Street appurtenances.
Sec.
51A-8.609.   Railroad crossings.
Sec.
51A-8.610.   Utilities.
Sec.
51A-8.611.   Storm drainage design.
Sec.
51A-8.612.   Private development contracts.
Sec.
51A-8.613.   Covenant procedures.
Sec.
51A-8.614.   Cost sharing contract.
Sec.
51A-8.615.   Nonstandard materials.
Sec.
51A-8.616.   Reserved.
Sec.
51A-8.617.   Monumentation.
Sec.
51A-8.618.   Traffic barriers.
Sec.
51A-8.619.   Screening walls.
Sec.
51A-8.620.   Retaining walls.
Division
51A-8.700. Administration.
Sec.
51A-8.701.   Nothing deemed submitted until fees paid.
Sec.
51A-8.702.   Early release of building or foundation permit.
Sec.
51A-8.703.   Circumvention of regulations prohibited.
Sec.
51A-8.704.   Utilities.
Sec.
51A-8.705.   Taxes.
Sec.
51A-8.706.   Approvals and agreements in writing.
Sec.
51A-8.707.   Platting in the escarpment zone and in the geologically similar
area.
Sec.
51A-8.708.   Waiver by city council.
ARTICLE IX.
THOROUGHFARES.
Division
51A-9.100. Thoroughfare Plan Amendments.
Sec.
51A-9.101.   Thoroughfare plan defined.
Sec.
51A-9.102.   Thoroughfare plan amendment process.
Division
51A-9.200. Approval of Alignment of Thoroughfares.
Sec.
51A-9.201.   Procedures for establishment of thoroughfare alignment.
Sec.
51A-9.202.   Procedure for approval of state or county thoroughfare
improvements.
Division
51A-9.300. Street Naming and Name Change Process.
Sec.
51A-9.301.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-9.302.   General provisions.
Sec.
51A-9.303.   Application.
Sec.
51A-9.304.   Standards for street names and street name changes.
Sec.
51A-9.305.   Review of application.
Sec.
51A-9.306.   Hearing before the city plan commission.
Sec.
51A-9.307.   Hearing before the city council.
Sec.
51A-9.308.   Notification of name change.
Sec.
51A-9.309.   Effective date of name change.
Division
51A-9.400. Four-Way/All-Way Stop Controls at Residential Intersections.
Sec.
51A-9.401.   Application.
Sec.
51A-9.402.   Standards of review.
Sec.
51A-9.403.   Appeals.
Division
51A-9.500. Ceremonial Street Naming.
Sec.
51A-9.501.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-9.502.   General provisions.
Sec.
51A-9.503.   Process.
Sec.
51A-9.504.   Standards for ceremonial street naming.
Sec.
51A-9.505.   Notification of ceremonial street naming.
Sec.
51A-9.506.   Effective date of ceremonial street name and end date.
Sec.
51A-9.507.   Installation and replacement.
Division
51A-9.600. First Responder Street Topper.
Sec.
51A-9.601.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-9.602.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-9.603.   General provisions.
Sec.
51A-9.604.   Process.
Sec.
51A-9.605.   Standards for first responder street topper.
Sec.
51A-9.606.   Effective date of first responder street topper and end date.
Sec.
51A-9.607.   Installation and replacement.
ARTICLE X.
LANDSCAPE AND TREE CONSERVATION REGULATIONS.
Division
51A-10.100. In General.
Sec.
51A-10.101.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-10.102.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-10.103.   Acceptable plant materials.
Sec.
51A-10.104.   Soil and planting area requirements.
Sec.
51A-10.105.   Measurements.
Sec.
51A-10.106.   Irrigation requirements.
Sec.
51A-10.107.   Reserved.
Sec.
51A-10.108.   General maintenance.
Sec.
51A-10.109.   Landscape and tree manual.
Sec.
51A-10.110.   Special exceptions.
Division
51A-10.120. Landscaping.
Sec.
51A-10.121.   Application of division.
Sec.
51A-10.122.   Artificial lot delineation.
Sec.
51A-10.123.   Landscape plan submission.
Sec.
51A-10.124.   Landscape plan review.
Sec.
51A-10.125.   Mandatory landscaping requirements.
Sec.
51A-10.126.   Landscape design options.
Sec.
51A-10.127.   When landscaping must be completed.
Sec.
51A-10.128.   Enforcement by building official.
Division
51A-10.130. Urban Forest Conservation.
Sec.
51A-10.131.   Application of division.
Sec.
51A-10.131.1.   Intent.
Sec.
51A-10.131.2.   Planned development districts.
Sec.
51A-10.132.   Tree removal applications.
Sec.
51A-10.133.   Historic trees.
Sec.
51A-10.133.1.   Transplanted trees.
Sec.
51A-10.134.   Replacement of removed or seriously injured trees.
Sec.
51A-10.135.   Alternative methods of compliance with tree replacement
requirements.
Sec.
51A-10.136.   Conservation and maintenance of protected trees during
construction or other disturbance.
Sec.
51A-10.137.   Violation of this division.
Sec.
51A-10.138.   Appeals.
Sec.
51A-10.139.   Fines.
Sec.
51A-10.140.   Criminal responsibility, and defenses to prosecution.
ARTICLE XI.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION TAX EXEMPTIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES FOR
HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
Division
51A-11.100. Purpose and Definitions.
Sec.
51A-11.101.   Purpose and authority.
Sec.
51A-11.102.   Definitions.
Division
51A-11.200. Tax Exemptions for Historic Properties.
Sec.
51A-11.201.   Initial application, completion of rehabilitation, and final
application are all required for tax exemption.
Sec.
51A-11.202.   Penalties for failure to complete a project or failure to obtain
a certificate of occupancy.
Sec.
51A-11.203.   Historic property destruction or alteration.
Sec.
51A-11.204.   Tax exemptions in the urban historic districts.
Sec.
51A-11.205.   Tax exemptions in endangered and revitalizing historic districts.
Sec.
51A-11.206.   Tax exemptions in historic districts other than urban historic
districts, endangered historic districts, and revitalizing historic districts.
Sec.
51A-11.207.   Tax exemption for historic properties open to the public and
owned by non-profit organizations.
Sec.
51A-11.208.   Citywide tax exemption.
Division
51A-11.300. Other Incentives for Historic Preservation in Urban Historic
Districts.
Sec.
51A-11.301.   Historic conservation easement program.
Sec.
51A-11.302.   Transfer of development rights.
Division
51A-11.400. Sunset Provision and Coordination with Pending Tax Exemptions.
Sec.
51A-11.401.   Sunset provision.
Sec.
51A-11.402.   Coordination with pending tax exemptions.
ARTICLE XII.
GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION.
Division
51A-12.100. In General.
Sec.
51A-12.101.   Purpose.
Sec.
51A-12.102.   Definitions.
Sec.
51A-12.103.   Administration.
Sec.
51A-12.104.   SUP requirement and use regulations.
Division II. Gas Drilling.
Sec.
51A-12.201.   Seismic survey permit.
Sec.
51A-12.202.   Gas well permit.
Sec.
51A-12.203.   Insurance and security instruments.
Sec.
51A-12.204.   Operations.
Sec.
51A-12.205.   Abandonment and restoration.
Division III. Regulated Pipelines.
Sec.
51A-12.301.   Pipeline permit.
Sec.
51A-12.302.   Insurance.
Sec.
51A-12.303.   General provisions.
Sec.
51A-12.304.   Emergency response plan and incident reporting.
Sec.
51A-12.305.   Markers.
Sec.
51A-12.306.   One-call system.
Sec.
51A-12.307.   Pipeline information reporting requirements.
Sec.
51A-12.308.   Public education.
Sec.
51A-12.309.   Repairs and maintenance.
Sec.
51A-12.310.   No assumption of responsibility by city.
Sec.
51A-12.311.   Abandoned pipelines.
Division IV. Violations.
Sec.
51A-12.401.    Violations.
ARTICLE XIII.
FORM DISTRICTS.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SEC. 51A-1.101.   RESERVED.  
(Ord. 24637)
SEC. 51A-1.102.   APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   At any time prior to March 1, 1987, an applicant for a change in
zoning district classification or boundary may voluntarily elect to proceed
under either this chapter or Chapter 51. The zoning procedures in this chapter
automatically apply to any request for a change in zoning district
classification or boundary that is formally initiated on or after March 1,
1987.
      (2)   This chapter (and not Chapter 51) automatically applies to:
         (A)   all property that is annexed into the city on or after March 1,
1987; and
         (B)   all property that is rezoned on or after March 1, 1987, if the
request for the change in zoning district classification or boundary was
formally initiated on or after that date.
      (3)   The passage of an ordinance granting or amending a specific use
permit is not considered to be “rezoning” for purposes of this section.
   (b)   Purpose.
      (1)   In general. The regulations in this chapter have been established
in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city in order to:
         (A)   ensure safe and efficient circulation of all modes of
transportation, prioritizing transit and active transportation modes;
         (B)   secure safety from fire, flooding, and other dangers;
         (C)   provide adequate light and air;
         (D)   prevent the overcrowding of land;
         (E)   avoid undue concentration of population;
         (F)   facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements;
         (G)   promote the character of areas of the city;
         (H)   limit the uses in areas of the city that are peculiarly suitable
for particular uses;
         (I)   conserve the value of buildings; and
         (J)   encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
      (2)   Compliance with FHAA. The city council intends that this chapter
fully comply with the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (“FHAA”) and
all other applicable state and federal legislation. Residential use and
district regulations in this chapter are based on the family unit as defined in
Section
51A-2.102 . It is the express intent of the city council that all families as
defined herein be treated alike without regard to the handicapped or non-
handicapped status of individual family members, and that this chapter be
construed in a manner consistent with the FHAA and all other applicable state
and federal legislation at all times. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 21044; 33112)
SEC. 51A-1.103.   ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Criminal prosecution.
      (1)   A person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter is
guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the
violation is continued. Each offense is punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,000 nor less than $200. The minimum fine established in this paragraph shall
be doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month
period and trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense
within any 24-month period. At no time shall the minimum fine exceed the
maximum fine established in this paragraph.
      (2)   A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this chapter
if:
         (A)   the person knowingly commits the violation or assists in the
commission of the violation;
         (B)   the person owns part or all of the property and knowingly allows
the violation to exist;
         (C)   the person is the agent of the property owner or is an
individual employed by the agent or property owner; is in control of the
property; knowingly allows the violation to exist; and fails to provide the
property owner’s name, street address, and telephone number to code enforcement
officials; or
         (D)   the person is the agent of the property owner or is an
individual employed by the agent or property owner, knowingly allows the
violation to exist, and the citation relates to the construction or development
of the property.
      (3)   A person may not use land or a structure on land located in the
city for other than those uses designated as permitted uses in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person is
in compliance with an order of the board of adjustment that specifically
authorizes otherwise unlawful conduct.
      (5)   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a use or
structure is nonconforming unless the nonconforming rights attendant to the use
or structure have been lost or terminated under Section
51A-4.704.
   (b)   Civil action. This chapter may be enforced through civil court action
as provided by state law.
   (c)   Utility disconnection. The building official may order city or private
utilities to be disconnected upon failure to comply with this chapter or the
building laws.
   (d)   Enforcement authority. This chapter may be enforced by the building
official or any other representative of the city. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19963;
20236; 20599; 26286)
SEC. 51A-1.104.   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   Except as provided in Section 306.1, “Use or Occupancy,” of Chapter 52,
“Administrative Procedures for the Construction Codes,” a person shall not use
or occupy or change the use or occupancy of a building, a portion of a
building, or land without obtaining a certificate of occupancy from the
building official in compliance with Section 306, “Certificate of Occupancy,”
of Chapter 52, “Administrative Procedures for the Construction Codes,” of the
Dallas City Code. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 21735; 22204; 24439; 26579; 29023)
SEC. 51A-1.104.1.   APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   Except conservation district applications and neighborhood
stabilization overlay applications, when submitting an application, the
applicant must submit proof, such as a tax certificate, that property taxes and
any city fees, fines, or penalties are not delinquent on the subject property.
Unless such proof is submitted, the application will be considered incomplete
and returned to the applicant. A waiver of this requirement may be granted by a
two-thirds vote of the city council if:
      (1)   a waiver will facilitate urban redevelopment, historic
conservation, or an important planning objective;
      (2)   a pending sale of the property is contingent on the zoning
application, and the applicant can supply evidence, such as a contract of sale,
that the taxes and any city fees, fines, or penalties will be paid at closing;
or
      (3)   the applicant can demonstrate financial hardship that makes payment
of taxes impossible, and approval of a waiver will improve the applicant’s
ability to pay the taxes and any city fees, fines, or penalties.
   (b)   A waiver application form may be obtained from the department. The
waiver application form and waiver application fee must be filed with the city
secretary.
   (c)   Consideration of a waiver application under this procedure is not a
consideration of the merits of the zoning application, and does not imply that
the zoning application will be approved or disapproved when considered on its
merits. (Ord. Nos. 21633; 25047; 26536; 28073)
SEC. 51A-1.105.   FEES.
   (a)   Fees for zoning and SUP amendments and renewals.
      (1)   An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the filing fee to the director. The
director shall deposit fees received in the official city depository not later
than the next business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   With respect to an application for automatic renewal of an SUP, if
no public hearings are held in conjunction with the renewal, the city
controller shall refund the appropriate portion of the fee as specified in this
subsection. In all other respects, the refund of all or part of an application
fee is controlled by Section
51A-4.701(f).
      (4)   Fee schedule.
Type of Application Application Fee Area of Notification for Hearing
Type of Application        Application Fee             Area of Notification for
                                                       Hearing
Amendment to planned
development district or    $2,610.00 + $1,000.00 per
institutional overlay      regulation type being       500 feet
district site plan and/or  amended
conditions only
All other applications
relating to planned
development districts,
including the creation of                              
subdistricts, or
institutional overlay
districts:
   0-5 acres            $5,820.00 + $1,000.00 per   500 feet
                           regulation type
                           $5,820.00 +$250.00 per each
   over 5 acres         acre over 5 and $1,000.00   500 feet
                           per regulation type
   Maximum fee          $50,000.00                   
Applications for straight
form districts, planned
form districts, and                                    
parking management overlay
districts:
   0-1 acre             $1,050.00                   200 feet
over 1 acre to 5 acres     $2,610.00                   300 feet
   over 5 acres to 15   $5,820.00                   400 feet
acres
   over 15 acres to 25  $5,820.00 + $113.00 per     400 feet
acres                      each acre over 15
   over 25 acres        $6,950.00 + $113.00 per     500 feet
                           each acre over 25
   Maximum fee          $30,000.00                   
Applications for height
map overlay districts and  $1,170.00                   200 feet
shopfront overlay
districts
All applications relating
to neighborhood
stabilization overlay                                  
districts and accessory
dwelling unit overlays:
   0-1 acre             $500.00                     200 feet
   over 1 acre to 5 acre$1,200.00                   200 feet
   over 5 acres to 25   $2,400.00                   200 feet
acres
   over 25 acres        $2,400.00                   200 feet
All applications relating                              
to conservation districts
   0-1 acre             $500.00                     200 feet
   over 1 acre to 5 acre$1,200.00                   200 feet
   over 5 acres to 25   $2,400.00                   200 feet
acres
   over 25 acres        $2,400.00                   200 feet
Application for original                               
SUP:
   0-1 acre             $1,170.00                   200 feet
   over 1 acre to 5 acre$1,170.00                   300 feet
   over 5 acres to 25   $1,170.00                   400 feet
acres
   over 25 acres        $1,170.00                   500 feet
   pedestrian skybridge $10,000.00                  See 51A-4.217(b)(12)
   gas drilling and     $2,000.00                   1,000 feet
production
Application for SUP                                    
amendment or renewal:
   0-1 acre             $825.00*                    200 feet
   over 1 acre to 5 acre$825.00*                    300 feet
   over 5 acres to 25   $825.00*                    400 feet
acres
   over 25 acres        $825.00*                    500 feet
*If an SUP is automatically renewed in accordance with the procedures outlined
in Section
51A-4.219 and no public hearings are held in conjunction with its renewal, the
applicant shall be entitled to a refund of $350.00 as of the date of the
renewal.
Straight zoning and all                                
other zoning applications:
   0-1 acre             $1,050.00                   200 feet
   over 1 acre to 5 acre$2,610.00                   300 feet
over 5 acres to 15 acres   $5,820.00                   400 feet
   over 15 acres to 25  $9,315.00                   400 feet
acres
   over 25 acres        $9,315.00 + $113.00 per     500 feet
                           each acre over 25
   Maximum fee          $37,500.00                   
 
      (5)   An applicant shall pay a fee of $400.00 for an appeal to the city
council of any decision of the city plan commission denying a zoning
application described in Paragraph (4) of this subsection.
   (b)   Fees for board of adjustment applications. Refer to Section 303.12.1
in Chapter 52 of the Dallas City Code.
   (c)   Fees for fill permits for removal of a flood plain designation.
      (1)   An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay a filing fee to the director of water
utilities. The director of water utilities shall deposit fees received in the
official city depository not later than the next business day following receipt
of the fees.
      (3)   No refund of a fee may be made.
      (4)   Fee schedule.
 
Type of Application             Application Fee Area of Notification for
                                                Hearing
Fill permit for land within the
Trinity River or Elm Fork flood $8,150.00       500 feet
plains
Fill permit for land within the $1,436.00        
interior drainage areas
Fill permit in all other        $8,150.00       500 feet
applications
Single family                   $8,150.00       500 feet
 
   (d)   Fees for extraordinarily significant sign designation.
      (1)   An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the filing fee to the director. The
director shall deposit fees received in the official city depository not later
than the next business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   No refund of a fee may be made.
      (4)   Fee schedule.
 
Type of Application             Application Fee Area of Notification for
                                                Hearing
Designation of an existing sign
as an extraordinarily           $600.00         200 feet
significant sign
 
   (e)   Fees for creating or amending a voluntary deed restriction.
      (1)   An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the filing fee to the director. The
director shall deposit fees received in the official city depository not later
than the next business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   The controller shall refund 35 percent of the filing fee to the
applicant if the application is not forwarded to council after a public hearing
by the commission.
      (4)   If a deed restriction amendment is submitted as part of an
application for a change in a zoning district classification or boundary, the
fee outlined in this subsection is not required.
      (5)   Fee schedule.
 
Type of Application                                           Application Fee
Creation of a voluntary deed restriction where the city is a  $350.00
party
Amendment to a voluntary deed restriction where the city is a $900.00
party
 
   (f)   Fees for notification signs.
      (1)   An application will not be processed until the fee for notification
signs has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the fee to the director. The director shall
deposit fees received in the official city depository not later than the next
business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   No refund of a fee may be made.
      (4)   There is no fee for a sign required under Section
51A-1.106(a)(4). The fee for all other notification signs required under
Section
51A-1.106 is $10 for each sign.
   (g)   Fees for inspection of infrastructure improvements constructed under
private development contracts. Refer to Section 303.14.5 in Chapter 52 of the
Dallas City Code.
   (h)   Fees for letters of zoning verification. Refer to Section 303.12.2 in
Chapter 52 of the Dallas City Code.
   (i)   Fees for development impact review. Refer to Section 303.12.3 in
Chapter 52 of the Dallas City Code.
   (j)   Fees for thoroughfare plan amendments.
      (1)   An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the filing fee to the director of
development services. The director of development services shall deposit fees
received in the official city depository not later than the next business day
following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   No refund of a fee may be made.
      (4)   Fee schedule for thoroughfare plan amendment:
 
Length of Roadway     Application Fee
0-.25 miles           $6,350.00
Longer than .25 miles $5,325.00 plus $.87 per linear foot
 
   (k)   Fees for miscellaneous items.
      (1)   An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the filing fee to the director. The
director shall deposit fees received in the official city depository not later
than the next business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   Fee schedule.
Type of Application Application Fee Area of Notification for Hearing
Type of Application        Application Fee             Area of Notification for
                                                       Hearing
Minor plan amendment       $825.00                      
Appeal of the decision of
the director to city plan
commission or the decision
of the city plan           $300.00                      
commission to the city
council for a minor plan
amendment
Detailed development plan
when submitted after
passage of an ordinance    $600.00 for each submission  
establishing a planned
development district
Waiver of the two year
waiting period under       $300.00                      
Section
51A-4.701(d)(3)
Extension of the
development schedule under $75.00                       
Section
51A-4.702(g)(3)
Waiver of the requirement
of proof that taxes, fees,
fines, and penalties are   $200.00                      
not delinquent under
Section
51A-1.104.1
Appeal to the city council
of a moratorium on a       $300.00                      
zoning or nonzoning matter
handled by the department
Request for a letter from
the department explaining  Refer to Section 303.17.1
the availability of water  in Chapter 52 of the Dallas  
services for a development City Code
site
Request for a letter from
the department explaining  Refer to Section 303.17.1
the availability of        in Chapter 52 of the Dallas  
wastewater services for a  City Code
development site.
Request for performance of
a wastewater capacity
analysis on an existing    Refer to Section 303.17.2
wastewater line to         in Chapter 52 of the Dallas  
determine its capacity for City Code
a proposed development or
land use
Appeal of an apportionment
determination to the city  $600.00                      
plan commission
Appeal an apportionment
determination decision of  $600.00                      
the city plan commission
to the city council
Appeal a decision of the
landmark commission on a
predesignation certificate
of appropriateness,
certificate of
appropriateness, or        $300.00                      
certificate for demolition
or removal to the city
plan commission regarding
a single family use or a
handicapped group dwelling
unit use
Appeal a decision of the
landmark commission on a
predesignation certificate
of appropriateness,
certificate of             $700.00                      
appropriateness, or
certificate for demolition
or removal to the city
plan commission regarding
any other use
Request for a sidewalk     Refer to Section 303.5.6 in
width waiver under Section Chapter 52 of the Dallas     
51A-4.124(a)(8)(C)(v)      City Code
Request for an             Refer to Section 303.12.5
administrative parking     in Chapter 52 of the Dallas  
reduction under Section    City Code
51A-4.313
Note: The director shall also send notification of minor plan amendments to the
city plan commission members, any known neighborhoods associations covering the
property, and persons on the early notification list at least 10 days prior to
the city plan commission meeting.
 
   (l)   Fees for a street name change and for a ceremonial street naming.
Refer to Sections 303.13.1 and 303.13.2 in Chapter 52 of the Dallas City Code.
   (m)   Fees for special parking and mechanized parking. Refer to Section
303.12.4 in Chapter 52 of the Dallas City Code.
   (n)   Fees for platting, replatting, and other related fees. Refer to
Section 303.13.3 in Chapter 52 of the Dallas City Code.
   (o)   Fee for amendment to
Article VII, “Sign Regulations.”
      (1)   An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the fee to the director. The director shall
deposit fees received in the official city depository not later than the next
business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   No refund of a fee may be made.
      (4)   Fee schedule.
 
Type of Application                                    Application Fee
Amendment to create a special provision sign district  $5,600
All other amendments, supplementations, or changes to  $1,100
Article VII, “Sign Regulations”
 
   (p)   Fee for amendment to the Dallas Development Code other than to
Article VII, “Sign Regulations.”
      (1)   An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the fee to the director. The director shall
deposit fees received in the official city depository not later than the next
business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   No refund of a fee may be made.
      (4)   The fee for an application to amend, supplement, or change the
Dallas Development Code, other than
Article VII, “Sign Regulations,” is $6,700.
   (q)   Fees for sign review in special provision sign districts. Refer to
Section 303.5.5.5 in Chapter 52 of the Dallas City Code.
   (r)   Fee for an escarpment permit. Refer to Section 303.14.1 in Chapter 52
of the Dallas City Code.
   (s)   Fee for tree removal application. Refer to Section 303.15.1 in Chapter
52 of the Dallas City Code.
   (t)   Fee for municipal setting designation ordinance.
      (1)   An application will not be accepted until the initial filing fee
has been paid. An application will not be placed on a city council agenda until
the additional processing fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the fees to the director. The director
shall deposit fees received in the official city depository not later than the
next business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   No refund of the fees may be made.
      (4)   The initial filing fee for a municipal setting designation
ordinance is $3,903. The director shall not mail notices or advertise the
public metting until the estimated cost of mailing notices and advertising the
public meeting is paid. The director shall not place a municipal setting
designation ordinance on a city council agenda until an additional processing
fee of $8,192 is paid.
      (5)   The city council may, by resolution, waive or reimburse the initial
filing fee when the city council finds that payment of the fee would result in
substantial financial hardship to the applicant.
   (u)   Fees for gas drilling and production.
      (1)   The city may use a qualified third party to conduct any inspections
required by
Article XII. The operator shall pay the city for any fees charged by third
party inspectors within 30 days of receipt of an invoice from the city.
      (2)   Any permit that lapses for nonpayment of the annual permit fee will
be reinstated upon payment of an additional fee of $50.00 for each thirty-day
period during the lapse.
      (3)   Fee schedule.
Type of Application Application Fee
Type of Application       Application Fee
Seismic survey permit     $150.00
                          $3,000.00 for the first well on an operation site and
New gas well permit       $1,000 for each additional well on that same
                          operation site
Amended permit            $600.00
Reworking fee             $800.00
Operator transfer         $600.00
Annual fee (per well)     $1,000.00
Regulated pipeline permit $1,500.00
 
   (v)   Fee for the city’s review and consent to the creation of or amendment
to a municipal utility district or any other district created under Article 16,
Section 59 of the Texas Constitution.
      (1)   The fee shall be paid to the director when the application is
filed. An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The director shall deposit fees in the official city depository not
later than the next business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   No refund of a fee may be made.
      (4)   Fee schedule.
 
Type of Application                                                        Application
                                                                           Fee
City’s review and consent to the creation of or amendment to a municipal
utility district or any other district created under Article 16, Section   $3,825.00
59 of the Texas Constitution
 
   (w)   Fees for annexation, disannexation, boundary adjustment agreement, and
waiver of extraterritorial jurisdiction applications.
      (1)   The fee shall be paid to the director when the application is
filed. An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The director shall deposit fees received in the official city
depository not later than the next business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   No refund of a fee may be made.
      (4)   If an annexation, disannexation, boundary adjustment agreement, or
waiver of extraterritorial jurisdiction is initiated by the city, no fee is
required.
      (5)   Fee schedule.
 
Type of Application                                            Application Fee
All applications relating to annexation, disannexation,
boundary adjustment agreements, and waiver of extraterritorial $3,825.00
jurisdiction
 
   (x)   Fee and permit for accessory occasional sales (garage sales).
      (1)   An application for an occasional sale permit will not be processed
until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the fee to the director of code compliance.
The director of code compliance shall deposit fees received in the official
city depository not later than the next business day following receipt of the
fees.
      (3)   No refund of a fee may be made.
      (4)   There is no fee for the first occasional sale permit in each 12
month period. The fee for the second occasional sale permit in a 12 month
period is $25.00.
      (5)   A person may not operate an occasional sale without a valid permit
issued by the director of code compliance. Only the owner or lessee of the
property where the occasional sale is being conducted may obtain a permit. The
applicant shall provide proof (driver’s license, utility bills, or other proof)
that the applicant is the owner or lessee of the property.
      (6)   The application for an occasional sale permit must be on a form
provided by the director and must contain the dates, location, hours of
operation of the occasional sale, and any other information that may be
reasonably required by the director of code compliance.
      (7)   The director of code compliance shall deny the application for an
occasional sale permit if the director of code compliance determines that:
         (A)   the applicant has not paid the required fee;
         (B)   the applicant made a false statement of material fact in the
application;
         (C)   the applicant has been given two or more citations for violating
the provisions of this subsection or Section
51A-4.217(b)(9) within 12 months before submitting an application; or
         (D)   the occasional sale would not meet the requirements of this
subsection or of Section
51A-4.217(b)(9).
      (8)   The applicant may appeal the denial of an application for an
occasional sale permit to the permit and license appeal board in accordance
with Section
2-96 of the Dallas City Code.
      (9)   By making an application for an occasional sale permit, accepting
the permit, and conducting the sale, the permit holder authorizes any code
enforcement officer to enter the property to determine that the occasional sale
is being conducted in compliance with this chapter.
      (10)   Permits are only valid for the dates specified on the application.
If inclement weather prevents the occasional sale, the director of code
compliance may, in his sole discretion, issue a replacement permit at no cost
to the applicant. The applicant must request the replacement permit within one
week after the date of the cancelled occasional sale. No more than one
replacement permit shall be issued per calendar year per address.
   (y)   Fees for property description review. Refer to Section 303.16.1 in
Chapter 52 of the Dallas City Code.
   (z)   Fee-in-lieu for park land dedication and park development fees.
      (1)   The developer shall pay the filing fee to the building official.
The building official shall deposit fees received in the official city
depository not later than the next business day following receipt of the fees.
      (2)   Fee schedule for park land dedication fee-in-lieu.
 
Type of Development                              Fee-in-lieu
Single family or duplex                          $762.00 per dwelling unit
Multifamily (one bedroom)                        $299.00
Multifamily (two or more bedrooms)               $600.00
College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house $299.00 per sleeping room
Hotel and motel                                  $327.00 per guest room
 
      (3)   Park development fees.
 
Type of Development                              Park land development fee
Single family or duplex                          $403.00 per dwelling unit
Multifamily (one bedroom)                        $158.00
Multifamily (two or more bedrooms)               $317.00
College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house $158.00 per sleeping room
Hotel and motel                                  $173.00 per guest room
 
   (aa)   Fees for landmark commission applications.
      (1)   An application will not be processed until the fee has been paid.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay the filing fee to the building official.
The building official shall deposit fees received in the official city
depository not later than the next business day following receipt of the fees.
      (3)   The city controller shall refund 75 percent of the filing fee to
the applicant if the applicant withdraws the application prior to the case
being advertised for hearing. After the case is advertised, no refund of the
filing fee may be made.
      (4)   Fee schedule.
 
Type of Application                                         Application Fee
Certificate of appropriateness for new construction         $500
Certificate for demolition or removal                       $400
Certificate of appropriateness/certificate of demolition or $600
removal for unauthorized work
 
      (5)   The applicant shall pay a single filing fee for each certificate of
appropriateness or certificate for demolition or removal requested.
      (6)   The landmark commission may waive the filing fee if the landmark
commission finds that payment of the fee would result in substantial financial
hardship to the applicant. The applicant may request that the issue of
financial hardship be placed on the landmark commission's miscellaneous docket
for predetermination. If the issue is placed on the miscellaneous docket, the
applicant may not file the application until the merits of the request for
waiver have been determined by the landmark commission. In making this
determination, the landmark commission may require the production of financial
documents.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19557; 19832; 20037; 20073; 20093; 20132; 20612; 20920;
20926; 20927; 21431; 21553; 21751; 22004; 22026; 22206; 22392; 22738; 22920;
24051; 24542; 24843; 25047; 25048; 25384; 26001; 26161; 26529; 26530; 26536;
26730; 26920; 27069; 27430; 27495; 27587; 27695; 27697; 27893; 28021; 28073;
28096; 28272; 28424; 28553; 28803; 29128; 29228; 29024; 30215; 30808 ; 30931;
30934; 30993; 30994; 31040; 31657; 32002; 32003; 32556; 32676; 32863)
SEC. 51A-1.105.1.   FEE EXEMPTIONS AND REFUNDS.
   (a)   No fee is required for applications filed under this chapter by the
U.S. Government, the State of Texas, or the city of Dallas if the property that
is the subject of the application is devoted exclusively to governmental use.
   (b)   No fee is required for applications made to the board of adjustment
pursuant to Section
51A-1.107, requesting a special exception to a regulation in this chapter based
on a handicap.
   (c)   Whenever affordable housing units are provided as a part of a project
in accordance with Division
51A-4.900, the director shall authorize a refund of a percentage of the total
zoning and platting application fees paid for the project equal to the
percentage of standard affordable housing units provided in the project. (Ord.
Nos. 20037; 21176; 21183; 21663; 28096)
SEC. 51A-1.106.   NOTIFICATION SIGNS REQUIRED TO BE OBTAINED AND POSTED.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   The notification signs required in this section are intended to
supplement state law and other Dallas Development Code notice requirements.
      (2)   The city plan commission, landmark commission, board of adjustment,
or city council shall determine if an applicant has complied with the
notification sign posting requirements in this section.
   (b)   Signs required to be obtained from the city. An applicant is
responsible for obtaining the required number of notification signs and posting
them on the property that is the subject of the application. Notification signs
must be obtained from the director or the building official. An application
will not be processed until the fee for the signs has been paid. For purposes
of this section, an applicant is one who makes a request:
      (1)   for a change in a zoning classification or boundary;
      (2)   to the board of adjustment;
      (3)   for a certificate of appropriateness for a sign that is to be
located in a special provision sign district and is either a detached sign or
an attached sign that has more than 100 square feet of effective area; or
      (4)   to the landmark commission for a certificate for demolition or
removal.
   (c)   Number of signs required. A minimum of one notification sign is
required for every 500 feet or less of street frontage, with one additional
notification sign required for each additional 500 feet or less of street
frontage. For tracts without street frontage, a minimum of one notification
sign is required for every five acres or less, with one additional notification
sign required for each additional five acres or less. A maximum of five
notification signs are required.
   (d)   Posting of signs.
      (1)   Except as provided in Subsection
51A-1.106(e), the applicant shall post the required number of notification
signs on the property within 14 days after an application is filed.
      (2)   The signs must remain posted until a final decision is made on the
application.
      (3)   For tracts with street frontage, signs must be evenly spaced over
the length of every street frontage, posted at a prominent location adjacent to
a public street, and be easily visible from the street. For tracts without
street frontage, signs must be evenly posted in prominent locations most
visible to the public.
      (4)   An applicant has complied with the required posting of notification
signs if any lost, stolen, or vandalized notification signs are timely
replaced, and the applicant has made good faith efforts to keep the
notification signs posted in accordance with this section.
   (e)   Failure to comply.
      (1)   If the city plan commission, landmark commission, or board of
adjustment determines that the applicant has failed to comply with the
provisions of this section, it shall take no action on the application other
than to postpone the public hearing for at least four weeks or deny the
applicant’s request, with or without prejudice.
      (2)   If the hearing is postponed, the required notification signs must
be posted within 24 hours after the case is postponed and comply with all other
requirements of this section.
   (f)   Illegal removal of signs.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly
removes a notification sign that has been posted pursuant to this section.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the sign
was no longer required to be posted pursuant to this section at the time of its
removal.
   (g)   Posting of signs by the director.
      (1)   When the city council or city plan commission authorizes a hearing
on a change in zoning district classification or boundary pursuant to Paragraph
51A-4.701(a)(1), the city council, city plan commission, or landmark commission
authorizes a public hearing to establish or amend a historic overlay district
pursuant to Paragraph
51A-4.501(c)(2), the board of adjustment authorizes a hearing pursuant to
Paragraph
51A-4.703(a)(1), or the city council requests that the board of adjustment
consider establishing a compliance requirement for a nonconforming use pursuant
to Subparagraph
51A-4.704(a)(1), the director shall post the required number of notification
signs on the subject property at least 30 days before the first public hearing
unless the body authorizing a hearing approves a shorter time period for
posting the required notification signs at the time of authorization.
      (2)   If the property owner denies permission for the post of the signs,
the signs may be posted on the nearest public right-of-way.
      (3)   Illegal removal of a notification sign that has been posted
pursuant to this subsection does not require postponement or denial under
Subsection
51A-1.106(e). (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19872; 19963; 20599; 20926; 20949; 21044;
22389; 24542; 26287; 26577; 27184; 29626; 33012)
SEC. 51A-1.107.   SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS FOR THE HANDICAPPED.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the express intent of the city council to comply with
the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, and to ensure that all
handicapped persons have equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. This
section allows a person to seek relief from the enforcement of any regulation
contained in this chapter that would result in illegal discrimination against
the handicapped.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   The board of adjustment shall grant a special exception to any
regulation in this chapter if, after a public hearing, the board finds that the
exception is necessary to afford a handicapped person equal opportunity to use
and enjoy a dwelling. The term “handicapped person” means a person with a
“handicap,” as that term is defined in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act
of 1988, as amended.
      (2)   The board may impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of
this special exception consistent with the purpose stated in this section.
      (3)   This section does not authorize the board to grant a change in the
use of a building or structure. (Ord. 21183)
SEC. 51A-1.108.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (a)   Adoption. The comprehensive plan was adopted following review by the
department and the city plan commission, and following a hearing at which the
public was given the opportunity to give testimony and present written
evidence.
   (b)   Purpose. The purpose of this comprehensive plan is to promote sound
development of the city and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. The
comprehensive plan is a plan for the long-range development of the city. The
comprehensive plan sets forth policies to govern the future physical
development of the city. The comprehensive plan shall serve as a guide to all
future city council action concerning land use and development regulations,
urban conservation and rehabilitation programs, and expenditures for capital
improvements.
   (c)   Components. The comprehensive plan is composed of the following
components:
      (1)   Vision component. This component expresses the ideas, ideals, and
goals residents have for the future of the city, and includes a vision
illustration showing possible general locations of building blocks or
development patterns.
      (2)   Policy plan. This plan provides the overall policy framework to
guide decisions over time toward achieving the vision.
      (3)   Implementation plan. This plan provides timelines for accomplishing
goals outlined in the vision statement and policy plan. Goals are divided into
the implementation plan, which are long-term projects, and action plans, which
are short-term projects.
      (4)   Monitoring program. This program gives the city and citizens a
framework for tracking progress toward implementation of the vision.
      (5)   Other plans. All other area plans and programmatic plans, as
existing, amended, or created in the future, are incorporated into the
comprehensive plan.
   (d)   Amendment.
      (1)   The vision, policy plan, area plans, and programmatic plans may be
amended if authorized by city council and by following the procedure for city
council authorized amendments as set out in Section
51A-4.701, “Zoning Amendments,” of
Article IV, “Zoning Regulations,” of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (2)   The implementation plan and monitoring program may be amended by
ordinance of the city council.
   (e)   Relation to zoning. The relationship between the comprehensive plan
and development regulations is that the comprehensive plan serves merely as a
guide for rezoning requests rather than as a mandatory restriction on the
city’s authority to regulate land use. The comprehensive plan shall not
constitute zoning regulations or establish zoning district boundaries. The
comprehensive plan does not limit the ability of the city to prepare other
plans, policies, or strategies as required. (Ord. Nos. 26371; 28073)
SEC. 51A-1.109.   APPORTIONMENT OF EXACTIONS.
   (a)   Exactions must be related and proportionate.
      (1)   No exactions may be imposed unless the exactions are:
         (A)   related to the needs created by the property development
project; and
         (B)   roughly proportionate to the impact of the property development
project.
      (2)   No precise mathematical calculation is required, but the city must
make an individualized determination that the required exaction is related both
in nature and extent to the impact of the property development.
   (b)   Request for apportionment determination. Except as provided in this
section, a request for an apportionment determination will not be processed
until the developer submits an application on a form provided by the director
including a complete developer report.
   (c)   Developer report. The developer shall submit a report prepared by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in Texas to the director containing
an analysis of existing municipal infrastructure, including streets capacity
and condition, alleys, street lighting, street signals, water service,
wastewater service, fire hydrants, storm water drainage system, solid waste
collection, and sanitary sewer; an analysis of the need for municipal
infrastructure additions or improvements; and any other information related to
the property development project that the director deems necessary.
   (d)   Waiver. The director may waive the developer report if:
      (1)   The developer will bear the total cost of the exactions, such as
infrastructure improvement necessitated solely by, and internal to, the
property development project.
      (2)   The developer has volunteered to pay a greater proportion of the
costs of the exactions.
      (3)   The director determines that the developer report is unnecessary.
   (e)   Apportionment determination.
      (1)   Within 15 days after submission of the developer report, the
director shall notify the developer that the report is complete or notify the
developer in writing of any deficiencies in the report and of any additional
documentation required.
      (2)   A professional engineer licensed to practice in Texas and retained
by the city shall evaluate the complete developer report and make the
apportionment determination.
      (3)   The apportionment determination is a determination of the
proportion of exactions to be borne by the developer. For example, if the total
cost of the municipal infrastructure additions or improve ments is $10,000, and
the need for the municipal infrastructure additions or improvements is related
to the needs created by the property development project, and the property
development project accounts for 80 percent of the impact on the municipal
infrastructure additions or improvements, then the developer's portion is 80
percent of the cost of the municipal infrastructure additions or improvements,
or $8,000.
      (4)   The director shall notify the developer of the apportionment
determination within 30 days after deeming the application and developer report
complete, prior to approval of any related zoning district classification or
boundary change, prior to final release of any related plat, or prior to
execution of any related private development contract, whichever is earliest.
      (5)   Cost sharing of municipal infrastructure additions or improvements
between the developer and the city shall be documented in a cost sharing
contract pursuant to Section
51A-8.614.
   (f)   Appeal.
      (1)   No waiver. A developer shall not be required to waive the right of
appeal as a condition for approval of a development project.
      (2)   City plan commission. A developer may appeal the director's
apportionment determination to the city plan commission by filing written
notice with the director within 30 days after the date of the determination. If
an appeal is filed, the city plan commission shall hear the appeal within 60
days after the date of its filing. The director shall forward to the city plan
commission the complete record of the matter being appealed, including the
developer report, if any, and the apportionment determination. The city plan
commission shall hold a public hearing where the developer and director may
present evidence and testimony under procedures adopted by the city plan
commission. The developer shall have the burden of proof at the public hearing.
The city plan commission shall have the same authority as the director and may
affirm, in whole or in part, modify the apportionment determination, or remand
the apportionment determination back to the director for further consideration.
In reviewing the apportionment determination, the city plan commission shall
use the standard in Subsection (a). The city plan commission shall make its
determination within 30 days after the hearing.
      (3)   City council. A developer may appeal the city plan commission's
decision to the city council by filing a written notice with the director
within 30 days after the date of the city plan commission's decision. If an
appeal is filed, the city council shall hear the appeal within 60 days after
the date of its filing. The director shall forward to the city council the
complete record of the matter being appealed, including the developer report,
if any, the apportionment determination, and the record of the city plan
commission hearing. City council shall hold a public hearing where the
developer and the director may present evidence and testimony under procedures
adopted by city council. The developer shall have the burden of proof at the
public hearing. The city council shall have the same authority as the director
and may affirm, in whole or in part, modify the apportionment determination, or
remand the apportionment determination back to the director for further
consideration. In reviewing the apportionment determination, the city council
shall use the standard in Subsection (a). The city council shall make its
determination within 30 days after the hearing.
      (4)   County or district court. A developer may appeal the city council's
decision to a county or district court of the county where the development
project is located within 30 days after the date of the city council's final
determination. The sole issue on appeal is whether the city council erred in
its review of the city plan commission determination. (Ord. Nos. 26530; 31358)
ARTICLE II.
INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
SEC. 51A-2.101.   INTERPRETATIONS.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following rules apply in
interpreting this chapter:
   (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
   (2)   Words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural
include the singular.
   (3)   The word “building” includes the word “structure”, and the word
“structure” includes the word “building.”
   (4)   The word “lot” includes the words “building site,” “site,” “plot” or
“tract.”
   (5)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
   (6)   If there is a conflict:
      (A)   the text of this chapter controls over the charts or any other
graphic display in this chapter;
      (B)   the use regulations (Division
51A-4.200) control over the district regulations (Division
51A-4.100, et seq.) in this chapter; and
      (C)   the text, charts, or other graphic display in
Article XIII control over the text, charts, or other graphic display in other
articles of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 27495)
SEC. 51A-2.102.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
   (1)   “A” DISTRICT means the agricultural district established under Chapter
51.
   (2)   “A(A)” DISTRICT means the agricultural district established under this
chapter.
   (2.1)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE means a structure located on the same lot as the
main building that is subordinate in floor area, location, and purpose to the
main building and used for a permitted accessory use.
   (3)   ACCESSORY USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.217.
   (4)   AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT means the A(A) district established under this
chapter.
   (5)   AGRICULTURAL USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.201.
   (6)   AIRPORT HAZARD means any structure, tree, sign, vehicle or use of land
which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or
taking off at an airport, or is otherwise hazardous to the landing or taking
off of aircraft.
   (7)   ALLEY means a right-of-way which provides secondary access to adjacent
property.
   (7.1)   ARTERIAL means a street designated as either a principal or minor
arterial in the city’s thoroughfare plan.
   (8)   BASEMENT means any level of a building where more than one half of the
vertical distance between floor and ceiling is below grade.
   (8.1)   BATHROOM means a room used for personal hygiene and containing a
shower or bathtub, a toilet, and a sink.
   (9)   BEDROOM means any room or area in a dwelling unit designed for
sleeping. Kitchens, dining rooms, living rooms, bathrooms, closets, game rooms,
sunrooms, and other similar rooms are not considered bedrooms.
   (9.1)   BICYCLE PARKING means space reserved for the secured standing or
storage of bicycles, with vertical elements available to support a bicycle in
every space and includes short-term and long-term bicycle parking.
   (9.2)   BICYCLE PARKING, LONG-TERM means bicycle parking for use exceeding
four hours and enclosed within a structure designed for increased security from
theft and vandalism, such as locked bicycle storage rooms, bicycle check-in
systems, and bicycle lockers.
   (9.3)   BICYCLE PARKING, SHORT-TERM means unenclosed bicycle parking for use
for four hours or less.
   (10)    BLOCK means an area bounded by streets on all sides.
   (10.1)   BLOCKFACE means:
      (A)   the distance along one side of a street between the two nearest
intersecting streets;
      (B)   where a street deadends, the distance along one side of a street
between the nearest intersecting street and the end of the deadend street; or
       (C)   where a street centerline contains a change of direction 90
degrees or more, the distance along one side of a street between either the
nearest intersecting street or the deadend and the point determining the angle
of the change of direction.
   (11)   BOARD means the board of adjustment.
   (11.1)   BREEZEWAY means an unenclosed passage connecting two buildings or
portions of a building.
   (12)   BUILDING means a structure for the support or shelter of any use or
occupancy.
   (13)   BUILDING LINE means a line marking the minimum distance a building
may be erected from a street, alley, or lot line. (Also called the “setback
line.”)
   (14)   BUILDING OFFICIAL means the person designated by the city manager as
the building official of the city, or the building official’s authorized
representative.
   (15)   BUILDING SITE means property that meets the requirements of Section
51A-4.601.
   (16)   “CA-1” DISTRICT means the CA-1 district established under Chapter 51.
   (17)   “CA-1(A)” DISTRICT means the CA-1(A) district established under this
chapter.
   (18)   “CA-2” DISTRICT means the CA-2 district established under Chapter 51.
   (19)   “CA-2(A)” DISTRICT means the CA-2(A) district established under this
chapter.
   (20)   CENTER LINE means a line running midway between the bounding right-
of-way lines of a street or alley. Where the bounding right-of-way lines are
irregular, the center line shall be determined by the director of
transportation and public works.
   (21)   CENTRAL AREA DISTRICTS means the CA-1(A) and CA-2(A) districts
established under this chapter.
   (22)   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT means the area of the city within Woodall
Rodgers Freeway, Central Expressway (elevated bypass), R. L. Thornton Freeway,
and Stemmons Freeway.
   (23)   CITY COUNCIL means the governing body of the city.
   (23.1)   Reserved.
   (23.2)   Reserved.
   (23.3)   COLLECTOR means a street designated as either a community or
residential collector in the city’s thoroughfare plan.
   (24)   COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS SERVICE USES means those uses defined in
Section
51A-4.202.
   (25)   COMMISSION or CITY PLAN COMMISSION means the city plan and zoning
commission.
   (26)   COVERAGE means the percentage of lot area covered by a roof, floor,
or other structure, except that roof eaves up to 24 inches and other ordinary
building projections up to 12 inches are excluded.
   (27)   DENSITY means the ratio of dwelling units to lot area.
   (28)   DEPARTMENT means the department of development services. The
department of development services was formerly named the department of
sustainable development and construction, the department of planning and
development, the department of urban design, and the city plan department. Any
reference to these departments is a reference to the department of development
services.
   (29)   “D” DISTRICT means the duplex district established under Chapter 51.
   (30)   “D(A)” DISTRICT means the duplex district established under this
chapter.
   (31)   DIR means “development impact review” (See Division
51A-4.800).
   (32)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department of sustainable
development and construction or the director's representative.
   (33)   DUPLEX DISTRICT means the D(A) district established under this
chapter.
   (34)   DWELLING UNIT means one or more rooms designed to be a single
housekeeping unit to accommodate one family and containing one or more
kitchens, one or more bathrooms, and one or more bedrooms.
   (35)   EAVES means the lowest border of a roof, including any overhang.
   (35.1)   EXACTION means, for purposes of Section
51A-1.109 and Texas Local Government Code Section 212.904, dedications, fees,
or construction costs for municipal infrastructure additions or improvements
that the city requires a developer to bear a portion of as a condition for
approval of a property development project.
   (36)   FAMILY means individuals living together as a single housekeeping
unit in which not more than four individuals are unrelated to the head of the
household by blood, marriage, or adoption.
   (37)   FENCE means a structure that provides a physical barrier.
   (38)   FLOOR AREA means the total square feet of floor space in a building
measured to the outside faces of exterior walls or to the omitted wall lines,
whichever produces the larger area, excluding the following:
      (A)   Area used solely for off-street parking.
      (B)   Area between an omitted wall line and the structural wall when the
area is used solely for foot or vehicular traffic or landscaping.
      (C)   Area of a private balcony that is not accessible to the public and
does not provide a means of ingress or egress.
      (D)   Area of a breezeway or an unenclosed stairway located within the
first three stories, excluding any basement, of a residential use.
   (39)   FLOOR AREA RATIO means the ratio of floor area to lot area. (Note: A
1:1 FAR is stated as “1.0,” 2:1 is stated as “2.0,” 2.5:1 is stated as “2.5,”
etc.)
   (39.1)   FORM DISTRICTS means the RTN, WMU- 3, WMU-5, WMU-8, WMU-12, WMU-20,
WMU-40, WR-3, WR-5, WR-8, WR-12, WR-20, and WR-40 districts and the planned
form districts established under
Article XIII of this chapter.
   (40)   FRONTAGE means the length of property along one side of a street
between property or lease boundary lines.
   (41)   FRONT YARD means that portion of a lot which abuts a street and
extends across the width of the lot between the street and the setback line.
   (41.1)   GARBAGE means solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and
vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking,
and consumption of food. This includes such waste materials from markets and
storage facilities where handling or sale of produce and other food products is
conducted.
   (42)   “GO” DISTRICTS means the general office matrix districts established
under Chapter 51.
   (43)   “GO(A)” DISTRICT means the general office district established under
this chapter.
   (44)   “GR” DISTRICT means the general retail district established under
Chapter 51.
   (45)   GRADE means the average of the finished ground surface elevations
measured at the highest and lowest exterior corners of a structure. For
purposes of this definition, FINISHED GROUND SURFACE ELEVATION means the ground
surface elevation of the building site before any construction or the ground
surface elevation as altered in accordance with grading plans approved by the
building official. Finished ground surface elevation does not include:
      (A)   fill material not necessary to make the site developable;
      (B)   berms; or
      (C)   landscape features.
   (45.1)   HAZARDOUS WASTE means solid waste identified or listed as hazardous
waste by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et
seq.).
   (46)   “HC” DISTRICT means the heavy commercial district established under
Chapter 51.
   (47)   HEIGHT means the vertical distance measured from grade to:
      (A)   for a structure with a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the midpoint of
the vertical dimension between the lowest eaves and the highest ridge of the
structure;
      (B)   for a structure with a dome roof, the midpoint of the vertical
dimension of the dome; and
      (C)   for any other structure, the highest point of the structure.
   (47.1)   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 20478).
   (48)   Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. 24163).
   (48.1)   HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, constructed on or
after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in
the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more
in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
   (49)   “I-1” DISTRICT means the I-1 district established under Chapter 51.
   (50)   “I-2” DISTRICT means the I-2 district established under Chapter 51.
   (51)   “I-3” DISTRICT means the I-3 district established under Chapter 51.
   (52)   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS means LI, IR, and IM districts.
   (52.1)   INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE means solid waste generated by manufacturing
or industrial processes, excluding mining or oil and gas, that is not hazardous
waste regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
of 1976. Such waste may include, but is not limited to, waste resulting from:
      (A)   Electric power generation.
      (B)   Foundries or the manufacturing of nonferrous metals.
      (C)   Water treatment.
      (D)   The manufacturing of textiles; transportation equipment; plastics;
resins; rubber; miscellaneous plastic products; concrete products; iron; steel;
clay; glass; stone; organic chemicals; inorganic chemicals; leather; leather
products; fertilizers and agricultural chemicals; pulp and paper; food; and
food-related products and by-products.
   (53)   INDUSTRIAL USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.203.
   (54)   INNER COURT means an open space bounded on all sides by the walls of
a building.
   (55)   INSTITUTIONAL USES means the post office; community service center;
foster home; child or adult care facility; halfway house; church; convent or
monastery; cemetery or mausoleum; overnight general purpose shelter; public or
private school; business school; technical school; college, university, or
seminary; college dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house; library, art
gallery, or museum; hospital; and convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care,
and related institutions uses.
   (56)   INSTITUTIONAL AND COMMUNITY SERVICE USES means those uses defined in
Section
51A-4.204.
   (57)   INTERIOR LOT LINE means a lot line not adjacent to a street or alley.
   (57.1)   KITCHEN means any room or area used for cooking or preparing food
and containing one or more ovens, stoves, or cooktops; one or more
refrigerators; and one or more sinks. This definition does not include outdoor
cooking facilities.
   (57.2)   KNOWINGLY means a person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with
respect to the nature of their conduct or to circumstances surrounding their
conduct when the person is aware of the nature of the conduct or that the
circumstances exist. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect
to a result of their conduct when the person is aware that the conduct is
reasonably certain to cause the result.
   (58)   LANDING AREA means the area of an airport used for the landing, take
off or taxiing of aircraft.
   (59)   LANDSCAPE AUTHORITY means:
      (A)   a landscape architect licensed or registered by the state; or
      (B)   a professional horticulturist or nurseryman.
   (60)   “LC” DISTRICT means the light commercial district established under
Chapter 51.
   (61)   LEGAL HEIGHT means the maximum building height allowed under Federal
Aviation Administration regulations or any other ordinance or regulation in
effect, whichever is most restrictive.
   (61.1)   “LI” DISTRICT means the light industrial district established under
this chapter.
   (61.2)   LIGHT SOURCE means a flame or a bulb, mantle, or other device that
produces light. The term “light source” does not include a device or fixture
that serves to cover, direct or control the distribution of light.
   (61.3)   LIMITED ACCESSORY USE means an accessory use that is subject to the
restrictions in Section
51A-4.218 governing limited uses.
   (62)   LIMITED USE means a use restricted under Section
51A-4.218.
   (63)   “LO” DISTRICTS means the limited office matrix districts established
under Chapter 51.
   (64)   “LO-1” DISTRICT means the LO-1 district established under this
chapter.
   (65)   “LO-2” DISTRICT means the LO-2 district established under this
chapter.
   (65.1)   “LO-3” DISTRICT means the LO-3 district established under this
chapter.
   (65.2)   LO(A) DISTRICTS means the LO-1, LO-2, and LO-3 districts
established under this chapter.
   (66)   LODGING USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.205.
   (67)   LOT means a building site that fronts on a public or private street,
except that in the case of a planned development district, the building site
may front on an access easement, and in the case of a shared access
development, the building site may front on a shared access area.
   (68)   LOT AREA means the total square feet contained within lot lines.
   (69)   LOT DEPTH means the average distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   (70)   LOT LINE means a property line bounding a lot, excluding any street
or alley dedicated in fee simple.
   (71)   LOT WIDTH means the distance between side lot lines measured along
the front setback line.
   (72)   MAIN BUILDING means a building on a lot intended for occupancy by the
main use.
   (73)   MAIN USE means those uses defined in Sections
51A-4.201 through 51A-4.216.
   (73.1)   MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and which is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. In this chapter, the term “manufactured home” includes, but is not
limited to, HUD-code manufactured homes and mobile homes.
   (73.2)   MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT means the MH(A) district established
under this chapter.
   (73.3)   “MC” DISTRICTS means the MC-1, MC-2, MC-3, and MC-4 districts
established under this chapter (also called “multiple commercial districts”).
   (74)   “MF” DISTRICTS means the MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, and MF-4 districts
established under Chapter 51.
   (75)   “MF(A)” DISTRICTS means the MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2(A), MF-2(SAH),
MF-3(A), and MF-4(A) districts established under this chapter (also called
“multifamily districts”).
   (76)   “MH” DISTRICT means the manufactured home district established under
Chapter 51.
   (77)   “MH(A)” DISTRICT means the manufactured home district established
under this chapter.
   (77.1)   MINOR ARTERIAL means a street designated as a minor arterial in the
city’s thoroughfare plan.
   (77.2)   MINOR STREET means a street not designated in the city’s
thoroughfare plan.
   (78)   MISCELLANEOUS USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.206.
   (79)   MIXED USE DISTRICTS means the MU-1, MU-1(SAH), MU-2, MU-2(SAH), MU-3,
and MU-3(SAH) districts established under this chapter (also called “MU”
districts).
   (80)   “MO” DISTRICTS means the mid-range office matrix districts
established under Chapter 51.
   (81)   “MO-1” DISTRICT means the MO-1 district established under this
chapter.
   (82)   “MO-2” DISTRICT means the MO-2 district established under this
chapter.
   (82.1)   MO(A) DISTRICTS means the MO-1 and MO-2 districts established under
this chapter.
   (83)   MOBILE HOME means a structure that was constructed before June 15,
1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is
eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
   (83.1)   MOBILITY AND STREET SERVICES means public works or transportation.
Any reference to mobility and street services is a reference to public works or
transportation.
   (84)   “MU” DISTRICTS means the MU-1, MU-1(SAH), MU-2, MU-2(SAH), MU-3, and
MU-3(SAH) districts established under this chapter (also called “mixed use
districts”).
   (85)   MULTIFAMILY DISTRICTS means the MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2(A), MF-2
(SAH), MF-3(A), and MF-4(A) districts established under this chapter [also
called “MF(A)” districts].
   (85.1)   MULTIPLE COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS means the MC-1, MC-2, MC-3, and MC-
4 districts established under this chapter (also called “MC” districts).
   (86)   NET ACRE means an acre of land that does not include public rights-
of-way.
   (87)   “NO” DISTRICTS means the neighborhood office matrix districts
established under Chapter 51.
   (88)   “NO(A)” DISTRICT mean the neighborhood office district established
under this chapter.
   (89)   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE means a structure which does not conform to
the regulations (other than the use regulations) of this chapter, but which was
lawfully constructed under the regulations in force at the time of
construction.
   (90)   NONCONFORMING USE means a use that does not conform to the use
regulations of this chapter, but was lawfully established under the regulations
in force at the beginning of operation and has been in regular use since that
time.
   (91)   NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS means the office, retail, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, P(A), urban corridor, walkable
urban mixed use, and walkable urban residential districts.
   (92)   NONRESIDENTIAL USE means any main use that is not listed in Section
51A-4.209.
   (93)   “NS” DISTRICT means the neighborhood service district established
under Chapter 51.
   (94)   “NS(A)” DISTRICT means the neighborhood service district established
under this chapter.
   (95)   “O-1” DISTRICT means the O-1 district established under Chapter 51.
   (96)   “O-2” DISTRICT means the O-2 district established under Chapter 51.
   (97)   OCCUPANCY means the purpose for which a building or land is used.
   (98)   OFFICE DISTRICTS means the NO(A), LO-1, LO-2, LO-3, MO-1, MO-2, and
GO(A) districts established under this chapter.
   (99)   OFFICE USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.207.
   (99.1)   OFF-STREET PARKING means parking spaces provided for a motor
vehicle that are not located on a public right-of-way or private street.
Off-street parking does not include bicycle parking spaces.
   (100)   OMITTED WALL LINE means a line on the ground determined by a
vertical plane from:
      (A)   the overhang or outermost projection of a structure; or
      (B)   the outer edge of the roof of a structure without walls; or
      (C)   two feet inside the eave line of a structure with roof eaves.
   (101)   OPEN SPACE means an area that is unobstructed to the sky and
contains no structures except for ordinary projections of cornices and eaves.
   (102)   OPENINGS FOR LIGHT OR AIR means any windows, window walls, or glass
panels in an exterior wall of a building, excluding doors used for access.
   (103)   OUTER COURT means an open space bounded on all sides except one by
the walls of a building, and opening upon a street, alley or a permanent open
space.
   (104)   OUTSIDE DISPLAY means the placement of a commodity outside for a
period of time less than 24 hours.
   (104.1)   OVERSIZED MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor vehicle:
      (A)   that is more than 22 feet from end to end, more than eight feet at
its widest point, or more than nine feet from the ground to its highest point;
or
      (B)   with two or more rear axles such as trucks, truck tractors, and
similar vehicles; or
      (C)   designed to transport more than 15 passengers including the driver.
   (104.2)   OVERSIZED TRAILER means any trailer or semi-trailer that is more
than 20 feet from end to end, more than eight feet at its widest point, or more
than nine feet from the ground to its highest point, excluding boat and
recreational vehicle trailers.
   (105)   “P” DISTRICT means the parking district established under Chapter
51.
   (106)   “P(A)” DISTRICT means the parking district established under this
chapter.
   (107)   PARKING means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
Parking does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle when commodities
or passengers are being loaded or unloaded.
   (108)   PARKING DISTRICT means the “P(A)” district established under this
chapter.
   (109)   PARKING BAY WIDTH means the width of one or two rows of parking
stalls and the access aisle between them.
   (110)   PARTY WALL means a wall built on an interior lot line used as a
common support for buildings on both lots.
   (111)   PERSON means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, or political subdivision.
   (111.1)   PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL means a street designated as a principal
arterial in the city’s thoroughfare plan.
   (112)   PRIVATE STREET means a street or an alley built to the same
specifications as a street or alley dedicated to the public use, whose
ownership has been retained privately.
   (113)   QUASI-PUBLIC AGENCY means an institution obtaining more than 51
percent of its funds from tax revenue.
   (114)   RAR means “residential adjacency review” (See Division
51A-4.800).
   (115)   “R” DISTRICTS means the R-1ac, R-1/2ac, R-16, R-13, R-10, R-7.5, and
R-5 districts established under Chapter 51.
   (116)   “R(A)” DISTRICTS means the R-1ac(A), R-1/2ac(A), R-16(A), R-13(A),
R-10(A), R-7.5(A), and R-5(A) districts established under this chapter (also
called “single family districts”).
   (117)   REAR YARD means that portion of a lot between two side lot lines
that does not abut a street and that extends across the width of the lot
between the rear setback line and the rear lot line.
   (118)   RECREATION USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.208.
   (118.1)   REFUSE means waste principally composed of trash and rubbish and
containing no more than 50 percent by weight garbage or 50 percent by weight
moisture, and no more than seven percent by weight noncombustible solids.
   (119)   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS means the A(A), R-1ac(A), R-1/2ac(A), R-16(A),
R-13(A), R-10(A), R-7.5(A), R-5(A), D(A), TH-1(A), TH-2(A), TH-3(A), CH, MF-1
(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2(A), MF-2(SAH), MF- 3(A), MF-4(A), MH(A), and RTN districts
established under this chapter.
   (120)   RESIDENTIAL PROXIMITY SLOPE means “residential proximity slope” as
defined in Section
51A-4.412.
   (121)   RESIDENTIAL USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.209.
   (121.1)   RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION DISTRICT means the RTN district established
under
Article XIII of this chapter.
   (122)   RETAIL AND PERSONAL SERVICE USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.210.
   (122.1)   RETAIL DISTRICTS means the NS(A), CR, and RR districts established
under this chapter.
   (123)   RIDGE means the line of intersection at the top between the opposite
slopes or sides of a roof.
   (124)   RIGHT-OF-WAY means an area dedicated to public use for pedestrian
and vehicular movement.
   (125)   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE means the dividing line between a right-of-way and
an adjacent lot.
   (125.1)   RTN DISTRICT means the residential transition district established
under
Article XIII of this chapter.
   (125.2)   RUBBISH means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes,
consisting of both combustible and noncombustible materials. Combustible
rubbish includes, but is not limited to, paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior,
rubber, plastics, non-metal furniture, leaves, and yard trimmings.
Noncombustible rubbish includes glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal
furniture, and similar items or materials which will not burn at ordinary
incinerator temperatures. For purposes of this paragraph, temperatures from
1600 to 1800 degrees Fahrenheit are considered ordinary incinerator
temperatures.
   (126)   “SC” DISTRICT means the shopping center district established under
Chapter 51.
   (127)   SCREENING means a structure that provides a visual barrier.
   (128)   SETBACK LINE means a line marking the minimum distance a building
may be erected from a street, alley, or lot line (also called the “building
line”).
   (128.1)   SHARED ACCESS DEVELOPMENT means a development that meets all of
the requirements of Section
51A-4.411.
   (129)   SIDE YARD means:
      (A)   that portion of a lot extending from the front setback line to the
rear setback line between the side setback line and the side lot line; or
      (B)   that portion of a lot which is between a lot line and a setback
line but is not a front or rear yard.
   (130)   SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICTS means the R-1ac(A), R-1/2ac(A), R-16(A), R-
13(A), R-10(A), R-7.5(A), and R-5(A) districts established under this chapter
(also called “R(A)” districts).
   (131)   SITE AREA means that portion of a building site occupied by a use
and not covered by a building or structure. For purposes of determining
required off-street parking, site area does not include that area occupied by
off-street parking, landscaped areas, and open space not used for storage or
sales.
   (131.1)   SOLID WASTE means garbage; refuse; sludge from waste treatment
plants, water supply treatment plants, and air pollution control facilities;
and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous material, resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and
agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities. Solid
waste does not include:
      (i)   Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, solid or dissolved
material in irrigation return flows, or industrial discharges subject to
regulation by permit issued pursuant to
Chapter 26, Water Code.
      (ii)   Soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural or manmade inert solid
materials used to fill land to make it suitable for the construction of surface
improvements.
      (iii)   Waste materials resulting from activities associated with the
exploration, development, or production of oil or gas which are subject to
control by the Texas Railroad Commission.
   (131.2)   SPECIAL WASTE means solid waste from health-care-related
activities which if improperly treated or handled may serve to transmit
infectious disease, and which is comprised of the following: animal waste, bulk
blood and blood products, microbiological waste, pathological waste, and
sharps.
   (132)   STACKING SPACE means a space for one motor vehicle to line up in
while waiting to enter or use a parking lot, garage, drive-in, or drive-through
facility.
   (133)   STORY means that portion of a building between any two successive
floors or between the top floor and the ceiling above it.
   (133.1)   STREET LEVEL means, in a multi-level building, the level having
the floor closest in elevation to the adjacent street; if the floors of two
levels are equally close in elevation to the adjacent street, the level with
the higher elevation is the street level.
   (134)   STREET means a right-of-way which provides primary access to
adjacent property.
   (134.1)   STREET SERVICES means public works. Any reference to street
services is a reference to public works.
   (135)   STRUCTURE means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or
building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite manner.
   (136)   SUP means “specific use permit” (See Section
51A-4.219).
   (137)   “TH” DISTRICTS means the TH-1, TH-2, TH-3, and TH-4 districts
established under Chapter 51.
   (138)   “TH(A)” DISTRICTS means the TH-1(A), TH-2(A), and TH-3(A) districts
established under this chapter (also called townhouse districts).
   (138.1)   THOROUGHFARE means a street designated in the city’s thoroughfare
plan.
   (139)   TOWNHOUSE DISTRICTS means the TH-1(A), TH-2(A), and TH-3(A)
districts established under this chapter [also called “TH(A)” districts].
   (139.1)   TRAFFIC ENGINEER means the person designated by the city manager
as the traffic engineer of the city, or the traffic engineer’s authorized
representative.
   (139.2)   TRAILER means a vehicle without motive power that is designed or
used to carry property or passengers, and is drawn by, or partially rests on, a
motor vehicle.
   (140)   TRANSIENT STAND means a site for the placing and use of a
manufactured home, recreational vehicle, or tent.
   (140.1)   TRANSPARENCY means the total area of window opening, door opening,
or other opening, expressed as a percentage of the total facade area by story.
   (141)   TRANSPORTATION USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.211.
   (141.1)   “UC” DISTRICTS means the UC-1, UC-2, and UC-3 districts
established under this chapter (also called “urban corridor districts”).
   (141.2)   URBAN CORRIDOR DISTRICTS means the UC-1, UC-2, and UC-3 districts
established under this chapter (also called “UC” districts). [Note: Section 1
of Ordinance No. 24718 adds 51A–2.102 (141.2), providing a definition for the
term “street level.” Section 4 of Ordinance No. 24718 adds 51A–2.102(141.2),
providing a definition for the term “urban corridor districts.”]
   (142)   UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.212.
   (142.1)   WALKABLE URBAN MIXED USE DISTRICTS means the WMU-3, WMU-5, WMU-8,
WMU-12, WMU-20, and WMU-40 districts established under
Article XIII of this chapter.
   (142.2)   WALKABLE URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS means the WR-3, WR-5, WR-8,
WR-12, WR-20, and WR-40 districts established under
Article XIII of this chapter.
   (143)   WHOLESALE, DISTRIBUTION, AND STORAGE USES means those uses defined
in Section
51A-4.213.
   (143.1)   WMU DISTRICTS means the WMU-3, WMU-5, WMU-8, WMU-12, WMU-20, and
WMU-40 districts established under
Article XIII of this chapter (also called “walkable urban mixed use
districts”).
   (143.2)   WR DISTRICTS means the WR-3, WR-5, WR-8, WR-12, WR-20, and WR-40
districts established under
Article XIII of this chapter (also called “walkable urban residential
districts”).
   (144)   ZONING DISTRICT means a classification assigned to a particular area
of the city within which zoning regulations are uniform.
   (145)   ZONING DISTRICT MAP means the official map upon which the zoning
districts of the city are delineated. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19806; 20272;
20360; 20361; 20383; 20411; 20478; 20673; 20902; 20920; 21002; 21186; 21663;
22018; 24163; 24718; 24731; 24843; 25047; 25977; 26286; 26530; 27334; 27495;
27572; 28072; 28073; 28424; 29128; 30239; 30654; 30932; 31607; 32002; 32264;
32659; 32864; 32907; 33112)
ARTICLE III.
DECISIONMAKING AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES.
SEC. 51A-3.101.   CITY PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (a)   Creation; membership; appointment. There is hereby created the city
plan and zoning commission which consists of 15 members. Each city council
member shall appoint one member to the board. The chair shall be appointed by
the mayor and the vice-chair shall be appointed by the city council. Members
serve for two-year terms beginning on October 1 of odd-numbered years and serve
until their successors are appointed and qualified. Members must possess the
same qualifications and are subject to the same disqualifications as members of
the city council. A vacancy occurring during the unexpired term of a member
will be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
   (b)   Quorum and voting. All cases heard by the commission must be heard by
a minimum number equal to a quorum of the membership. A simple majority of the
membership of the commission, less any unfilled vacancies, constitutes a
quorum. Except as otherwise required by state law, the number of votes
necessary to decide a matter is a simple majority of the members present.
   (c)   Powers and duties. The commission has the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To serve as an advisory body to the city council concerning
amendments to the zoning ordinance and the granting or denial of specific use
permits.
      (2)   To administer the provisions of state law, regarding the platting
and recording of subdivisions and additions, and to require the owners and
developers of land who desire to plat or replat land for urban development to:
         (A)   dedicate streets, alleys, parks, easements or other public
places of adequate dimensions;
         (B)   coordinate street layouts and street planning with the city and
with the county, state and federally designated highways; and
         (C)   provide for building setback lines.
      (3)   To consider the character of development or land use contemplated
by proposed platting and zoning of property, and to require off-street parking
and streets and alleys of adequate dimensions.
      (4)   To advise and make recommendations on the comprehensive plan and
its implementation as may be requested by the city council or city manager.
      (5)   To advertise and hold public hearings on zoning or changes in
zoning.
      (6)   To exercise all other responsibilities as may be provided by
applicable law.
   (d)   Meetings, records and rules.
      (1)   All meetings and hearings of the commission must be open to the
public in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, Texas Government Code
Chapter 551.
      (2)   All records of the commission are public records open to inspection
at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice in accordance with the Texas
Public Information Act, Texas Government Code Section 552.
      (3)   The commission shall adopt, subject to approval of city council,
rules, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances, governing its
proceedings.
   (e)   Effect of decisions. Actions taken or recommendations made by the
commission are not binding upon the city council and the city council may
decide a matter contrary to the recommendations or actions of the commission.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 21153; 24843; 27892)
SEC. 51A-3.102.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (a)   Creation; membership; appointment. There is hereby created the board
of adjustment which shall consist of 15 members who are residents of the city.
Each city council member shall appoint one member to the board. The chair and
two vice-chairs shall be appointed by the mayor from among the board members.
The city secretary shall divide the board into panels of five members each. A
board member may serve only on the panel to which he or she is assigned. To the
greatest extent practicable, the panels must reflect the geographic and ethnic
diversity of the city. The chair and vice-chairs shall act as presiding
officers of the panels. Members serve for two-year terms beginning on October 1
of odd-numbered years and shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. A vacancy for the unexpired term of any member will be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment was made. The city council may appoint
six alternate members to the board who serve in the absence of one or more
regular members when requested to do so by the board chair, the presiding
officer of a board panel, or by the city manager. The alternate members serve
for the same period and are subject to removal the same as regular members. The
city council shall fill vacancies occurring in the alternate membership the
same as in the regular membership.
   (b)   Case assignments. The board shall adopt rules for the assignment of
cases to a panel. Only one panel may hear, handle, or render a decision in a
particular case. If a case is dismissed or withdrawn and subsequently refiled
within five years of the date the original case was dismissed or withdrawn, it
must be returned to the panel to which it was originally assigned.
   (c)   Quorum and voting. Cases must be heard by a minimum of 75 percent of
the members of a board panel. The concurring vote of 75 percent of the members
of a panel is necessary to:
      (1)   reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an
administrative official involving the interpretation or enforcement of the
zoning ordinance;
      (2)   decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board is
required to pass under state law, the city charter, or city ordinances; or
      (3)   grant a variance.
   (d)   Powers and duties. The board has the following powers and duties,
which must be exercised in accordance with this chapter:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from decisions of administrative
officials made in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance of the city. For
purposes of this section, "administrative official" means that person within a
city department having the final decision-making authority within the
department relative to the zoning enforcement issue.
      (2)   To interpret the intent of the zoning district map when uncertainty
exists because the actual physical features differ from those indicated on the
zoning district map and when the rules set forth in the zoning district
boundary regulations do not apply.
      (3)   To hear and decide special exceptions that are expressly provided
for in this chapter.
      (4)   To bring about the discontinuance of a nonconforming use under a
plan whereby the owner or lessee of the nonconforming use is compensated for
the costs of ceasing the nonconforming use of the property and any diminution
in the market value of the property as a result of a requirement to discontinue
the nonconforming use.
      (5)   To hear and decide requests for change of occupancy of a
nonconforming use to another nonconforming use.
      (6)   To hear and decide requests for the enlargement of a nonconforming
use.
      (7)   To hear and decide requests for reconstruction of a nonconforming
structure on the land occupied by the structure when the reconstruction will
not permanently prevent the return of the property to a conforming use and will
not increase the nonconformity.
      (8)   To require the vacation and demolition of a nonconforming structure
that is determined to be obsolete, dangerous, dilapidated, or substandard.
      (9)   To consider on its own motion or upon the request of interested
property owners, the operation or alteration of any use which is a
nonconforming use because of its noncompliance with the environmental
performance standards set forth in this chapter, and to specify the conditions
and standards which must be complied with for continuance of the nonconforming
use.
      (10)   To grant variances from the front yard, side yard, rear yard, lot
width, lot depth, lot coverage, floor area for structures accessory to single
family uses, height, minimum sidewalks, off-street parking or off-street
loading, or landscape regulations provided that:
         (A)   In general.
            (i)   the variance is not contrary to the public interest when,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result
in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance will be
observed and substantial justice done;
            (ii)   the variance is necessary to permit development of a
specific parcel of land that differs from other parcels of land by being of
such a restrictive area, shape, or slope that it cannot be developed in a
manner commensurate with the development upon other parcels of land with the
same zoning; and
            (iii)   the variance is not granted to relieve a self-created or
personal hardship, nor for financial reasons only, except as provided in
Subparagraph (B)(i), nor to permit any person a privilege in developing a
parcel of land not permitted by this chapter to other parcels of land with the
same zoning.
         (B)   Structures. In exercising its authority under Subparagraph (A)
(ii), the board may consider the following as grounds to determine whether
compliance with the ordinance as applied to a structure that is the subject of
the appeal would result in unnecessary hardship:
            (i)   the financial cost of compliance is greater than 50 percent
of the appraised value of the structure as shown on the most recent appraisal
roll certified to the assessor for the municipality under Section 26.01 of the
Texas Tax Code;
            (ii)    compliance would result in a loss to the lot on which the
structure is located of at least 25 percent of the area on which development is
authorized to physically occur;
            (iii)   compliance would result in the structure not being in
compliance with a requirement of a municipal ordinance, building code, or other
requirement;
            (iv)   compliance would result in the unreasonable encroachment on
an adjacent property or easement; or
            (v)   the municipality considers the structure to be a
nonconforming structure.
   (e)   Meetings, records and rules.
      (1)   All meetings and hearings of the board must be open to the public
in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551 of the Texas
Government Code.
      (2)   All records of the board are public records open to inspection at
reasonable times and upon reasonable notice in accordance with the Texas Public
Information Act, Chapter 552 of the Texas Government Code.
      (3)   The board shall adopt, subject to approval of city council, rules,
not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances, governing its proceedings.
   (f)   Effect of decisions. The board’s decision is final unless appealed to
the district court within 10 days in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas
Local Government Code. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20926; 22259; 22605; 24068; 26596;
27335; 27892; 30891; 32170; 33012)
SEC. 51A-3.103.   LANDMARK COMMISSION.
   (a)   Creation; membership; appointment.
      (1)   There is hereby created a landmark commission to be composed of 15
members. Each city council member shall appoint one member to the landmark
commission. The city council may appoint three alternate members to the
landmark commission who serve in the absence of one or more regular members
when requested to do so by the chair or by the city manager. The membership
(including alternate members) must include at least: one real estate developer
with experience in redevelopment of commercial historic properties, one
architect, one historian, one urban planner, one landscape architect, and one
real estate appraiser. All members must have demonstrated experience in
historic preservation and outstanding interest in the historic traditions of
the city and have knowledge and demonstrated experience in the fields of
history, art, architecture, architectural history, urban history, city
planning, urban design, historic real estate development, or historic
preservation.
      (2)   The city council shall solicit for consideration nominees for
appointment to the landmark commission from, but not limited to: the Dallas
County Historical Commission; the Dallas County Heritage Society; the Dallas
chapter of the American Institute of Architects; the Dallas Historical Society;
the Dallas chapter of the American Planning Association; the Dallas chapter of
the American Society of Landscape Architects; the Dallas Bar Association; the
North Texas Chapter of the Appraisal Institute; the city plan commission;
Preservation Dallas; Black Dallas Remembered; the African-American Museum; ACAL
de Mexico; the Dallas Black Chamber of Commerce; the Dallas Hispanic Chamber of
Commerce; the Greater Dallas Asian American Chamber of Commerce; the local
Urban Land Institute Section; the Dallas Real Estate Council; the CCIM
Commercial Real Estate Network; the Board of Realtors; and such other
individuals and organizations experienced in historic preservation. The
membership of the landmark commission must, as nearly as may be practicable,
reflect the racial and ethnic makeup of the city’s population.
      (3)   Each member of the landmark commission shall be appointed for a
two-year term beginning on October 1 of each odd-numbered year. All members
shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. A vacancy for
the unexpired term of any member shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointment was made. Alternate members serve for the same period and
are subject to removal the same as regular members. The city council shall fill
vacancies occurring in the alternate membership in the same manner as full city
council appointments to other boards. The members shall serve without
compensation. The mayor shall appoint the chair and the full council shall
appoint the vice-chair.
      (4)   In addition to the 15 regular members, representatives from the
city plan commission, department of development services, the building
inspection division of the department development services, code compliance
department, the department of planning and urban design, and the park and
recreation department shall sit on the landmark commission as ex officio
members. The ex officio members are not entitled to vote but assist the
landmark commission in various functions. The office of management services
shall provide adequate staff support to the landmark commission and shall
assign a member of the staff to act as the historic preservation officer.
   (b)   Quorum and voting. A quorum exists when there are physically present a
simple majority of the number of members officially appointed to the landmark
commission, regardless of the total number of members actually provided for the
landmark commission, except that a quorum may not be fewer than six members.
Issues are decided by a simple majority of the members present. Each member who
is present and entitled to vote must vote in accordance with
Chapter 8 of the Dallas City Code.
   (c)   Powers and duties. The landmark commission has the following powers
and duties:
      (1)   To thoroughly familiarize itself with the structures, land, areas,
and districts within the city that may be eligible for designation as historic
overlay districts.
      (2)   To create, examine and update the historic preservation plan and
present any modifications to the city plan commission for inclusion in the
comprehensive plan of the city. The historic preservation plan must:
         (A)   identify and catalog places and areas of historical, cultural,
architectural, or archeological value along with factual verification of their
importance and significance;
         (B)   identify criteria to be used in establishment of historic
overlay districts;
         (C)   identify guidelines and review procedures to be used in
determining whether to grant or deny predesignation certificates of
appropriateness, certificates of appropriateness, or certificates for
demolition or removal;
         (D)   formulate a program for private and public action to promote the
preservation of historic structures and districts;
         (E)   suggest sources of funds, including federal, state, municipal,
private, and foundation sources, for preservation and restoration activities
and for acquisitions; and
         (F)   recommend incentives for preservation.
      (3)   To recommend to the city plan commission that certain places and
areas be designated as historic overlay districts.
      (4)   To recommend to the city council that certain places and areas
which cannot be preserved without acquisition, be acquired in fee simple or in
some lesser degree by gift or purchase.
      (5)   To recommend changes in use where conditions exist under which the
required preservation of a property subject to the predesignation moratorium or
a historic structure would cause undue hardship to the owner of the property.
      (6)   To review the application for a building permit for proposed work
and design on a property subject to the predesignation moratorium or a historic
structure and determine whether a predesignation certificate of appropriateness
or a certificate of appropriateness should be issued.
      (7)   To recommend, when appropriate, the amendment to or removal of a
historic overlay district.
      (8)   To review applications for the demolition or removal of a structure
on a property subject to the predesignation moratorium and structures in
historic overlay districts and make recommendations, when appropriate,
concerning the applications to the city council.
      (9)   To annually review the status of properties subject to the
predesignation moratorium, and historic overlay districts and include a report
of the review in the landmark commission minutes.
      (10)   To initiate, when appropriate, the procedure for adopting an
ordinance to establish or amend a historic overlay district.
      (11)   To establish taskforces as needed to make recommendations to the
landmark commission on applications for predesignation certificates of
appropriateness, certificates of appropriateness, and other issues.
      (12)   To identify cases of demolition by neglect and initiate remedial
actions.
      (13)   To establish guidelines for selection of projects for the historic
preservation fund.
   (d)   Meetings, records and rules.
      (1)   The landmark commission shall meet at least once each month, with
additional meetings upon the call of the chair or upon petition of a simple
majority of the landmark commission members.
      (2)   All meetings and hearings of the landmark commission must be open
to the public in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, Texas Government
Code Chapter 551.
      (3)   All records of the landmark commission are public records open to
inspection at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice in accordance with
the Texas Open Records Act, Texas Government Code Chapter 552.
      (4)   The landmark commission shall adopt, subject to approval of city
council, rules, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinances, governing
its proceedings.
   (e)   Effect of decisions. Unless appealed, the determinations of the
landmark commission on predesignation certificates of appropriateness,
certificates of appropriateness, and certificates for demolition or removal are
final. Actions taken or recommendations made by the landmark commission that
are subject to review by the city plan commission or the city council are not
binding on those bodies, and the reviewing body may decide a matter contrary to
recommendations or actions of the landmark commission. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19499;
20487; 20585; 21153; 21512; 23694; 24163; 25047; 26596; 27892; 28073; 29478;
29645; 29882; 32002)
SEC. 51A-3.104.   RESERVED.
(Ord. 25047)
SEC. 51A-3.105.   BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The building official shall issue permits in accordance with this
chapter.
      (2)   The building official shall issue certificates of occupancy in
accordance with this chapter.
      (3)   The building official has the authority to enforce the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 19455)
ARTICLE IV.
ZONING REGULATIONS.
Division 51A-4.100. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
SEC. 51A-4.101.   NEW ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   (1)   Residential districts.
      (A)   A(A)   Agricultural district.
      (B)   R-1ac(A)   Single family district 1 acre.
      (C)   R-1/2ac(A)   Single family district 1/2 acre.
      (D)   R-16(A)   Single family district 16,000 square feet.
      (E)   R-13(A)   Single family district 13,000 square feet.
      (F)   R-10(A)   Single family district 10,000 square feet.
      (G)   R-7.5(A)   Single family district 7,500 square feet.
      (H)   R-5(A)   Single family district 5,000 square feet.
      (I)   D(A)   Duplex district.
      (J)   TH-1(A)   Townhouse district 1.
      (K)   TH-2(A)   Townhouse district 2.
      (L)   TH-3(A)   Townhouse district 3.
      (M)   CH      Clustered housing district.
      (N)   MF-1(A)   Multifamily district 1.
      (O)   MF-1(SAH)   Multifamily district 1 affordable.
      (P)   MF-2(A)   Multifamily district 2.
      (Q)   MF-2(SAH)   Multifamily district 2 affordable.
      (R)   MF-3(A)   Multifamily district 3.
      (S)   MF-4(A)   Multifamily district 4.
      (T)   MH(A)   Manufactured home district.
   (2)   Office districts.
      (A)   NO(A)   Neighborhood office district.
      (B)   LO-1   Limited office district 1.
      (C)   LO-2   Limited office district 2.
      (D)   LO-3   Limited office district 3.
      (E)   MO-1      Mid-range office district 1.
      (F)   MO-2   Mid-range office district 2.
      (G)   GO(A)   General office district.
   (3)   Retail districts.
      (A)   NS(A)   Neighborhood service district.
      (B)   CR   Community retail district.
      (C)   RR   Regional retail district.
   (4)   Commercial service and industrial districts.
      (A)   CS   Commercial service district.
      (B)   LI   Light industrial district.
      (C)   IR   Industrial / research district.
      (D)   IM   Industrial/ manufacturing district.
   (5)   Central area districts.
      (A)   CA-1(A)   Central area district 1.
      (B)   CA-2(A)   Central area district 2.
   (6)   Mixed use districts.
      (A)   MU-1   Mixed use district 1.
      (B)   MU-1(SAH)   Mixed use district 1 affordable.
      (C)   MU-2   Mixed use district 2.
      (D)   MU-2(SAH)   Mixed use district 2 affordable.
      (E)   MU-3   Mixed use district 3.
      (F)   MU-3(SAH)   Mixed use district 3 affordable.
   (7)   Multiple commercial districts.
      (A)   MC-1   Multiple commercial district 1.
      (B)   MC-2   Multiple commercial district 2.
      (C)   MC-3   Multiple commercial district 3.
      (D)   MC-4   Multiple commercial district 4.
   (8)   Special purpose districts.
      (A)   C   Conservation district.
      (B)   PD   Planned development district.
      (C)   P(A)   Parking district.
   (9)   Overlay districts.
      (A)   AF suffix   Airport flight path overlay district.
      (B)   CP suffix   Core pedestrian precinct overlay district.
      (C)   H suffix   Historic overlay district.
      (D)   ID suffix   Institutional overlay district.
      (E)   D suffix   D liquor control overlay district.
      (F)   D-1 suffix   D-1 liquor control overlay district.
      (G)   SP suffix   Secondary pedestrian precinct overlay district.
      (H)   MD suffix   Modified delta overlay district.
      (I)   NSO suffix   Neighborhood stabilization overlay district.
      (J)   TC suffix   Turtle Creek environmental corridor overlay district.
      (K)   SH suffix   Shopfront overlay. [See
Article XIII.]
      (L)   HM suffix   Height map overlay. [See
Article XIII.]
      (M)   PM suffix   Parking management overlay.
   (10)   Urban corridor districts.
      (A)   UC-1   Urban corridor district 1.
      (B)   UC-2   Urban corridor district 2.
      (C)   UC-3   Urban corridor district 3.
   (11)   Form districts.
      (A)   WMU   Walkable urban mixed use. [See
Article XIII.]
      (B)   WR   Walkable urban residential. [See
Article XIII.]
      (C)   RTN   Residential transition. [See
Article XIII.]
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20360; 21663; 24718; 27404; 27495)
SEC. 51A-4.102.   RESERVED. (Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-4.103.   ZONING DISTRICT MAP.
   (a)   The boundaries of zoning districts are recorded on the Geographic
Information System (GIS) maintained by the department which is the official
zoning district map of the city. The official zoning district map is made a
part of and incorporated into this chapter.
   (b)   The director shall maintain the zoning district map in the department.
The director shall revise the map to reflect any subsequent zoning district
amendment.
   (c)   In case of any question involving a district designation within the
city, the updated copy of the official zoning district map on file in the
office of the director is presumed correct, and the person challenging the
accuracy of that copy has the burden of presenting the official zoning map,
together with the ordinances amending the map, to prove the inaccuracy of the
updated copy. (Ord. 19455; 20729; 28072)
SEC. 51A-4.104.   ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (a)   When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on
the official zoning map, the following rules apply:
      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys are construed to follow those center lines.
      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
are construed as following those lot lines.
      (3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits are
construed as following city limits.
      (4)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines are construed as
following the established center line of a railroad right-of-way. If no center
line is established, the boundary is midway between the railroad right-of-way
lines.
      (5)   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines are construed to
follow shore lines. If the shore line changes, the boundaries are construed as
moving with the actual shore line.
      (6)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water are construed to
follow those center lines. The center line is interpreted as being midway
between the shore lines of the body of water. If the center line changes, the
boundaries are construed as moving with the center line.
      (7)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of the features
described in Subsections (a)(1) through (a)(6) are construed as being parallel
to or extensions of the features.
      (8)   Boundaries indicated as dividing a lot or tract are construed to be
located as shown on the zoning district map.
   (b)   Distances not specifically indicated on a zoning district map are
determined by the scale of the map.
   (c)   Whenever a street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official
action of the city council, the zoning district line adjoining each side of the
street, alley, or other public way automatically extends to the center line of
the vacated street, alley, or public way.
   (d)   When there is a question as to the boundary of a tract and that
question cannot be resolved by the application of Subsections (a) through (c),
the board of adjustment shall determine the boundary by interpreting the
official zoning district map and ordinances amending the map.
   (e)   When there is a question as to whether or how a tract is zoned and
that question cannot be resolved by the application of this section, the tract
is temporarily classified as an agricultural district, and the tract is subject
to the same regulations as provided for annexed territory temporarily zoned.
(Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-4.105.   INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The following rules apply in interpreting the district regulations:
      (1)   The symbol [L] appearing after a listed use means that the use is
permitted by right as a limited use only.
      (2)   The symbol [SUP] appearing after a listed use means that the use is
permitted by specific use permit only.
      (3)   The symbols [L] and [SUP] appearing together after a listed use
mean that the use is permitted by right as a limited use; otherwise it is
permitted by specific use permit only.
      (4)   The symbol [DIR] appearing after a listed use means that a site
plan must be submitted and approved in accordance with the requirements of
Section
51A-4.803. (“DIR” means “development impact review.” For more information
regarding development impact review generally, see Division
51A-4.800.)
      (5)   The symbol [RAR] appearing after a listed use means that, if the
use has a residential adjacency as defined in Section
51A-4.803, a site plan must be submitted and approved in accordance with the
requirements of that section. (RAR means residential adjacency review. For more
information regarding residential adjacency review generally, see Division
51A-4.800.)
   (b)   If there is a conflict between the text of the district regulations
and the charts or any other graphic display in this chapter, the text of the
district regulations controls.
   (c)   If there is a conflict between the text of the district regulations
and the text of the use regulations (Division
51A-4.100, et seq.), the text of the use regulations controls. (Ord. Nos.
19455; 19786)
SECS. 51A-4.106 THRU 51A-4.109.   RESERVED.
   (Ord. 19455)
Division 51A-4.110. Residential District Regulations.
SEC. 51A-4.111.   AGRICULTURAL [A(A)] DISTRICT.
      (1)   Purpose. There exists in certain fringe areas of the city, land
which is presently used for agricultural purposes and to which urban services
are not yet available. These lands should appropriately continue to be used for
agricultural purposes until needed for urban purposes in conformity with the
orderly growth of the city. The uses permitted in the A(A) district are
intended to accommodate normal farming, ranching, and gardening activities. It
is anticipated that all of the A(A) district area will be changed to other
urban zoning categories as the area within the corporate limits of Dallas
becomes fully developed. Newly annexed territory will be temporarily zoned as
an A(A) district until permanent zoning is established.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Animal production.
            --   Commercial stable.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Mining. [SUP]
            --   Organic compost recycling facility. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Open-enrollmentcharter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollmentcharter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [SUP]
            --   Private recreation center, club or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See  Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside run.
            --   Animal shelter or clinic with outside run. [SUP]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside). [SUP]
            --   Drive-in theater. [SUP]
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station. [SUP]
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Refuse transfer station. [SUP]
            --   Sanitary landfill. [SUP]
            --   Sewage treatment plant. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212 (10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
            --   Water treatment plant. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Livestock auction pens or sheds. [SUP]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213(11.3).]
            --   Sand, gravel, or earth sales and storage. [SUP]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory use is permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217(3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 50 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side yard is 20 feet.
            (ii)   Minimum rear yard is:
               (aa)   50 feet for single family structures; and
               (bb)   10 feet for other permitted structures.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 24 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   10 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Aboveground parking structures are included in lot coverage
calculations; surface parking lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot area for residential use is three acres.
            (ii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions. None. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20384; 20441;
20625; 20950; 21002; 21314; 22255; 24271; 24543; 26920; 32209; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.112.   SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICTS.
   (a)   R-1ac(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. There exists in certain parts of the city large areas of
single family residential development on estate type lots of one acre or more
in area. This development has been supplied with utilities and other public
services based upon an estate type density. To conserve the character and value
of buildings and building sites existing in these areas and to provide for the
gradual expansion of this residential development in accordance with the need
and a comprehensive plan for various types of residential districts, the R-1ac
(A) district is provided. This district is intended to be composed of single
family dwellings together with public and private schools, churches, and public
park areas to serve the area. The sections designated in the R-1ac(A) districts
are limited in area and are not intended to be subject to major alteration by
future amendment except at the fringe of the districts where minor adjustments
may become appropriate to permit the reasonable development of vacant tracts or
gradual transition from other districts.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [See Section
51A-4.204(3)]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery. [SUP]
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [SUP]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter. [See Section
51A-4.211.]
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 40 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   10 feet for single family structures; and
            (ii)   20 feet for other permitted structures.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 36 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   40 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Surface parking lots and underground parking structures are
not included in lot coverage calculations.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot area for residential use is one acre.
            (ii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
            (iii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally. In this district, off-street parking must be provided at or below
ground level.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Electrical service for single family uses. In this district, a
lot for a single family use may be supplied by not more than one electrical
utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter. The board
of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than one
electrical utility service and more than one electrical meter on a lot in this
district when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (1)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (2)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (3)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this district.
   (b)   R-1/2ac(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. There exists in certain parts of the city large areas of
single family residential development on estate type lots of one-half acre or
more in area. This development has been supplied with utilities and other
public services based upon an estate type density. To conserve the character
and value of buildings and building sites existing in these areas and to
provide for the gradual expansion of this residential development in accordance
with the need and a comprehensive plan for various types of residential
districts, the R-1/2ac(A) district is provided. This district is intended to be
composed of single family dwellings together with public and private schools,
churches, and public park areas to serve the area. The sections designated in
the R-1/2ac(A) districts are limited in area and are not intended to be subject
to major alteration by future amendment except at the fringe of the districts
where minor adjustments may become appropriate to permit the reasonable
development of vacant tracts or gradual transition from other districts.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [See Section
51A-4.204(3)]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery. [SUP]
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [SUP]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter. [See Section
51A-4.211.]
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212 (10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 40 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   10 feet for single family structures; and
            (ii)   20 feet for other permitted structures.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 36 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   40 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Surface parking lots and underground parking structures are
not included in lot coverage calculations.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot area for residential use is one-half acre.
            (ii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
            (iii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally. In this district, off-street parking must be provided at or below
ground level.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Electrical service for single family uses. In this district, a
lot for a single family use may be supplied by not more than one electrical
utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter. The board
of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than one
electrical utility service and more than one electrical meter on a lot in this
district when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (i)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (ii)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (iii)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this
district.
   (c)   R-16(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. Single family residential development has taken place on
intermediate sized lots in portions of the city in recent years. In order to
protect and encourage the continued development of intermediate density with
single family residences in appropriate areas of the city, the R-16(A) district
is provided. In addition to single family residences, it is intended that
churches, public and private schools, and public parks necessary to serve and
complement the intermediate density development be permitted. The areas placed
in the R-16(A) district are generally limited in area and are not intended to
be subject to major alteration by future amendment except where changed
conditions might justify the action or where minor adjustments in the boundary
of a district may be appropriate to secure a reasonable development of the
land.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [See Section
51A-4.204(3)]
            --   Child-care facility. [SUP]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery. [SUP]
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [SUP]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter. [See Section
51A-4.211.]
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212 (10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 35 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard for single family structures is 10
feet.
            (ii)   Minimum side yard for other permitted structures is 15 feet.
            (iii)   Minimum rear yard for other permitted structures is 20
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 30 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   40 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Surface parking lots and underground parking structures are
not included in lot coverage calculations.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot area for residential use is 16,000 square feet.
            (ii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
            (iii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally. In this district, off-street parking must be provided at or below
ground level.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Electrical service for single family uses. In this district, a
lot for a single family use may be supplied by not more than one electrical
utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter. The board
of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than one
electrical utility service and more than one electrical meter on a lot in this
district when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (i)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (ii)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (iii)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this
district.
   (d)   R-13(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. Single family residential development has taken place on
intermediate sized lots in portions of the city in recent years. In order to
protect and encourage the continued development of intermediate density with
single family residences in appropriate areas of the city, the R-13(A) district
is provided. In addition to single family residences, it is intended that
churches, public and private schools, and public parks necessary to serve and
complement the intermediate density development be permitted. The areas placed
in the R-13(A) district are generally limited in area and are not intended to
be subject to major alteration by future amendment except where changed
conditions might justify the action or where minor adjustments in the boundary
of a district may be appropriate to secure a reasonable development of the
land.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [See Section
51A-4.204(3)]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery. [SUP]
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
      --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of the
building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [SUP]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter. [See Section
51A-4.211.]
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212 (10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 30 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   8 feet for single family structures; and
            (ii)   15 feet for other permitted structures.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 30 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   45 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Surface parking lots and underground parking structures are
not included in lot coverage calculations.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot area for residential use is 13,000 square feet.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally. In this district, off-street parking must be provided at or below
ground level.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Electrical service for single family uses. In this district, a
lot for a single family use may be supplied by not more than one electrical
utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter. The board
of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than one
electrical utility service and more than one electrical meter on a lot in this
district when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (i)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (ii)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (iii)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this
district.
   (e)   R-10(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. Single family residential development has taken place on
intermediate sized lots in portions of the city in recent years. In order to
protect and encourage the continued development of intermediate density with
single family residences in appropriate areas of the city, the R-10(A) district
is provided. In addition to single family residences, it is intended that
churches, public and private schools, and public parks necessary to serve and
complement the intermediate density development be permitted. The areas placed
in the R-10(A) district are generally limited in area and are not intended to
be subject to major alteration by future amendment except where changed
conditions might justify the action or where minor adjustments in the boundary
of a district may be appropriate to secure a reasonable development of the
land.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [See Section
51A-4.204(3)]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery. [SUP]
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
      --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of the
building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [SUP]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit.  [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter. [See Section
51A-4.211.]
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212 (10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 30 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard for single family structures is
six feet.
            (ii)   Minimum side yard for other permitted structures is 10 feet.
            (iii)   Minimum rear yard for other permitted structures is 15
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 30 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   45 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Surface parking lots and underground parking structures are
not included in lot coverage calculations.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot area for residential use is 10,000 square feet.
            (ii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
            (iii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally. In this district, off-street parking must be provided at or below
ground level.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Electrical service for single family uses. In this district, a
lot for a single family use may be supplied by not more than one electrical
utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter. The board
of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than one
electrical utility service and more than one electrical meter on a lot in this
district when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (i)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (ii)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (iii)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this
district.
   (f)   R-7.5(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. This district comprises a major portion of the existing
single family dwelling development of the city and is considered to be the
proper zoning classification for large areas of the undeveloped land remaining
in the city appropriate for single family dwelling use. This district is
intended to be composed of single family dwellings together with public and
private schools, churches, and public parks essential to create basic
neighborhood units. Limited portions of these neighborhood units may consist of
denser residential zoning classifications which are shown on the zoning
district map or which later may be created by amendments to the map.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [See Section
51A-4.204(3)]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery. [SUP]
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [SUP]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit.  [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter. [See Section
51A-4.211.]
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212 (10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 25 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard for single family structures is
five feet.
            (ii)   Minimum side yard for other permitted structures is 10 feet.
            (iii)   Minimum rear yard for other permitted structures is 15
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 30 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   45 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Surface parking lots and underground parking structures are
not included in lot coverage calculations.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot area for residential use is 7,500 square feet.
            (ii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
            (iii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally. In this district, off-street parking must be provided at or below
ground level.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Electrical service for single family uses. In this district, a
lot for a single family use may be supplied by not more than one electrical
utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter. The board
of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than one
electrical utility service and more than one electrical meter on a lot in this
district when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (i)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (ii)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (iii)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this
district.
   (g)   R-5(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. This classification creates a single family dwelling
district which is appropriate in area requirements for moderate value single
family housing development and which, at the same time, provides a reasonable
standard of light, air, and similar living amenities. It is intended that the
R-5(A) classification be added by amendment in specific areas where higher
density single family residence development is shown to be appropriate because
of existing development and the adequacy of utilities and where redevelopment
of substandard areas at increased single family density is appropriate.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [See Section
51A-4.204(3)]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery. [SUP]
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [SUP]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter. [See Section
51A-4.211.]
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 20 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   five feet for single family structures; and
            (ii)   10 feet for other permitted structures.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 30 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   45 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Surface parking lots and underground parking structures are
not included in lot coverage calculations.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot area for residential use is 5,000 square feet.
            (ii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
            (iii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally. In this district, off-street parking must be provided at or below
ground level.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Electrical service for single family uses. In this district, a
lot for a single family use may be supplied by not more than one electrical
utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter. The board
of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than one
electrical utility service and more than one electrical meter on a lot in this
district when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (1)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (2)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (3)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this district.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19808; 20122; 20384; 20441; 20625; 20950; 21002;
21044; 21314; 24543; 26920; 32209; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.113.   DUPLEX [D(A)] DISTRICT.
      (1)   Purpose. Duplex dwellings have long been a recognized form of
housing in the city. In order to provide standards which will protect and
encourage the various types of duplex dwellings existing in the city, a duplex
dwelling district with minimum area requirements is provided.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [See Section
51A-4.204(3)]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery. [SUP]
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [SUP]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   Duplex.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter. [See Section
51A-4.211.]
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/ infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 25 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard for single family structures is
five feet.
            (ii)   Minimum side yard for duplex structures is five feet.
            (iii)   Minimum rear yard for duplex structures is 10 feet.
            (iv)   Minimum side and rear yard for other permitted structures is
10 feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 36 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   60 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Surface parking lots and underground parking structures are
not included in lot coverage calculations.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot area for residential use is 6,000 square feet.
            (ii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
            (iii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally. In this district, off-street parking must be provided at or below
ground level.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Electrical service for duplex uses. In this district, a lot for
a duplex use may be supplied by not more than one electrical utility service
and metered by not more than two electrical meters. The board of adjustment may
grant a special exception to authorize more than one electrical utility service
and more than two electrical meters on a lot for a duplex use in this district
when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (i)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (ii)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (iii)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this
district.
         (B)   Electrical service for single family uses. In this district, a
lot for a single family use may be supplied by not more than one electrical
utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter. The board
of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than one
electrical utility service and more than one electrical meter on a lot in this
district when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (i)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (ii)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (iii)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this
district. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19808; 20122; 20384; 20441; 20625; 20950;
21002; 21044; 21314; 24543; 26920; 32209; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.114.   TOWNHOUSE [TH-1(A), TH-2(A), and TH-3(A)] DISTRICTS.
      (1)   Purpose. These classifications create districts that are being
recognized as a form of housing in the city, and provide standards which will
protect and encourage various types of single family dwellings in the city. The
townhouse districts are also established in an effort to provide a more dense
single family residential character by providing minimum standards for lot
area, yards, lot coverage, and lot frontage.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [See Section
51A-4.204(3)]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery. [SUP]
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [SUP]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   Duplex.
            --   Retirement housing. [SUP]
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in these
districts:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/ infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In these districts, the following accessory uses are permitted
by SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. No minimum front yard.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   No minimum side and rear yard for single family structures.
            (ii)   Minimum side yard for duplex structures is five feet.
            (iii)   Minimum rear yard for duplex structures is 10 feet.
            (iv)   Minimum side and rear yard for other permitted structures is
10 feet.
            (v)   If a townhouse district abuts a district that requires a
greater side yard, the side yard requirements of the more restrictive district
apply to the abutting side yard in the townhouse district.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density.
            (i)   In a TH-1(A) district, no more than six dwelling units for
each acre are allowed.
            (ii)   In a TH-2(A) district, no more than nine dwelling units for
each acre are allowed.
            (iii)   In a TH-3(A) district, no more than 12 dwelling units for
each acre are allowed.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 36 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   60 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Surface parking lots and underground parking structures are
not included in lot coverage calculations.
            (iii)   In these districts, 80 percent of an individual lot may be
covered by structures if the coverage for the total project does not exceed 60
percent and at least 40 percent is reserved for open space.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot area for residential use is:
               (aa)   2,000 square feet for single family structures; and
               (bb)   6,000 square feet for duplex structures.
            (ii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
            (iii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally. In this district, off-street parking must be provided at or below
ground level.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Single family structure spacing. In this district, a minimum of
15 feet between each group of eight single family structures must be provided
by plat.
         (B)   Electrical service for single family uses. In this district, a
lot for a single family use may be supplied by not more than one electrical
utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter. The board
of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than one
electrical utility service and more than one electrical meter on a lot in this
district when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (i)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (ii)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (iii)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this
district.
         (C)   Electrical service for duplex uses. In this district, a lot for
a duplex use may be supplied by not more than one electrical utility service
and metered by not more than two electrical meters. The board of adjustment may
grant a special exception to authorize more than one electrical utility service
and more than two electrical meters on a lot for a duplex use in this district
when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will:
            (i)   not be contrary to the public interest;
            (ii)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
            (iii)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in this
district. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19808; 19912; 19913; 20384; 20441; 20625;
20950; 21002; 21044; 21314; 24543; 26920; 32209; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.115.   CLUSTERED HOUSING (CH) DISTRICT.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development and protection of areas of
moderate density housing with flexibility to allow for common open space.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [See Section
51A-4.204(3)]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery. [SUP]
            --   Foster home.
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [RAR]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   Duplex.
            --   Group residential facility. [See Section
51A-4.209(3).]
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Retirement housing.
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is:
            (i)   15 feet where adjacent to an expressway or a thoroughfare;
and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   10 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley from a
zoning district other than a TH or TH(A) district; and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. Maximum dwelling unit density is 18
dwelling units per net acre.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, or TH(A) district. (See
Section
51A-4.412.) Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 36 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 60 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. Minimum lot size is 2,000 square feet for each
dwelling unit.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally. In this district, off-street parking must be provided at or below
ground level.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Minimum district size. A minimum of one-half acre is required
for the establishment of this district unless the city council determines that
a smaller district is justified in a transitional circumstance separating a
residential district from a higher density district.
         (B)   Limit on attached units. No group of attached dwelling units may
exceed eight in number. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19808; 19912; 20384; 20625;
20950; 21002; 21044; 21186; 21314; 22139; 22782; 24543; 26920; 32209; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.116.   MULTIFAMILY DISTRICTS.
   (a)   MF-1(A) and MF-1(SAH) districts.
      (1)   Purpose. The MF-1(A) and MF-1(SAH) districts are composed mainly of
areas containing mixtures of single family, duplex, and multifamily dwellings
and certain uniformly developed multifamily dwelling sections. These districts
are medium density districts and are located in certain areas close into the
center of the city and at various outlying locations. The area regulations are
designed to protect the residential character and to prevent the overcrowding
of the land by providing minimum standards for building spacing, yards, off-
street parking, and coverage. All commercial and office uses are prohibited. It
is anticipated that additional areas may be designated in the MF-1(A) or MF-1
(SAH) district from time to time in the future where the change is appropriate
and access and utility services can reasonably accommodate these medium density
dwellings. Additionally, the MF-1(SAH) district is created to encourage the
provision of affordable housing.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions. [RAR]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Foster home.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [RAR]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
            --   Duplex.
            --   Group residential facility. [See Section
51A-4.209(3).]
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Retirement housing.
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/ infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217(3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
   Except as provided in this paragraph, the following yard, lot, and space
regulations apply:
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   No minimum side and rear yard for single family structures.
            (ii)   Minimum side yard for duplex structures is five feet.
            (iii)   Minimum side yard for other permitted structures is 10
feet.
            (iv)   Minimum rear yard for duplex structures is 10 feet.
            (v)   Minimum rear yard for other permitted structures is 15 feet.
A minimum rear yard of 10 feet may be provided when a building site backs upon
an MF, MF(A), O-1, O-2, NO, NO(A), LO, LO(A), MO, MO(A), GO, GO(A), NS, NS(A),
SC, CR, RR, GR, LC, HC, CS, CA-1, CA-1(A), CA-2, CA-2(A), I-1, I-2, I-3, LI,
IR, IM, mixed use, or multiple commercial district.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density.
            (i)   MF-1(A) district. No maximum dwelling unit density.
            (ii)    MF-1(SAH) district. Maximum dwelling unit density varies
depending on whether a density bonus is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.900 as follows:
 
MAXIMUM DWELLING UNIT DENSITY
(dwelling units per net acre)
Percentage of SAH Units Provided Dwelling Units Permitted
0%                               15
5%                               16
10%                              17
15%                              20
20%                              30
 
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, or TH(A) district. (See
Section
51A-4.412.) Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 36 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   60 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)    Aboveground parking structures are included in lot coverage
calculations; surface parking lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is as follows:
TYPE OF STRUCTURE MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
                                                                    MINIMUM LOT
TYPE OF STRUCTURE                                                   AREA PER
                                                                    DWELLING
                                                                    UNIT
Single family                                                       3,000 sq.
                                                                    ft.
Duplex                                                              3,000 sq.
                                                                    ft.
Multifamily:
   No separate bedroom                                           1,000 sq.
                                                                    ft.
   One bedroom                                                1,400 sq.
                                                                    ft.
   Two bedrooms                                                  1,800 sq.
                                                                    ft.
   More than two bedrooms (Add this amount for each bedroom over 200 sq. ft.
two)
 
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
         (I)   Development bonuses for mixed-income housing. In an MF-1(A)
district, lot coverage, lot size, and height may vary depending on whether a
development bonus is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.1100 as follows:
            (i)   Height and lot coverage. Except as provided in this
paragraph, the following increased height and lot coverage requirements apply:
 Set aside minimums (% of total
 residential units reserved in  Maximum Height Maximum Lot coverage
 each income band, adjusted                    (residential)
 annually)
                     Set aside minimums (%
                     of total residential                 Maximum Lot coverage
                     units reserved in     Maximum Height (residential)
                     each income band,
                     adjusted annually)
MVA Categories A, B, 5% at Income band 3;  51 ft.         80%
C
                     5% at Income band 3;
                     and                   66 ft.         80%
                     5% at Income band 2
                     5% at Income band 3;
                     5% at Income band 2;  85 ft.         85%
                     and
                     5% at Income band 1
MVA Categories D, E, 5% at Income band 2;  51 ft.         80%
F
                     10% at Income band 2  66 ft.         80%
                     10% at Income band 2;
                     and                   85 ft.         85%
                     5% at Income band 1
MVA Categories G, H, 5% at Income band 1   85 ft.         85%
I
 
            (ii)    Residential proximity slope. In addition to the items
listed in Section
51A-4.408 (a)(2)(A), the following additional items may project through the
residential proximity slope to a height not to exceed the maximum structure
height, or four feet above the slope, whichever is less:
               (aa)    railings;
               (bb)    parapet walls;
               (cc)    trellises; and
               (dd)    structures such as wind barriers, wing walls, and patio
dividing walls.
            (iii)   No minimum lot area per dwelling unit. No minimum lot area
per dwelling unit is required for qualifying developments.
            (iv)    Developments with transit proximity. For a development with
transit proximity as defined in Section
51A-4.1102, maximum lot coverage is 85 percent.
            (v)   Urban form setback. An additional 10-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure above 45 feet in height.
            (vi)    Retirement housing. The density limits in Section
51A-4.209(b)(5.2)(E)(ii) do not apply.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Single family structure spacing. In this district, a minimum of
15 feet between each group of eight single family structures must be provided
by plat.
   (b)   MF-2(A) and MF-2(SAH) districts.
      (1)   Purpose. The MF-2(A) and MF-2(SAH) districts are composed mainly of
areas containing mixtures of single family, duplex, and multifamily dwellings
and certain uniformly developed multifamily dwelling sections. These districts
are medium density districts and are located in certain areas close into the
center of the city and at various outlying locations. The area regulations are
designed to protect the residential character and to prevent the overcrowding
of the land by providing minimum standards for building spacing, yards, off-
street parking, and coverage. All commercial and office uses are prohibited. It
is anticipated that additional areas may be designated in the MF-2(A) or MF-2
(SAH) district from time to time in the future where the change is appropriate
and access and utility services can reasonably accommodate these medium density
dwellings. Additionally, the MF-2(SAH) district is created to encourage the
provision of affordable housing.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions. [RAR]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Foster home.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
            --   Lodging or boarding house.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [RAR]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
            --   Duplex.
            --   Group residential facility. [See Section
51A-4.209(3).]
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Residential hotel.
            --   Retirement housing.
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217(3.1).] 
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
   Except as provided in this paragraph, the following yard, lot, and space
regulations apply:
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   No minimum side and rear yard for single family structures.
            (ii)   Minimum side yard for duplex structures is five feet.
            (iii)   Minimum side yard for other permitted structures is 10
feet.
            (iv)   Minimum rear yard for duplex structures is 10 feet.
            (v)   Minimum rear yard for other permitted structures is 15 feet.
A minimum rear yard of 10 feet may be provided when a building site backs upon
an MF, MF(A), O-1, O-2, NO, NO(A), LO, LO(A), MO, MO(A), GO, GO(A), NS, NS(A),
SC, CR, RR, GR, LC, HC, CS, CA-1, CA-1(A), CA-2, CA-2(A), I-1, I-2, I-3, LI,
IR, IM, mixed use, or multiple commercial district.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density.
            (i)   MF-2(A) district. No maximum dwelling unit density.
            (ii)    MF-2(SAH) district. Maximum dwelling unit density varies
depending on whether a density bonus is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.900 as follows:
 
MAXIMUM DWELLING UNIT DENSITY
(dwelling units per net acre)
Percentage of SAH Dwelling Units
Units Provided    Permitted
0%                20
5%                22
10%               24
15%               30
20%               40
 
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, or TH(A) district. (See
Section
51A-4.412.) Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 36 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   60 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   50 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)    Aboveground parking structures are included in lot coverage
calculations; surface parking lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is as follows:
TYPE OF STRUCTURE MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
                                                                          MINIMUM
                                                                          LOT AREA
TYPE OF STRUCTURE                                                         PER
                                                                          DWELLING
                                                                          UNIT
Single family                                                          1,000
                                                                          sq. ft.
Duplex                                                                    3,000
                                                                          sq. ft.
Multifamily:
   No separate bedroom                                                 800 sq.
                                                                          ft.
   One bedroom                                                      1,000
                                                                          sq. ft.
   Two bedrooms                                                        1,200
                                                                          sq. ft.
   More than two bedrooms (Add this amount for     each bedroom over150 sq.
                                                                          ft.
 
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
         (I)   Development bonuses for mixed-income housing. In an MF-2(A)
district, lot coverage, lot size per bedroom, and height may vary depending on
whether a development bonus is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.1100 as follows:
            (i)   Height and lot coverage. Except as provided in this
paragraph, the following increased height and lot coverage requirements apply:
 Set aside minimums (% of total
 residential units reserved in  Maximum Height Maximum Lot coverage
 each income band, adjusted                    (residential)
 annually)
                     Set aside minimums (%
                     of total residential                 Maximum Lot coverage
                     units reserved in     Maximum Height (residential)
                     each income band,
                     adjusted annually)
MVA Categories A, B, 5% at Income band 3   51 ft.         80%
C
                     5% at Income band 3;
                     and                   66 ft.         80%
                     5% at Income band 2
                     5% at Income band 3;
                     5% at Income band 2;  85 ft.         85%
                     and
                     5% at Income band 1
MVA Categories D, E, 5% at Income band 2   51 ft.         80%
F
                     10% at Income band 2  66 ft.         80%
                     10% at Income band 2;
                     and                   85 ft.         85%
                     5% at Income band 1
MVA Categories G, H, 5% at Income band 1   85 ft.         85%
I
 
            (ii)    Residential proximity slope. In addition to the items
listed in Section
51A-4.408 (a)(2)(A), the following additional items may project through the
residential proximity slope to a height not to exceed the maximum structure
height, or four feet above the slope, whichever is less:
               (aa)    railings;
               (bb)    parapet walls;
               (cc)    trellises; and
               (dd)    structures such as wind barriers, wing walls, and patio
dividing walls.
            (iii)   No minimum lot area per dwelling unit. No minimum lot area
per dwelling unit is required for qualifying developments,
            (iv)    Developments with transit proximity. For a development with
transit proximity as defined in Section
51A-4.1102, maximum lot coverage is 85 percent.
            (v)   Urban form setback. An additional 10-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure above 45 feet in height.
            (vi)    Retirement housing. The density limits in Section
51A-4.209(b)(5.2)(E)(ii) do not apply.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Single family structure spacing. In this district, a minimum of
15 feet between each group of eight single family structures must be provided
by plat.
   (c)   MF-3(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development and protection of midrise,
medium density multifamily residential dwellings built on one lot. This
district is not intended to be located in areas of low density residential
development.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions. [RAR]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Foster home.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
            --   Lodging or boarding house.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [RAR]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
            --   Group residential facility. [See Section
51A-4.209(3).]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Residential hotel.
            --   Retirement housing.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store. [L]
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
[L]
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station. [SUP]
            --   Personal service uses. [L]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Post office. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Amateur communication tower.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217(3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
   Except as provided in this paragraph, the following yard, lot, and space
regulations apply:
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   In general. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure over 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   In general. Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF-2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district; and
               (bb)   10 feet in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure over 45 feet in height, up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. Maximum dwelling unit density is 90
dwelling units per net acre.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is 2.0.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, or TH(A) district. (See
Section
51A-4.412.) Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 90 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 60 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot size for residential use is 6,000 square feet.
            (ii)   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is as follows:
 
                                                                    MINIMUM LOT
TYPE OF STRUCTURE                                                   AREA PER
                                                                    DWELLING
                                                                    UNIT
Multifamily:
   No separate bedroom                                           450 sq. ft.
   One bedroom                                                   500 sq. ft.
   Two bedrooms                                                  550 sq. ft.
   More than two bedrooms (Add this amount for each bedroom over 50 sq. ft.
two)
 
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
         (I)   Development bonuses for mixed-income housing. In an MF-3(A)
district, lot coverage, lot size per bedroom, and height may vary depending on
whether a development bonus is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.1100 as follows:
            (i)   Height and lot coverage. Except as provided in this
paragraph, the following increased height and lot coverage requirements apply:
 Set aside minimums
 (% of total
 residential units   Maximum Unit Density Maximum Height Maximum Lot coverage
 reserved in each    per Acre                            (residential)
 income band,
 adjusted annually)
               Set aside
               minimums (% of
               total residential Maximum Unit                    Maximum Lot
               units reserved in Density per Acre Maximum Height coverage
               each income band,                                 (residential)
               adjusted
               annually)
MVA Categories 5% at Income band 100              90 ft.         80%
A, B, C        3
               5% at Income band
               3 and             120              105 ft.        80%
               5% at Income band
               2
               5% at Income band
               3 and
               5% at Income band 150              120 ft.        85%
               2 and
               5% at Income band
               1
MVA Categories 5% at Income band 100              90 ft.         80%
D, E, F        2
               10% at Income     120              105 ft.        80%
               band 2
               10% at Income
               band 2 and        150              120 ft.        85%
               5% at Income band
               1
MVA Categories 5% at Income band 150              120 ft.        85%
G, H, I        1
 
            (ii)    Residential proximity slope. In addition to the items
listed in Section
51A-4.408 (a)(2)(A), the following additional items may project through the
residential proximity slope to a height not to exceed the maximum structure
height, or four feet above the slope, whichever is less:
               (aa)    railings;
               (bb)    parapet walls;
               (cc)    trellises; and
               (dd)    structures such as wind barriers, wing walls, and patio
dividing walls.
            (iii)   No minimum lot area per dwelling unit. No minimum lot area
per dwelling unit is required for qualifying developments.
            (iv)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio includes non-
residential uses only.
            (v)    Developments with transit proximity. For developments with
transit proximity as defined in Section
51A-4.1102, maximum lot coverage is 85 percent.
            (vi)    Retirement housing. The density limits in Section
51A-4.209(b)(5.2)(E)(ii) do not apply.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions. None.
   (d)   MF-4(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development and protection of highrise,
high density multifamily residential dwellings built on one lot. This district
is not intended to be located in areas of low and medium density residential
development.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions. [RAR]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Foster home.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
            --   Lodging or boarding house.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [RAR]
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
            --   Group residential facility. [See Section
51A-4.209(3).]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Residential hotel.
            --   Retirement housing.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210 (b)(4).]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store. [L]
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
[L]
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station. [SUP]
            --   Personal service uses. [L]
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [L]
[RAR]
            --   Theater. [SUP]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Post office. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Amateur communication tower.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217(3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure over 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district; and
               (bb) 10 feet in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure over 45 feet in height, up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. Maximum dwelling unit density is 160
dwelling units per net acre.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is 4.0.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, or TH(A) district. (See
Section
51A-4.412.) Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 240 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   Minimum lot size is 6,000 square feet.
            (ii)   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is as follows:
 
                                                                    MINIMUM LOT
TYPE OF STRUCTURE                                                   AREA PER
                                                                    DWELLING
                                                                    UNIT
Multifamily:
   No separate bedroom                                           225 sq. ft.
   One bedroom                                                   275 sq. ft.
   Two bedrooms                                                  325 sq. ft.
   More than two bedrooms (Add this amount for each bedroom over 50 sq. ft.
two)
 
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions. None. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19808; 19912;
19913; 20384; 20441; 20625; 20920; 20950; 21002; 21044; 31314; 21663; 21735;
22139; 22531; 22782; 24543; 26920; 31152; 32209; 32482; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.117.   MANUFACTURED HOME [MH(A)] DISTRICT.
      (1)   Purpose. The manufactured home is recognized as a specific form of
housing for which accommodations should be provided. To provide appropriate
standards for density, spacing, and use, a separate district is created and
designated for the specific purpose of providing at appropriate locations, area
for the development of manufactured home parks, courts, or subdivisions. In
certain commercial and industrial districts, a manufactured home development
may be provided for by amending the zoning district map where these projects
are appropriate by approval of a specific use permit. The standards for
commercial manufactured home development for transient occupancy differ from
those of a manufactured home subdivision where more or less permanent occupancy
is anticipated.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP]  
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            None permitted.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership. [RAR]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Manufactured home park or subdivision.
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            None permitted.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [SUP]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217. The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   Minimum front yard is 20 feet.
            (ii)   In this district, a manufactured home may not be located
closer than 20 feet to a public street right-of-way or a private drive used for
access, circulation, or service to a lot or stand where a manufactured home is
located.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is ten feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. No maximum floor area ratio.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is 24 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage.
            (i)   Maximum lot coverage is:
               (aa)   20 percent for residential structures; and
               (bb)   25 percent for nonresidential structures.
            (ii)   Aboveground parking structures are included in lot coverage
calculations; surface parking lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size.
            (i)   In this district, a manufactured home must have the following
minimum lot area:
               (aa)   1,500 square feet for a manufactured home on a transient
stand; or
               (bb)   4,000 square feet for a manufactured home on a subdivided
lot.
            (ii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
            (iii)   Repealed by Ord. 20441.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   In this district, no person may locate a manufactured home
nearer than 10 feet to the side line of any lot or stand, and the minimum space
between adjacent manufactured homes must be 20 feet. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786;
20360; 20441; 20625; 20950; 21002; 21044; 21314; 21442; 22392; 24543; 26920;
32209; 32659)
SECS. 51A-4.118 THRU 51A-4.119.   RESERVED. 
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786)
Division 51A-4.120. Nonresidential District Regulations.
SEC. 51A-4.121.   OFFICE DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Neighborhood office [NO(A)] district.
      (1)   Purpose. This district represents a group of uses that is
restricted to office uses which predominantly serve neighborhood or community
needs. They are, therefore, compatible with and are intended for location
adjacent to single family, duplex, and townhouse neighborhoods. This district
is designed to preserve the environmental quality of neighborhood areas.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school. [RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity or sorority house. [SUP]
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Business school. [SUP]
            --   Personal service use up to 1,000 square feet in floor area.
[L]
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-thru service. [SUP]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [ By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217. The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
            --   Amateur communication tower.
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley from an
R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is 0.5.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is:
               (aa)   35 feet for a structure with a gable, hip, or gambrel
roof; and
               (bb) 30 feet for any other structure.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 50 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is two. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading.
         (A)   In general. Consult the use regulations (Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
         (B)   Special off-street loading provisions.
            (i)   In this district, off-street loading spaces may not be
located in the required front yard.
            (ii)   In this district, off-street loading spaces may be located
in the front yard behind the setback line if they are screened from the street.
Screening must be at least six feet in height measured from the horizontal
plane passing through the nearest point of the off-street loading space and may
be provided by using any of the methods described in Section
51A-4.602(b)(3).
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
         (C)   Garbage collection and mechanical equipment areas. Garbage
collection and mechanical equipment areas may not be located closer than 20
feet to the nearest building site in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH
district, or that portion of a planned development district restricted to
single family and/or duplex uses.
         (D)   Screening surface parking lots from street. In this district,
all off-street surface parking lots, excluding driveways used for ingress or
egress, must be screened from the street. For more information regarding this
requirement, see Section
51A-4.301.
         (E)   Screening side and rear yards from residential districts. In
this district, if a building or parking structure is erected on a building site
and a portion of the side or rear yard abuts or is across an adjoining alley
from an A, A(A), R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A)
district, any portion of the building site directly across from that district
must be screened from that district.
   (b)   LO(A) districts (LO-1, LO-2, and LO-3).
      (1)   Purpose. These districts represent a group of uses that is
restricted to office uses which predominantly serve neighborhood or community
needs. In addition, certain limited service uses are allowed where they are
contained primarily within the building and primarily serve the occupants of
the building and not the general public.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Catering service. [L]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory. [SUP]
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205 (2.1)]
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [SUP]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210 (b)(4).]
            --   Business school.
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store. [L]
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
[L]
            --   Personal service uses. [L]
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [L]
[RAR]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station. [SUP]
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Post office. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217. The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure over 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
               (bb)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure over 45 feet in height, up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is:
            (i)   1.0 in the LO-1 district;
            (ii)   1.5 in the LO-2 district; and
            (iii)   1.75 in the LO-3 district.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is:
               (aa)   70 feet in the LO-1 district;
               (bb)   95 feet in the LO-2 district; and
               (cc)   115 feet in the LO-3 district.
         (F)   Lot coverage: Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories.
            (i)   Maximum number of stories above grade is:
               (aa)   five in the LO-1 district;
               (bb)   seven in the LO-2 district; and
               (cc)   nine in the LO-3 district.
            (ii)   Parking garages are exempt from this requirement, but must
comply with the height regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading.
         (A)   In general. Consult the use regulations (Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
         (B)   Special off-street loading provisions.
            (i)   In these districts, off-street loading spaces may not be
located in the required front yard.
            (ii)   In these districts, off-street loading spaces may be located
in the front yard behind the setback line if they are screened from the street.
Screening must be at least six feet in height measured from the horizontal
plane passing through the nearest point of the off-street loading space and may
be provided by using any of the methods described in Section
51A-4.602(b)(3).
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in these
districts if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively
is equal to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day.
See Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
         (C)   Garbage collection and mechanical equipment areas. Garbage
collection and mechanical equipment areas may not be located closer than 20
feet to the nearest building site in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH
district, or that portion of a planned development district restricted to
single family and/or duplex uses.
         (D)   Screening surface parking lots from street. In these districts,
all off-street surface parking lots, excluding driveways used for ingress or
egress, must be screened from the street. For more information regarding this
requirement, see Section
51A-4.301.
         (E)   Screening side and rear yards from residential districts. In
these districts, if a building or parking structure is erected on a building
site and a portion of the side or rear yard abuts or is across an adjoining
alley from an A, A(A), R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A)
district, any portion of the building site directly across from that district
must be screened from that district.
   (c)   MO(A) districts (MO-1 and MO-2).
      (1)   Purpose. These districts represent a group of uses that is
restricted to office and limited service uses, which serve the building
occupants. These districts are intended to serve both community and city-wide
needs, and should be located adjacent to higher density residential, and low
and medium density office, retail, commercial, and light industrial districts.
In addition to office uses, certain complementary retail uses are permitted in
these districts in order to meet the day-to-day retail needs of area residents
and office patrons.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Catering service. [L]
            --   Electronics service center. [L]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR] or [SUP] [See Section
51A-4.205(1).]
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210 (b)(4).]
            --   Business school.
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store. [L]
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
[L]
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station. [L]
            --   Personal service uses. [L]
            --Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [L] [RAR]
            --   Theater. [SUP]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station. [SUP]
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Post office. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
            --   Accessory outside sales.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   In these districts, the following accessory use is permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure over 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
               (bb)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure over 45 feet in height, up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. Not applicable.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is:
            (i)   2.0 in the MO-1 district; and
            (ii)   3.0 in the MO-2 district.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is:
               (aa)   135 feet in the MO-1 district; and
               (bb)   160 feet in the MO-2 district.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories.
            (i)   Maximum number of stories above grade is:
               (aa)   10 stories in the MO-1 district; and
               (bb)   12 stories in the MO-2 district.
            (ii)   Parking garages are exempt from this requirement, but must
comply with the height regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading.
         (A)   In general. Consult the use regulations (Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
         (B)   Special off-street loading provisions.
            (i)   In these districts, off-street loading spaces may not be
located in the required front yard.
            (ii)   In these districts, off-street loading spaces may be located
in the front yard behind the setback line if they are screened from the street.
Screening must be at least six feet in height measured from the horizontal
plane passing through the nearest point of the off-street loading space and may
be provided by using any of the methods described in Section
51A-4.602(b)(3).
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in these
districts if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively
is equal to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day.
See Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
         (C)   Garbage collection and mechanical equipment areas. Garbage
collection and mechanical equipment areas may not be located closer than 20
feet to the nearest building site in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH
district, or that portion of a planned development district restricted to
single family and/or duplex uses.
         (D)   Screening surface parking lots from street. In these districts,
all off-street surface parking lots, excluding driveways used for ingress or
egress, must be screened from the street. For more information regarding this
requirement, see Section
51A-4.301.
         (E)   Screening side and rear yards from residential districts. In
these districts, if a building or parking structure is erected on a building
site and a portion of the side or rear yard abuts or is across an adjoining
alley from an A, A(A), R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A)
district, any portion of the building site directly across from that district
must be screened from that district.
   (d)   General office [GO(A)] district.
      (1)   Purpose. This district represents a group of uses which would
accommodate sophisticated office developments and may include certain
complementary retail and residential uses as a minor component of such
developments. This district is intended to serve city-wide needs and should be
located near higher density zoning districts, especially where the potential
trip generation allowed by this group will have a minimal effect on low density
communities.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Catering service. [L]
            --   Electronics service center. [L]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Hospital. [RAR]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR]
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209(3.1).]
            --   Single family, duplex, and multifamily uses may occupy up to
five percent of the total floor area of any building. See the “additional
provisions” [Paragraph (8)] in this subsection.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.*
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210 (b)(4).]
            --   Business school.
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station. [L]
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Theater. [SUP]
*In this district, a retail and personal service use: (1) must be contained
entirely within a building; and (2) may not have a floor area that, in
combination with the floor areas of other retail and personal service uses in
the building, exceeds 10 percent of the total floor area of the building.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Railroad passenger station. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [RAR]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217. The following accessory uses are not permitted in these districts:
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   Reserved.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure over 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
               (bb)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure over 45 feet in height, up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is 4.0.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 270 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is 20. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading.
         (A)   In general. Consult the use regulations (Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
         (B)   Special off-street loading provisions.
            (i)   In this district, off-street loading spaces may not be
located in the required front yard.
            (ii)   In this district, off-street loading spaces may be located
in the front yard behind the setback line if they are screened from the street.
Screening must be at least six feet in height measured from the horizontal
plane passing through the nearest point of the off-street loading space and may
be provided by using any of the methods described in Section
51A-4.602(b)(3).
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
         (C)   Garbage collection and mechanical equipment areas. Garbage
collection and mechanical equipment areas may not be located closer than 20
feet to the nearest building site in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH
district, or that portion of a planned development district restricted to
single family and/or duplex uses.
         (D)   Screening surface parking lots from street. In this district,
all off-street surface parking lots, excluding driveways used for ingress or
egress, must be screened from the street. For more information regarding this
requirement, see Section
51A-4.301.
         (E)   Screening side and rear yards from residential districts. In
this district, if a building or parking structure is erected on a building site
and a portion of the side or rear yard abuts or is across an adjoining alley
from an A, A(A), R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A)
district, any portion of the building site directly across from that district
must be screened from that district.
         (F)   Residential use restrictions. In this district, single family,
duplex, and multifamily uses are permitted as a component of a building if they
collectively comprise no more than five percent of the total floor area of the
building.
         (G)   Retail and personal service use restrictions. In this district,
a retail and personal service use:
            (i)   must be contained entirely within a building; and
            (ii)   may not have a floor area that, in combination with the
floor areas of other retail and personal service uses in the building, exceeds
10 percent of the total area of the building. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19806;
19808; 19873; 19928; 20382; 20625; 20920; 20950; 21002; 21044; 21314; 21399;
21442; 21663; 21735; 22392; 22531; 22782; 24232; 24271; 24543; 24857; 25815;
26920; 28214; 32209); 32482; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.122.   RETAIL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Neighborhood service [NS(A)] district.
      (1)   Purpose. To accommodate convenience retail shopping, services, and
professional offices principally servicing and compatible in scale and
intensity of use with adjacent residential uses.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            None permitted.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary. [SUP]
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            None permitted.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [SUP]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house. [SUP]
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station. [SUP]
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Electrical substation. [SUP]
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station. [SUP]
            --   Post office. [SUP]
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217. The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
            --   Amateur communication tower.
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley from an
R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is 0.5.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is:
               (aa)   35 feet for a structure with a gable, hip, or gambrel
roof; and
               (bb)   30 feet for any other structure.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 40 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is two. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
   (b)   Community retail (CR) district.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development of community-serving
retail, personal service, and office uses at a scale and intensity compatible
with residential communities.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Building repair and maintenance shop. [RAR]
            --   Catering service.
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory. [SUP]
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Hotel and motel. [SUP]
            --   Lodging or boarding house. [SUP]
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205 (2.1)]
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210 (b)(4).]
            --   Ambulance service. [RAR] 
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs. [RAR]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [DIR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside). [SUP]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Convenience store with drive-through. [SUP]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
[SUP]
            --   Home improvement center, lumber, brick or building materials
sales yard. [DIR]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquor store.
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Paraphernalia shop. [SUP]
            --   Pawn shop.
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio and television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Mini-warehouse. [SUP]
            --   Recycling buy-back center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory use is permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley from an
R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is:
            (i)   0.5 for office uses; and
            (ii)   0.75 for all uses combined.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 54 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 60 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is four. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
   (c)   Regional retail (RR) district.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development of regional-serving retail,
personal service, and office uses. This district is not intended to be located
in areas of low density residential development.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Building repair and maintenance shop. [RAR]
            --   Catering service.
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Machinery, heavy equipment, or truck sales and services. [RAR]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory. [SUP]
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
            --   Vehicle or engine repair or maintenance. [RAR]
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center.
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Halfway house. [SUP]
            --   Hospital. [RAR]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school. [RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR] or [SUP] [See Section
51A-4.205(1).]
            --   Lodging or boarding house.
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Ambulance service. [RAR]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs. [RAR]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic with outside runs. [SUP]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [RAR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside). [SUP]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Convenience store with drive-through. [SUP]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
            --   Home improvement center, lumber, brick or building materials
sales yard. [RAR]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquor store.
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Outside sales. [SUP]
            --   Paraphernalia shop. [SUP]
            --   Pawn shop.
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
            --   Vehicle display, sales, and service. [RAR]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Commercial bus station and terminal. [DIR]
            --   Heliport. [SUP]
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Railroad passenger station. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Mini-warehouse. [SUP]
            --   Recycling buy-back center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory use is permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure over 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley from an
R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is:
            (i)   0.5 for office uses; and
            (ii)   1.5 for all uses combined.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 70 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is five. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412 .) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19806; 19808; 19873; 19931; 20242; 20273; 20382;
20494; 20625; 20895; 20902; 20920; 20950; 21002; 21044; 21259; 21314; 21399;
21442; 21663; 21735; 22204; 22531; 22782; 24232; 24271; 24543; 24857; 25785;
26920; 27572; 28079; 28214; 30477; 32209; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.123.   COMMERCIAL SERVICE AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Commercial service (CS) district.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development of commercial and business
serving uses that may involve outside storage, service, or display. This
district is not intended to be located in areas of low and medium density
residential development.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Building repair and maintenance shop. [RAR]
            --   Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility.
[RAR]
            --   Catering service.
            --   Commercial bus station and terminal. [DIR] [By right or SUP.
See Section
51A-4.211(2).]
            --   Commercial cleaning or laundry plant. [RAR]
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Custom woodworking, furniture construction, or repair.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Job or lithographic printing. [RAR]
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Machine or welding shop. [RAR]
            --   Machinery, heavy equipment, or truck sales and services. [RAR]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
            --   Technical school.
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
            --   Vehicle or engine repair or maintenance. [RAR]
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Industrial (inside) for light manufacturing.
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility. [DIR]
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Halfway house. [SUP]
            --   Hospital. [RAR]
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR] or [SUP] [See Section
51A-4.205(1).]
            --   Lodging or boarding house.
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [RAR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Ambulance service. [RAR]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs. [RAR]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic with outside runs. [SUP may be
required. See Section
51A-4.210(b)(2).]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [RAR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside). [DIR]
            --   Commercial motor vehicle parking. [By SUP only if within 500
feet of a residential district.]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Convenience store with drive-through. [SUP]
            --   Drive-in theater. [SUP]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
[SUP]
            --   Home improvement center, lumber, brick or building
               materials sales yard. [RAR]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquefied natural gas fueling station. [SUP]
            --   Liquor store.
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Paraphernalia shop. [SUP]
            --   Outside sales. [SUP]
            --   Pawn shop.
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service.
               [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Taxidermist.
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
            --   Truck stop. [SUP]
            --   Vehicle display, sales, and service. [RAR]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Commercial bus station and terminal. [DIR]
            --   Heliport. [SUP]
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Railroad passenger station. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [RAR]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Auto auction. [SUP]
            --   Building mover's temporary storage yard. [SUP]
            --   Contractor's maintenance yard. [RAR]
            --   Freight terminal. [RAR]
            --   Manufactured building sales lot. [RAR]
            --   Mini-warehouse.
            --   Office showroom/warehouse.
            --   Outside storage. [RAR]
            --   Petroleum product storage and wholesale. [SUP]
            --   Recycling buy-back center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213(11.3).]
            --   Sand, gravel, or earth sales and storage. [SUP]
            --   Trade center.
            --   Vehicle storage lot. [SUP]
            --   Warehouse. [RAR]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory use is permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/ infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is:
            (i)   15 feet where adjacent to an expressway or a thoroughfare;
and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley from an
R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. Not applicable.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is:
            (i)   0.5 for any combination of lodging, office, and retail and
personal service uses; and
            (ii)   0.75 for all uses combined.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 45 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is three. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
   (b)   Light industrial (LI) district.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for light industrial office, research and
development, and commercial uses in an industrial park setting. This district
is designed to be located in areas appropriate for industrial development which
may be adjacent to residential communities.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Building repair and maintenance shop. [RAR]
            --   Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility.
[RAR]
            --   Catering service.
            --   Commercial bus station and terminal.
            --   Commercial cleaning or laundry plant. [RAR]
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Custom woodworking, furniture construction, or repair.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Job or lithographic printing. [RAR]
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Machine or welding shop. [RAR]
            --   Machinery, heavy equipment, or truck sales and services. [RAR]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
            --   Technical school.
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
            --   Vehicle or engine repair or maintenance.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage manufacturing. [RAR]
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Industrial (inside) for light manufacturing.
            --   Inside industrial. [RAR]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Adult day care facility.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child-care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Halfway house. [SUP]
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR] or [SUP] [See Section
51A-4.205(1).]
            --   Lodging or boarding house.
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [RAR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   None permitted.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs.
            --   Animal shelter or clinic with outside runs. [SUP may be
required. See Section
51A-4.210(b)(2).]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [RAR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial motor vehicle parking. [By SUP only if within 500
feet of a residential district.]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
[SUP]
            --   Home improvement center, lumber, brick or building materials
sales yard. [RAR]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquefied natural gas fueling station. [By SUP only if the use
has more than four fuel pumps or is within 1,000 feet of a residential zoning
district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.]
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Paraphernalia shop. [SUP]
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Taxidermist.
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
            --   Truck stop. [SUP]
            --   Vehicle display, sales, and service. [RAR]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Commercial bus station and terminal. [RAR]
            --   Heliport. [SUP]
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Railroad passenger station. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station. [SUP]
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television or microwave tower. [RAR]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Freight terminal. [RAR]
            --   Manufactured building sales lot. [RAR]
            --   Mini-warehouse.
            --   Office showroom/warehouse.
            --   Outside storage. [RAR]
            --   Recycling buy-back center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213(11.3).]
            --   Trade center.
            --   Warehouse. [RAR]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/ infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   30 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley from an
R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is:
            (i)   0.5 for retail and personal service uses;
            (ii)   0.75 for any combination of lodging, office, and retail and
personal service uses; and
            (iii)   1.0 for all uses combined.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 70 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is five. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
   (c)   Industrial/research (IR) district.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for research and development, light industrial,
office, and supporting commercial uses in an industrial research park setting.
This district is not intended to be located in areas of low and medium density
residential development.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Building repair and maintenance shop. [RAR]
            --   Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility.
[RAR]
            --   Catering service.
            --   Commercial cleaning or laundry plant. [RAR]
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Custom woodworking, furniture construction, or repair.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Job or lithographic printing. [RAR]
            --   Labor hall. [SUP may be required. See Section
51A-4.202 (8.1).]
            --   Machine or welding shop. [RAR]
            --   Machinery, heavy equipment, or truck sales and services. [RAR]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
            --   Technical school.
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
            --   Vehicle or engine repair or maintenance.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage manufacturing. [RAR]
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Industrial (inside). [See Section
51A-4.203(b)(1).]
            --   Industrial (inside) for light manufacturing.
            --   Industrial (outside). [See Section
51A-4.203(b)(2).]
            --   Medical/infectious waste incinerator. [SUP]
            --   Municipal waste incinerator. [SUP]
            --   Organic compost recycling facility. [SUP]
            --   Pathological waste incinerator. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Adult day care facility.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child-care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center.
            --   Hospital. [RAR]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR]
            --   Lodging or boarding house.
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Hazardous waste management facility. [Except when operated as
a hazardous waste incinerator.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [RAR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   None permitted.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs.
            --   Animal shelter or clinic with outside runs. [SUP may be
required. See Section
51A-4.210(b)(2).]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [RAR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial motor vehicle parking. [By SUP only if within 500
feet of a residential district.]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Convenience store with drive-through. [SUP]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   Home improvement center, lumber, brick or building materials
sales yard. [RAR]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquefied natural gas fueling station. [By SUP only if the use
has more than four fuel pumps or is within 1,000 feet of a residential zoning
district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.]
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Paraphernalia shop. [SUP]
            --   Pawn shop.
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Taxidermist.
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
            --   Truck stop. [SUP]
            --   Vehicle display, sales, and service. [RAR]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Airport or landing field. [SUP].
            --   Commercial bus station and terminal. [RAR].
            --   Heliport. [RAR]
            --   Helistop. [RAR]
            --   Railroad passenger station. [SUP]
            --   STOL (short take off or landing) port. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [RAR]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
            --   Water treatment plant. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Freight terminal. [RAR]
            --   Manufactured building sales lot. [RAR]
            --   Mini-warehouse.
            --   Office showroom/warehouse.
            --   Outside storage. [RAR]
            --   Recycling buy-back center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213(11.3).]
            --   Trade center.
            --   Warehouse. [RAR]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217. The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   Reserved.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   30 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley from an
R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is:
            (i)   0.5 for retail and personal service uses;
            (ii)   0.75 for any combination of lodging, office, and retail and
personal service uses; and
            (iii)   2.0 for all uses combined.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 200 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is 15. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
   (d)   Industrial manufacturing (IM) district.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for heavy industrial manufacturing uses with
accompanying open storage and supporting commercial uses. This district is not
intended to be located in or near areas of residential development.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Building repair and maintenance shop. [RAR]
            --   Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility.
[RAR]
            --   Catering service.
            --   Commercial cleaning or laundry plant. [RAR]
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Custom woodworking, furniture construction, or repair.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Job or lithographic printing. [RAR]
            --   Labor hall. [SUP may be required. See Section
51A-4.202 (8.1).]
            --   Machine or welding shop. [RAR]
            --   Machinery, heavy equipment, or truck sales and services. [RAR]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
            --   Technical school.
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
            --   Vehicle or engine repair or maintenance. [RAR]
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage manufacturing. [RAR]
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Gas pipeline compressor station. [SUP]
            --   Industrial (inside).  [SUP may be required. See Section
51A-4.203(a); otherwise RAR.]
            --   Industrial (inside) for light manufacturing.
            --   Industrial (outside). [SUP may be required. See Section
51A-4.203(a); otherwise RAR.]
            --   Medical/infectious waste incinerator.  [SUP]
            --   Metal salvage facility. [SUP]
            --   Mining. [SUP]
            --   Municipal waste incinerator. [SUP]
            --   Organic compost recycling facility. [RAR]
            --   Outside salvage or reclamation.  [SUP]
            --   Pathological waste incinerator.  [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Adult day care facility.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child-care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Public or private school. [SUP]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR]
            --   Lodging or boarding house. [SUP]
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Hazardous waste management facility.
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [RAR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            None permitted.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs.
            --   Animal shelter or clinic with outside runs. [SUP may be
required. See Section
51A-4.210(b)(2).]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [RAR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial motor vehicle parking. [By SUP only if within 500
feet of a residential district.]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Convenience store with drive-through. [SUP]
            --   Drive-in theater. [SUP]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   Home improvement center, lumber, brick or building materials
sales yard. [RAR]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquefied natural gas fueling station. [By SUP only if the use
has more than four fuel pumps or is within 1,000 feet of a residential zoning
district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.]
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Paraphernalia shop. [SUP]
            --   Pawn shop.
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Taxidermist.
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
            --   Truck stop. [SUP]
            --   Vehicle display, sales, and service. [RAR]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Airport or landing field. [SUP]
            --   Commercial bus station and terminal. [RAR]
            --   Heliport. [RAR]
            --   Helistop. [RAR]
            --   Railroad passenger station. [SUP]
            --   Railroad yard, roundhouse, or shops. [RAR]
            --   STOL (short take off or landing) port. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical generating plant. [SUP]
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [RAR]
            --   Refuse transfer station. [SUP]
            --   Sanitary landfill. [SUP]
            --   Sewage treatment plant. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
            --   Water treatment plant. [RAR]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Auto auction. [SUP]
            --   Building mover's temporary storage yard. [SUP]
            --   Contractor's maintenance yard. [RAR]
            --   Freight terminal. [RAR]
            --   Livestock auction pens or sheds. [SUP]
            --   Manufactured building sales lot. [RAR]
            --   Mini-warehouse.
            --   Office showroom/warehouse.
            --   Outside storage. [RAR]
            --   Petroleum product storage and wholesale. [RAR]
            --   Recycling buy-back center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213(11.3).]
            --   Sand, gravel, or earth sales and storage. [RAR]
            --   Trade center.
            --   Vehicle storage lot.
            --   Warehouse. [RAR]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217. The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   Reserved.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. Minimum front yard is:
            (i)   15 feet where adjacent to an expressway or a thoroughfare;
and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (B)   Side and rear yard. Minimum side and rear yard is:
            (i)   30 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley from an
R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
            (ii)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is:
            (i)   0.5 for retail and personal service uses;
            (ii)   0.75 for any combination of lodging, office, and retail and
personal service uses; and
            (iii)   2.0 for all uses combined.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 110 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is eight. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope originating in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412 .) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19806; 19873; 19931; 20242; 20273; 20363; 20382;
20425; 20478; 20625; 20806; 20895; 20902; 20920; 20950; 21002; 21044; 21186;
21259; 21314; 21399; 21442; 21456; 21663; 21735; 22204; 22255; 22392; 22531;
22782; 23735; 24232; 24271; 24543; 24759; 24857; 25056; 25785; 25815; 26269;
26920; 27563; 28079; 28214; 28700; 28737; 28803; 29228; 29917; 30477; 32209;
32659)
SEC. 51A-4.124.   CENTRAL AREA DISTRICTS.
   (a)   CA-1(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. This district is provided to accommodate existing
development in the central area of the city, to encourage the most appropriate
future use of land, and to prevent the increase of street congestion. This
district is hereby designated as an area of historical, cultural, and
architectural importance and significance.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business services uses.
            --   Building repair and maintenance shop.
            --   Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility.
            --   Catering service.
            --   Commercial cleaning or laundry plant
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Custom woodworking, furniture construction, or repair.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Job or lithographic printing.
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
            --   Technical school.
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
            --   Vehicle or engine repair or maintenance. [DIR]
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage manufacturing. [SUP]
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions.
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Foster home. [SUP]
            --   Halfway house. [SUP]
            --   Hospital.
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel.
            --   Lodging or boarding house.
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
            --   Duplex.
            --   Group residential facility. [See Section
51A-4.209(3).]
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209 (3.1).]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Residential hotel.
            --   Retirement housing.
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Ambulance service.
            --   Auto service center.
            --   Business school.
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside).
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage.
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquor store.
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Outside sales.
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service.
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [SUP]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Taxidermist.
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
            --   Vehicle display, sales, and service. [SUP]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Commercial bus station and terminal. [DIR]
            --   Heliport. [SUP]
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Railroad passenger station.
            --   Railroad yard, roundhouse, or shops.
            --   STOL (short takeoff or landing) port. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center.
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower.
            --   Sewage treatment plant. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [See
Section
51A-4.212 (11)]
            --   Water treatment plant. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Freight terminal. [DIR]
            --   Mini-warehouse.
            --   Office showroom/warehouse.
            --   Outside storage. [SUP]
            --   Recycling buy-back center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213(11.3).]
            --   Trade center.
            --   Warehouse.
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217. In this district, the following accessory use is permitted by SUP
only:
         (A)   Reserved.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory use is permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. No minimum front yard.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side yard is:
               (aa)   five feet for duplex structures;
               (bb) 10 feet for multifamily structures 36 feet or less in
height; and
               (cc)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Minimum rear yard is:
               (aa)   10 feet for duplex structures;
               (bb) 15 feet for multifamily structures 36 feet or less in
height; and
               (cc)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio.
            (i)   Maximum floor area ratio is 20.0.
            (ii)   Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. 20361)
            (iii)   The maximum floor area ratio in the CA-1(A)-CP and CA-1(A)-
SP districts may be increased to 24 to 1 by the use of the building setback
bonus provisions in the “additional provisions” [Paragraph (8)] in this
subsection.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is any legal height.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 100 percent.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading.
         (A)   In general. No minimum off-street parking is required for any
use in this district. Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations
(Divisions
51A-4.300  et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
         (B)   Special off-street loading provisions.
            (i)   In this district, off-street loading spaces must be provided
in accordance with Section
51A-4.303(a) for only new structures or additions to an existing structure.
            (ii)   In this district, once the required off-street loading has
been established for a structure, no additional off-street loading is required
if the use of the structure changes.
            (iii)   In this district, once an off-street loading space has been
provided, the off-street loading space may not be reduced, eliminated, or made
unusable in any manner during the life of the structure.
            (iv)   In this district, on-street loading spaces may satisfy the
off-street loading space requirement subject to the following standards:
               (aa)   Any on-street loading spaces must be approved by the
traffic engineer.
               (bb)   Required off-street loading spaces furnished on-street
must be provided at curbside contiguous to the building site.
               (cc) If no adjacent curb space is available due to traffic or
transit needs, indented curb space may be provided if the required sidewalk
width is maintained.
               (dd)   All required medium and large loading spaces must be
provided off-street.
               (ee)   Structures meeting Subparagraphs (aa) through (dd) above
and requiring seven or more off-street loading spaces may satisfy the off-
street loading requirement as follows:
 
REQUIRED SPACES MINIMUM OFF-STREET NUMBER ON STREET
7               6                  1
8               6                  2
9               6                  3
10 or more      60%                40%
 
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Single family structure spacing. In this district, a minimum of
15 feet between each group of eight single family structures must be provided
by plat.
         (B)   Minimum 10-foot setback in CA- 1(A)-CP and CA-1(A)-SP districts.
In the CA-1(A)-CP and CA-1(A)-SP districts, a 10 foot setback is required that
is measured from the street curb as established by the Dallas Central Business
District Streets and Vehicular Circulation Plan, Ordinance No. 13262, as
amended. When an owner establishes a setback on his property greater than the
10 foot requirement, a floor area bonus of six times the additional setback
area is allowed. The maximum permitted floor area ratio with a bonus is 24 to
one.
         (C)   Sidewalk regulations. In this district, a sidewalk must be
provided between the back of the street curb and the face of a building at
grade in accordance with this subsection. The face of a building is behind the
columns for a building with exterior columns.
            (i)   Average sidewalk width equals the total sidewalk surface area
divided by the lineal feet of frontage.
               (aa)   Each frontage on each blockface must contain the required
average sidewalk width.
               (bb)   The computation of average sidewalk width excludes the
area occupied by structural walls or columns.
               (cc)   In computing average sidewalk width, the surface area at
a corner is counted only once.
            (ii)   In a CA-1(A)-CP district, sidewalks must be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the following regulations:
               (aa)   An average sidewalk width of 18 feet is required.
               (bb)   A minimum sidewalk width of 12 feet that is unobstructed
by any structure or planting is required. The 12 foot minimum sidewalk width
may be divided into seven and five foot minimum segments.
            (iii)   In the CA-1(A)-SP district, sidewalks must be constructed
and maintained in accordance with the following regulations:
               (aa)   A building with a floor area ratio of more than 15 to one
is subject to the requirements of the CA-1(A)-CP district in Subparagraph (ii).
               (bb)   A building with a floor area ratio of 15 to one or less
must have an average sidewalk width of 15 feet and a minimum sidewalk width of
nine feet that is unobstructed by any structure or planting.
            (iv)   In a CA-1(A) district without a CP or SP overlay district
designation, sidewalks must be constructed and maintained in accordance with
the following regulations:
               (aa)   A building with a floor area ratio of more than 15 to one
is subject to the requirements of the CA-1(A)-CP district in Subparagraph (ii).
               (bb)   A building with a floor area ratio of 10 to one through
15 to one must have an average sidewalk width of 15 feet and a minimum sidewalk
width of nine feet that is unobstructed by any structure.
               (cc)   All other buildings must provide a minimum sidewalk width
of 10 feet with seven feet unobstructed by any structure or planting.
            (v)   Waiver of sidewalk width requirements. An applicant for a
sidewalk width waiver shall submit an application to the director on a form
approved by the director and signed by all owners of property abutting the
sidewalk. The director shall take into account the needs of pedestrians and the
proximity of the sidewalk to intersections and crosswalks, transit stops, parks
and playgrounds, and other pedestrian-intensive areas when considering the
application. The director may grant a sidewalk waiver if the director finds:
               (aa)   the potential pedestrian traffic in the area does not
warrant the width of the sidewalk required;
               (bb)   the waiver will facilitate an amenity that promotes
pedestrian activity such as sidewalk seating areas, enhanced landscaping, or
retail kiosks; or
               (cc)   there are sufficient alternative pedestrian passageways
to accommodate pedestrian traffic in the area.
The granting of a waiver does not preclude the city from requiring compliance
with all sidewalk standards at some later time and assessing the abutting
owners for the cost of the installation or replacement.
      (9)   Commercial parking garages and surface parking lots.
         (A)   Intent. The intent of this paragraph is to create a distinct
boundary between public space and private parking facilities, raise the
aesthetic standards for parking facilities, and improve the quality of right-
of-ways.
         (B)   Definitions. In this paragraph:
            (i)   COMMERCIAL PARKING GARAGE means a multistory vehicle parking
facility that is operated as a business enterprise by charging a fee for
parking.
            (ii)   CORNER LANDSCAPING AREA means an area of any shape abutting
the intersection of two right-of-ways equal to the area on a surface parking
lot covered by a triangle formed by connecting together the point of
intersection of adjacent right-of-way lines and points on each of the right-of-
way lines 12.5 percent of the length of the surface parking lot’s right-of-way
frontage from the intersection, but in no case to exceed 225 square feet.
            (iii)   PARKWAY means the portion of a right-of-way located between
the street curb and the property line of an adjoining commercial parking garage
or surface parking lot.
            (iv)   RIGHT-OF-WAY means an area dedicated to public use for
pedestrian and vehicular movement, but does not include alleys.
            (v)   SELF-PARK SPACE means a parking space where a customer parks
his vehicle and it remains there until a customer drives it away. It does not
include a space where an attendant parks a customer vehicle.
            (vi)   STRIP LANDSCAPING AREA means an area 1.5 feet in width
abutting the parkway (or right-of-way if there is no parkway) and extending the
length of the street frontage of a surface parking lot, excluding the corner
landscaping area and openings for pedestrian and vehicular access.
            (vii)   SURFACE PARKING LOT means an at-grade parking lot that is
operated as a business enterprise by charging a fee for parking.
            (viii)   WROUGHT IRON includes metal that resembles wrought iron in
appearance.
         (C)   Site plan.
            (i)   When required. A site plan must be submitted to and approved
by the building official in accordance with this subparagraph before a building
permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued.
            (ii)   Requisites. The site plan must include the following
information:
               (aa)   The number of existing and proposed parking spaces on the
property.
               (bb)   The location and dimensions of the property.
               (cc)   The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
off-street parking and loading areas, parking bays, aisles, driveways,
pedestrian access openings, and attendant booths.
               (dd)   The location and type of all existing and proposed
landscaping, fencing, trash receptacles, lighting, and signs.
               (ee)   Any other reasonable and pertinent information that the
building official determines to be necessary for site plan review.
            (iii)   Development. If a site plan is approved by the building
official, development of the property must be in accordance with the site plan.
         (D)   Construction.
            (i)   Slope. The entire surface of a surface parking lot may not
deviate more than seven degrees from the horizontal plane. No portion of the
surface may deviate more than 12 degrees from the horizontal plane.
            (ii)   Driveways. No more than one two-way driveway or two one-way
driveways may be maintained for each 300 feet, or fraction thereof, of frontage
of a surface parking lot. This provision does not require the closure or
relocation of driveways existing as of January 28, 2004.
            (iii)   Pervious surface. The use of pervious surfacing materials
for surface parking lots is encouraged.
         (E)   Striping. All self-park spaces must be clearly and permanently
identified by stripes. All self-park spaces for compact cars must be at least
7.5- foot wide stalls and must be clearly and permanently marked “compact car
only.” All other self-park spaces must be at least 8-foot wide stalls. Except
as specified in this provision, these spaces must be provided and striped in
accordance with Section
51A-4.301(d)(1).
         (F)   Lighting.
            (i)   Requirement. The following must be lighted between one-half
hour after sunset and 2:30 a.m. and between 6:00 a.m. and one-half hour before
sunrise:
               (aa)   A surface parking lot.
               (bb)   The first story of an above-grade commercial parking
garage.
               (cc)   All other portions of a commercial parking garage that
are accessible to pedestrians or vehicles during the time between one-half hour
after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise.
            (ii)   Intensity. The intensity of required lighting on the surface
where vehicles are parked must be:
               (aa)   an average of at least two footcandles, initial
measurement, and at least one footcandle on a maintained basis; and
               (bb)   a minimum at any point of at least 0.6 footcandle
initial, and at least 0.3 footcandle maintained or one-third of the average
footcandle measurement for the lighted area, whichever is greater.
            (iii)   Type of fixtures. Light sources must be indirect, diffused,
or shielded-type fixtures, installed to reduce glare and the consequent
interference with boundary streets. Bare bulbs or strings of lamps are
prohibited.
            (iv)   Location of fixtures for surface parking lots. Fixtures must
be attached to buildings or mounted on permanent poles. Fixtures may be located
on adjoining property. This requirement does not apply to commercial parking
garages.
            (v)   Height of fixtures for surface parking lots. Fixtures on
surface parking lots must be at least 20 feet above the lot surface. This
requirement does not apply to commercial parking garages.
            (vi)   Reconciliation. This subparagraph controls over Section
51A-4.301(e).
         (G)   Trash receptacles. At least one trash receptacle must be
provided for each commercial parking garage or surface parking lot. Trash
receptacles must not have a fluorescent color.
         (H)   Attendant booths. An attendant booth may not be constructed of
flammable materials or have a fluorescent color.
         (I)   Access openings.
            (i)   Access openings for surface parking lots may not exceed:
               (aa)   30 feet in width for a two-way drive.
               (bb)   20 feet in width for a one-way drive.
               (cc)   10 feet in width for pedestrian access openings.
            (ii)   At least one pedestrian access opening must be provided for
each commercial parking garage and surface parking lot. The spacing between
pedestrian access openings must be from 30 feet to 150 feet.
            (iii)   This subparagraph does not require the closure or
relocation of access openings existing as of January 28, 2004.
         (J)   Fencing.
            (i)   Fencing must be provided:
               (aa)   For surface parking lots, along an abutting right-of-way,
excluding openings for pedestrian and vehicular access. Fencing may be located
behind a corner landscaping area.
               (bb)   For commercial parking garages, to eliminate openings not
intended for pedestrian and vehicular access in the first story above grade
where the garage abuts the right-of-way.
               (cc)   Fencing is not required along a DART right-of-way if DART
has provided fencing along the right-of-way.
            (ii)   Surface parking lots in the middle of a blockface with
buildings on both adjoining lots and less than 100 feet of frontage and all
commercial parking garages must have wrought iron fencing.
            (iii)   All other surface parking lots must have:
               (aa)   a wrought iron fencing;
               (bb)   bollards;
               (cc)   post-and-cable fencing; or
               (dd)   other fencing that is in keeping with the intent of this
paragraph, as determined by the director.
            (iv)   If a wrought iron fence is provided:
               (aa)   it must be at least 36 inches in height;
               (bb)   its bars must be spaced no more than eight inches apart;
and
               (cc)   it may have a foundation that does not exceed twelve
inches in height.
            (v)   If bollards are provided, each bollard must be:
               (aa)   constructed of concrete, brick or stone;
               (bb)   at least eight inches in width or diameter;
               (cc)   at least 30 inches in height;
               (dd)   no more than seven feet from another bollard, unless
connected by a metal chain, in which case they may be no more than nine feet
from another bollard.
            (vi)   If post-and-cable fencing is provided, the posts must:
               (aa)   be finished metal with caps;
               (bb)   have a minimum diameter of two and one-half inches;
               (cc)   be spaced no more than 18 feet apart; and
               (dd)   be connected with stainless steel tension cable.
         (K)   Landscaping.
            (i)   Parkway landscaping requirement for commercial parking
garages and surface parking lots. Unless a parkway landscape permit is denied
or revoked, one tree or shrub must be provided in the adjoining parkway for
each 30 feet along the frontage abutting the right-of-way. This provision does
not apply to commercial parking garages or surface parking lots existing as of
January 28, 2004.
            (ii)   Perimeter landscaping requirement for surface parking lots.
The corner landscaping area must be planted with a combination of ground cover,
shrubs, and trees, or used for kiosks with decorative paving. As used in this
subparagraph, ”kiosk” means a multi-sided structure for the display of premise
and non-premise signs. The strip landscaping area must be planted with a
combination of ground cover, shrubs, and trees. Car bumpers may overhang the
strip landscaping area.
            (iii)   Exemption along certain DART right-of-ways. Landscaping is
not required along a DART right-of-way if DART has provided landscaping along
the right-of-way.
            (iv)   Exemption for certain small surface parking lots.
Landscaping is not required for surface parking lots with a total area of
10,000 square feet or less, unless two or more contiguous lots have an
aggregate area of 10,000 square feet or more.
            (v)   Alternative landscape plan. The director may approve an
alternative landscape plan only if compliance with this paragraph is not
possible, the inability to comply is not self-created, and the alternative
landscape plan is in keeping with the intent of this paragraph. An alternative
landscape plan may include placement of landscaping in alternative locations.
An alternative landscape plan may reduce the square footage of landscape area
if additional trees or shrubs are provided.
            (vi)   Trees. All trees provided must be recommended for local area
use by the director. Each tree planted must have a caliper of at least two and
one-half inches.
            (vii)   Shrubs. All shrubs provided must be recommended for local
area use by the director. Each shrub provided must be at least 30 inches in
height.
            (viii)   Minimum tree clearance. All portions of a tree above
street pavement must be at least thirteen and one-half feet in height.
            (ix)   Tree grates. Tree grates conforming to state and federal
standards and specifications adopted to eliminate, insofar as possible,
architectural barriers encountered by aged, handicapped, or disabled persons,
and of a size adequate to permit healthy tree growth must be provided for all
trees planted within a public sidewalk.
            (x)   Private license granted. The city council hereby grants a
private license to the owners of all commercial parking garages and surface
parking lots in this district for the exclusive purpose of authorizing
compliance with the parkway landscaping requirements. A property owner is not
required to pay an initial or annual fee for this license. This private license
shall not terminate at the end of any specific time period, however, the city
council retains the right to terminate this license whenever in its judgment
the purpose or use of this license is inconsistent with the public use of the
right-of-way or whenever the purpose or use of this license is likely to become
a nuisance. A property owner is not required to comply with any landscaping
requirement of this subparagraph if compliance is made impossible due to the
termination of this license. This provision controls over
Article VI, “License for Use of Public Right-of-Way,” of
Chapter 43, “Streets and Sidewalks,” of this code. Note: This private license
does not eliminate the need for a parkway landscape permit or commercial
general liability insurance.
            (xi)   Parkway landscape permit. A parkway landscape permit must be
obtained from the director for all landscaping in the parkway.
               (aa)   An application for a parkway landscape permit must be in
writing on a form approved by the director and accompanied by plans or drawings
showing the area of the parkway affected and the planting proposed.
               (bb)   Upon receipt of the application, the director shall
circulate it to all affected city departments, utilities, and other franchise
holders for review and comment. If, after receiving those comments, the
director determines that the construction and planting proposed will not be
inconsistent with and will not unreasonably impair the public use of the right-
of-way, he shall issue a parkway landscape permit to the property owner;
otherwise, he shall deny the permit.
               (cc)   A parkway landscape permit issued by the director is
subject to immediate revocation upon written notice if at any time he
determines that the use of the parkway authorized by the permit is inconsistent
with or unreasonably impairs the public use of the right-of-way.
               (dd)   The issuance of a parkway landscape permit under this
subparagraph does not excuse the property owner, his agents, or employees from
liability in the installation or maintenance of trees or shrubs in the right-
of-way.
            (xii)   Xeriscape. The use of xeriscape is encouraged.
         (L)   Additional regulations. All commercial parking garages and
surface parking lots must comply with Subsection (e), “Wheel Guards and
Barriers,” Subsection (f), “Passenger Unloading Zone Required in Certain
Cases,” and Subsection (g), “Stacking Space Required in Certain Cases,” of
Section
51A-4.306, “Off-Street Parking in the Central Business District.” Consult
Section
51A-4.306, “Off-Street Parking in the Central Business District,” for
regulations concerning off-street parking in the Central Business District.
         (M)   Compliance.
            (i)   All commercial parking garages and surface parking lots in
the Central Subdistrict must comply with this paragraph before January 28,
2007. Fencing within the Central Subdistrict is required only when the City
Center Tax Increment Financing District finances its installation. As used in
this subparagraph, “Central Subdistrict” means the area bounded by Ross Avenue,
Pearl Street, Bryan Street, Central Expressway, Live Oak Street, Olive Street,
Harwood Street, Young Street, Akard Street, Wood Street, and Griffin Street.
            (ii)   All commercial parking garages and surface parking lots in
the Secondary Subdistrict must comply with this paragraph before January 28,
2009. As used in this subparagraph, “Secondary Subdistrict” means the area with
CA-1(A) zoning inside the Central Business District (including property under
the freeways), but excluding the Central Subdistrict.
         (N)   Maintenance.
            (i)   Any improvements required by this paragraph must be properly
maintained in a state of good repair and neat appearance at all times.
            (ii)   Plant materials required by this paragraph must be
maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times.
         (O)   Special exception.
            (i)   In general. The board of adjustment may grant a special
exception to any requirement of this paragraph if the board finds, after a
public hearing, the special exception will not adversely affect the other
properties within the subdistrict and strict compliance with the requirement
would result in unnecessary hardship. If the board grants a special exception,
it must specify the length of time the special exception is effective.
            (ii)   Lighting. The board shall not grant a special exception to a
lighting requirement unless the board also finds, after a public hearing, that
the special exception will not compromise the safety of persons using the
parking. In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board
shall consider:
               (aa)   the extent to which the parking will be used after dark;
               (bb)   the crime statistics for the area;
               (cc)   the extent to which adequate lighting may be provided by
light sources located on adjacent property; and
               (dd)   the extent to which the commercial parking garage or
surface parking lot will be secured by fences, gates, and chains.
   (b)   CA-2(A) district.
      (1)   Purpose. This district is provided to accommodate existing
development in the central area of the city, to encourage the most appropriate
future use of land, and to prevent the increase of street congestion.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business services uses.
            --   Building repair and maintenance shop.
            --   Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility.
            --   Catering service.
            --   Commercial cleaning or laundry plant.
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Custom woodworking, furniture construction, or repair.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Job or lithographic printing.
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
            --   Technical school.
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
            --   Vehicle or engine repair or maintenance. [DIR]
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage manufacturing. [SUP]
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center.
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions.
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Foster home.
            --   Halfway house. [SUP]
            --   Hospital.
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel.
            --   Lodging or boarding house.
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
            --   Duplex.
            --   Group residential facility. [See Section
51A-4.209(3).]
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209 (3.1).]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Residential hotel.
            --   Retirement housing.
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Ambulance service.
            --   Auto service center.
            --   Business school.
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside).
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage.
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquor store.
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Outside sales.
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service.
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [SUP]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Taxidermist.
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
            --   Vehicle display, sales, and service. [SUP]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Commercial bus station and terminal. [DIR]
            --   Heliport. [SUP]
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Private street or alley. [SUP]
            --   Railroad passenger station.
            --   Railroad yard, roundhouse, or shops.
            --   STOL (short takeoff or landing) port. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center.
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower.
            --   Sewage treatment plant. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed.
            --   Water treatment plant. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Freight terminal. [DIR]
            --   Mini-warehouse.
            --   Office showroom/warehouse.
            --   Outside storage. [SUP]
            --   Recycling buy-back center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213(11.3).]
            --   Trade center.
            --   Warehouse.
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217. In this district, the following accessory use is permitted by SUP
only:
         (A)   Reserved.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory use is permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard. There is no minimum front yard.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side yard is:
               (aa)   five feet for duplex structures;
               (bb)   10 feet for multifamily structures 36 feet or less in
height; and
               (cc)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Minimum rear yard is:
               (aa)   10 feet for duplex structures;
               (bb)   15 feet for multifamily structures 36 feet or less in
height; and
               (cc)   no minimum in all other cases.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. No maximum dwelling unit density.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio is 20.0.
         (E)   Height. Maximum structure height is any legal height.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 100 percent.
         (G)   Lot size. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit is as follows:
TYPE OF STRUCTURE  MINIMUM LOT AREA
                     PER DWELLING UNIT
TYPE OF STRUCTURE                        MINIMUM LOT AREA
                                            PER DWELLING UNIT
Single family                               1000 sq. ft.
Duplex                                      2500 sq. ft.
Multifamily:
   No separate bedroom                   50 sq. ft.
   One bedroom                           65 sq. ft.
   Two bedrooms                          75 sq. ft.
   More than two bedrooms                10 sq. ft.
(Add this amount for each bedroom over two)
 
         (H)   Stories. No maximum number of stories.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. No off-street parking is required
for any use in this district. Consult the off-street parking and loading
regulations (Division
51A-4.300  et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Single family structure spacing. In this district, a minimum of
15 feet between each group of eight single family structures must be provided
by plat. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19806; 19912; 20242; 20273; 20361; 20625;
20731; 20752; 20895; 20902; 20920; 20950; 21001; 21002; 21044; 21259; 21314;
21735; 21960; 22097; 22139; 22204; 22531; 22799; 24232; 24271; 24543; 24857;
25047; 25133; 25487; 25785; 26920; 28073; 28125; 28214; 28272; 28700; 29128;
29917; 30932; 32209; 32482; 32659; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.125.   MIXED USE DISTRICTS.
   (a)   In general. Single or multiple uses may be developed on one site in a
mixed use district as in any other district; however, in order to encourage a
mixture of uses and promote innovative and energy conscious design, efficient
circulation systems, the conservation of land, and the minimization of
vehicular travel, density bonuses are awarded to developments that qualify as
“mixed use projects” as defined in Subsection (b). If a development does not
qualify as an MUP, it is limited to a “base” dwelling unit density and floor
area ratio. When a development qualifies as an MUP, it earns a higher maximum
dwelling unit density and floor area ratio and, in some instances, a greater
maximum structure height. Additional FAR bonuses are incrementally awarded to
encourage the inclusion of “residential” as part of an MUP. The exact
increments of increase vary depending on the actual use categories mixed and
the district that the MUP is in. For more information regarding the exact
increments of increase, consult the yard, lot, and space regulations in this
section governing the particular district of interest.
   (b)   Qualifying as a mixed use project. To qualify as a MIXED USE PROJECT
(MUP) for purposes of this section, a development must contain uses in two or
more of the following categories, and the combined floor areas of the uses in
each category must equal or exceed the following percentages of the total floor
area of the project:
 
MU-1 AND MU-1(SAH) DISTRICTS
Use Category                % of Total Floor Area
Lodging                     15%
Office                      15%
Residential                 15%
Retail and personal service 10%
 
 
MU-2 AND MU-2(SAH) DISTRICTS
Use Category                % of Total Floor Area
Lodging                     10%
Office                      15%
Residential                 10%
Retail and personal service 5%
 
 
MU-3 AND MU-3(SAH) DISTRICTS
Use Category                         % of Total Floor Area
Lodging                              10%
Office                               15%
Residential                          10%
Retail and personal service          5%
Wholesale, distribution, and storage 15%
 
   (c)   Mixed use project (MUP) regulations.
      (1)   If an MUP is proposed, a project plan must be submitted to and
approved by the building official.
      (2)   If an MUP is constructed in phases:
         (A)   the first phase must independently qualify as an MUP under
Subsection (b); and
         (B)   each subsequent phase combined with all previous phases already
completed or under construction must also qualify as an MUP under Subsection
(b).
      (3)   An MUP may consist of two or more building sites if they are
developed under a unified development plan. The plan must be:
         (A)   signed by or on behalf of all of the owners of the property
involved;
         (B)   approved by the building official; and
         (C)   filed in the deed records of the county where the property is
located.
      (4)   When an MUP consists of multiple building sites, its development
standards and off-street parking and loading requirements are calculated by
combining the sites and treating them as a single building site.
   (d)   MU-1 and MU-1(SAH) districts.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development of moderate density retail,
office, and/or multifamily residential uses in combination on single or
contiguous building sites; to encourage innovative and energy conscious design,
efficient circulation systems, the conservation of land, and the minimization
of vehicular travel. Additionally, the MU-1(SAH) district is created to
encourage the provision of affordable housing.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Catering service.
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory. [SUP]
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions. [RAR]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Foster home.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR] or [SUP] [See Section
51A-4.205(1).]
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
            --   Duplex.
            --   Group residential facility. [See Section
51A-4.209(3).]
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [See Section
51A-4.209 (3.1).]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Residential hotel.
            --   Retirement housing.
            --   Single family.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs. [RAR]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [RAR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside). [SUP]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
[SUP]
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Paraphernalia shop. [SUP]
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Mini-warehouse. [SUP]
            --   Recycling buy-back center [See Section
51A-4.213 (11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory use is permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
   Except as provided in this paragraph, the following yard, lot, and space
regulations apply:
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   In general. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure above 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   In general. Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
               (bb)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure above 45 feet in height, up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density.
            (i)   MU-1 district. Maximum dwelling unit density varies depending
on whether the development is a "mixed use project" as follows:
 
MAXIMUM DWELLING UNIT DENSITY
(dwelling units per net acre)
Base (No MUP) MUP with Mix of 2 Categories MUP with Mix of 3 or More Categories
15            20                           25
 
            (ii)    MU-1(SAH) district. Maximum dwelling unit density varies
depending on whether a density bonus is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.900 and the development is a "mixed use project" as follows:
 
MAXIMUM DWELLING UNIT DENSITY
(dwelling units per net acre)
Percentage of SAH Units Base (No MUP) MUP with Mix of 2 MUP with Mix of 3 or
Provided                              Categories        More Categories
0%                      10            15                20
20%                     15            20                25
 
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) varies
depending on whether the development is a "mixed use project" as follows:
[Note: The first column is the base FAR, which applies when there is no MUP.
The second column (MUP=2/no Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of two use
categories when neither category is "residential." The third column (MUP=2/with
Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of "residential" plus one other use
category. The fourth column (MUP=3/no Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of
three or more use categories, none of which is "residential." The fifth column
(MUP=3/with Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of "residential" plus two or
more other use categories.]
 
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO
Use Categories              Base     MUP=2    MUP=2      MUP=3    MUP=3
                            (no MUP) (no Res) (with Res) (no Res) (with Res)
Lodging                     0.8      0.85     0.9        0.85     0.95
Office                      0.8      0.85     0.9        0.85     0.95
Residential                 0.8      ---      0.95       ---      0.95
Retail and personal service 0.4      0.5      0.5        0.6      0.6
TOTAL DEVELOPMENT           0.8      0.9      1.0        1.0      1.1
 
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height varies depending on whether the development is a
"mixed use project" as follows:
[Note: The first column is the base height, which applies when there is no MUP.
The second column (MUP/No Retail) is the height for an MUP with a mix of two
use categories when neither category is "retail and personal service." The
third column (MUP/with Retail) is the height for an MUP with a mix of "retail
and personal service" plus one or more other use categories.]
 
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT
(in feet)
Base     MUP with Mix  MUP
(No MUP) (No Retail)   (with Retail)
80       90            120
 
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories.
            (i)   Maximum number of stories above grade is:
               (aa)    seven when the maximum structure height is 90 feet; and
               (bb)   nine when the maximum structure height is 120 feet.
            (ii)   Parking garages are exempt from this requirement, but must
comply with the height regulations of Subparagraph (E).
         (I)   Development bonuses for mixed-income housing. In an MU-
1 district, certain regulations vary depending on whether a development bonus
is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.1100 as follows:
            (i)   Maximum dwelling unit density. Except as provided in this
paragraph, the following density bonuses apply:
 Set aside minimums (% of total     Additional Maximum Unit Density: 51A-
 residential units reserved in each 4.125(d)(4)(C), plus:
 income band, adjusted annually)
                       Set aside minimums (% of  Additional Maximum Unit
                       total residential units   Density: 51A-4.125(d)(4)(C),
                       reserved in each income   plus:
                       band, adjusted annually)
MVA Category A, B, C   5% at Income band 3       65 per acre
                       5% at Income band 3; and  80 per acre
                       5% at Income band 2
                       5% at Income band 3;
                       5% at Income band 2; and  105 per acre
                       5% at Income band 1
MVA Category D, E, F   5% at Income band 2       65 per acre
                       10% at Income band 2;     80 per acre
                       10% at Income band 2; and 105 per acre
                       5% at Income band 1
MVA Categories G, H, I 5% at Income band 1       105 per acre
 
            (ii)    Residential proximity slope. In addition to the items
listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2)(A), the following additional items may project through the
residential proximity slope to a height not to exceed the maximum structure
height, or four feet above the slope, whichever is less:
               (aa)    railings;
               (bb)    parapet walls;
               (cc)    trellises; and
               (dd)    structures such as wind barriers, wing walls, and patio
dividing walls.
            (iii)   Floor area ratio. In calculating the maximum floor area
ratios in Subparagraph (D), residential uses are not included.
            (iv)    Developments with transit proximity. For developments with
transit proximity as defined in Section
51A-4.1102, an additional bonus of 15 dwelling units is allowed and the maximum
lot coverage is 85 percent.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(SAH), MF-1(A), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope which originates in that district. (See Section 1A-4.412.) For
purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open and unobstructed
space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from which there can
be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
   (e)   MU-2 and MU-2(SAH) districts.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development of medium density retail,
office, hotel, and/or multifamily residential uses in combination on single or
contiguous building sites; to encourage innovative and energy conscious design,
efficient circulation systems, the conservation of land, and the minimization
of vehicular travel. Additionally, the MU-2(SAH) district is created to
encourage the provision of affordable housing.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Catering service.
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions. [RAR]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Foster home.
            --   Halfway house. [SUP]
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR]
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
            --   Duplex.
            --   Group residential facility. [See Section
51A-4.209(3).]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Residential hotel.
            --   Retirement housing.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs. [RAR]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [RAR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside). [SUP]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Convenience store with drive-through. [SUP]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
[SUP]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquor store.
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Paraphernalia shop. [SUP]
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Railroad passenger station. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Mini-warehouse. [SUP]
            --   Recycling buy-back center [See Section
51A-4.213 (11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   In this district, the following accessory use is permitted by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
   Except as provided in this paragraph, the following yard, lot, and space
regulations apply.
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   In general. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure above 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   In general. Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
               (bb)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure above 45 feet in height up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density.
            (i)   MU-2 district. Maximum dwelling unit density varies depending
on whether the development is a "mixed use project" as follows:
 
MAXIMUM DWELLING UNIT DENSITY
(dwelling units per net acre)
Base     MUP with Mix of 2 Categories MUP with Mix of 3 or More Categories
(No MUP)
50       75                           100
 
            (ii)    MU-2(SAH) district. Maximum dwelling unit density varies
depending on whether a density bonus is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.900 and whether the development is a "mixed use project" as follows:
 
MAXIMUM DWELLING UNIT DENSITY
(dwelling units per net acre)
Percentage of SAH Units Base (No MUP) MUP with Mix of 2 MUP with Mix of 3 or
Provided                              Categories        More Categories
0%                      30            45                60
5%                      33            50                65
10%                     37            55                70
15%                     42            60                75
20%                     50            75                100
 
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) varies
depending on whether the development is a "mixed use project" as follows:
[Note: The first column is the base FAR, which applies when there is no MUP.
The second column (MUP=2/no Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of two use
categories when neither category is "residential." The third column (MUP=2/with
Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of "residential" plus one other use
category. The fourth column (MUP=3/no Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of
three or more use categories, none of which is "residential." The fifth column
(MUP=3/with Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of "residential" plus two or
more other use categories.]
 
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO
Use Categories              Base     MUP=2    MUP=2      MUP=3    MUP=3
                            (no MUP) (no Res) (with Res) (no Res) (with Res)
Lodging                     1.6      1.7      1.8        1.8      1.9
Office                      1.6      1.7      1.8        1.8      1.9
Residential                 1.6      --       1.8        --       1.9
Retail and personal service 0.6      0.7      0.7        0.8      0.8
TOTAL DEVELOPMENT           1.6      1.8      2.0        2.0      2.25
 
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height varies depending on whether the development is a
"mixed use project" as follows:
[Note: The first column is the base height, which applies when there is no MUP.
The second column (MUP/no Retail) is the height for an MUP with a mix of two
use categories when neither category is "retail and personal service." The
third column (MUP/with Retail) is the height for an MUP with a mix of "retail
and personal service" plus one or more other use categories.]
 
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT
(in feet)
Base (No MUP) MUP (No Retail) MUP with Retail
135           135             180
 
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories.
            (i)   Maximum number of stories above grade is:
               (aa)   10 when the maximum structure height is 135 feet; and
               (bb)   14 when the maximum structure height is 180 feet.
            (ii)   Parking garages are exempt from this requirement, but must
comply with the height regulations of Subparagraph (E).
         (I)   Development bonuses for mixed-income housing. In an MU-
2 district, certain regulations vary depending on whether a development bonus
is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.1100 as follows:
            (i)   Maximum dwelling unit density. Except as provided in this
paragraph, the following density bonuses apply:
 Set aside minimums (% of total     Additional Maximum Unit Density: 51A-
 residential units reserved in each 4.125(e)(4)(C), plus:
 income band, adjusted annually)
                       Set aside minimums (% of  Additional Maximum Unit
                       total residential units   Density: 51A-4.125(e)(4)(C),
                       reserved in each income   plus:
                       band, adjusted annually)
MVA Categories A, B, C 5% at Income band 3       40 per acre
                       5% at Income band 3; and  60 per acre
                       5% at Income band 2
                       5% at Income band 3;
                       5% at Income band 2; and  80 per acre
                       5% at Income band 1
MVA Categories D, E, F 5% at Income band 2       35 per acre
                       10% at Income band 2;     55 per acre
                       10% at Income band 2; and 75 per acre
                       5% at Income band 1
MVA Categories G, H, I 5% at Income band 1       75 per acre
 
            (ii)    Residential proximity slope. In addition to the items
listed in Section
51A-4.408 (a)(2)(A), the following additional items may project through the
residential proximity slope to a height not to exceed the maximum structure
height, or four feet above the slope, whichever is less:
               (aa)    railings;
               (bb)    parapet walls;
               (cc)    trellises; and
               (dd)    structures such as wind barriers, wing walls, and patio
dividing walls.
            (iii)   Floor area ratio. In calculating the maximum floor area
ratios in Subparagraph (D), residential uses are not included.
            (iv)    Developments with transit proximity. For developments with
transit proximity as defined in Section
51A-4.1102, an additional bonus of 15 dwelling units is allowed and the maximum
lot coverage is 85 percent.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope which originates in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
   (f)   MU-3 and MU-3(SAH) districts.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development of high density retail,
office, hotel, and/or multifamily residential uses in combination on single or
contiguous building sites; to encourage innovative and energy conscious design,
efficient circulation systems, the conservation of land, and the minimization
of vehicular travel. Additionally, the MU-3(SAH) district is created to
encourage the provision of affordable housing.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Catering service.
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions. [RAR]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Foster home.
            --   Halfway house. [SUP]
            --   Hospital. [RAR]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR]
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
            --   Duplex.
            --   Group residential facility. [See Section
51A-4.209(3).]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Residential hotel.
            --   Retirement housing.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs. [RAR]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [RAR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside). [SUP]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Convenience store with drive-through. [SUP]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
[SUP]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquor store.
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Paraphernalia shop. [SUP]
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Heliport. [SUP]
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Railroad passenger station. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Mini-warehouse. [SUP]
            --   Office showroom/warehouse.
            --   Recycling buy-back center [See Section
51A-4.213 (11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
            --   Trade center.
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory use is not permitted in this district:
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   Reserved.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
   Except as provided in this paragraph, the following yard, lot, and space
regulations apply:
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   In general. Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure above 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   In general. Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
               (bb)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure above 45 feet in height up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density.
            (i)   MU-3 district. No maximum dwelling unit density.
            (ii)    MU-3(SAH) district. Maximum dwelling unit density varies
depending on whether a density bonus is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.900 and whether the development is a "mixed use project" as follows:
 
MAXIMUM DWELLING UNIT DENSITY
(dwelling units per net acre)
Percentage of SAH Units Base (No MUP) MUP with Mix of 2 MUP with Mix of 3
Provided                              Categories        Categories
0%                      50            50                50
5%                      53            55                55
10%                     57            60                60
15%                     62            65                65
20%                        NO MAXIMUM
 
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) varies
depending on whether the development is a "mixed use project" as follows:
[Note: The first column is the base FAR, which applies when there is no MUP.
The second column (MUP=2/no Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of two use
categories when neither category is "residential." The third column (MUP=2/with
Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of "residential" plus one other use
category. The fourth column (MUP=3/no Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of
three or more use categories, none of which is "residential." The fifth column
(MUP=3/with Res) is the FAR for an MUP with a mix of "residential" plus two or
more other use categories.]
 
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO
Use Categories    Base     MUP=2    MUP=2 (with Res) MUP=3    MUP=3 (with Res)
                  (no MUP) (no Res)                  (no Res)
Lodging           3.2      3.4      3.6              3.6      3.8
Office            3.2      3.4      3.6              3.6      3.8
Residential       3.2      --       3.8              --       3.8
Retail and        2.0      2.6      3.0              3.2      3.75
personal service
TOTAL DEVELOPMENT 3.2      3.6      4.0              4.0      4.5
 
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 270 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is 20. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
         (I)   Development bonuses for mixed-income housing. In an MU-
3 district, certain regulations vary depending on whether a development bonus
is obtained in accordance with Division
51A-4.1100 as follows:
            (i)   Maximum floor area bonuses and lot coverage. Except as
provided in this paragraph, the following floor area bonuses and lot coverage
requirements apply:
 Set aside minimums (% of
 total residential units  Floor Area Ratio: 51A-4.125 Maximum Lot coverage
 reserved in each income  (f)(4)(D ), plus:           (residential)
 band, adjusted annually)
                  Set aside minimums
                  (% of total         Floor Area Ratio:
                  residential units   51A-4.125(f)(4)(D ), Maximum Lot coverage
                  reserved in each    plus:                (residential)
                  income band,
                  adjusted annually)
MVA Categories A, 5% at Income band   1.0                  80%
B, C              3;
                  5% at Income band
                  3; and              2.0                  85%
                  5% at Income band 2
                  5% at Income band
                  3;
                  5% at Income band   3.0                  85%
                  2; and
                  5% at Income band 1
MVA Categories D, 5% at Income band   1.0                  80%
E, F              2;
                  10% at Income band  2.0                  85%
                  2
                  10% at Income band
                  2; and              3.0                  85%
                  5% at Income band 1
MVA Categories G, 5% at Income band 1 3.0                  85%
H, I
 
            (ii)    Residential proximity slope. In addition to the items
listed in Section
51A-4.408 (a)(2)(A), the following additional items may project through the
residential proximity slope to a height not to exceed the maximum structure
height, or four feet above the slope, whichever is less:
               
               (aa)    railings;
               (bb)    parapet walls;
               (cc)    trellises; and
               (dd)    structures such as wind barriers, wing walls, and patio
dividing walls.
            (iii)   Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio bonuses in this
paragraph are limited to residential uses only.
            (iv)    Developments with transit proximity. For developments with
transit proximity as defined in Section
51A-4.1102, the maximum floor area ratio is increased by 1.0 above the FAR
allowed in this section (for example: if the allowed FAR for a mixed use
project is 4.0 and a development bonus of 1.5 is utilized, this transit
proximity bonus allows an FAR of 6.5) and the maximum lot coverage is 90
percent.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope which originates in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412 .) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19806; 19808; 19912; 19931; 20237; 20242; 20273;
20380; 20382; 20625; 20895; 20902; 20920; 20928; 20950; 21002; 21044; 21259;
21314; 21399; 21400; 21442; 21663; 21735; 21796; 22139; 22204; 22531; 22782;
24232; 24271; 24543; 24857; 25785; 25815; 26920; 27572; 28079; 28214; 30477;
31152; 32209; 32482; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.126.   MULTIPLE COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   In general. Single or multiple uses may be developed on one site in a
multiple commercial district as in any other district; however, in order to
encourage a mixture of uses, density bonuses are awarded to developments that
qualify as “multiple commercial projects” as defined in Subsection (b). If a
development does not qualify as an MCP, it is limited to a “base” floor area
ratio. When a development qualifies as an MCP, it earns a higher maximum floor
area ratio. For more information regarding the exact increments of increase,
consult the yard, lot, and space regulations in this section governing the
particular district of interest.
   (b)   Qualifying as a multiple commercial project. To qualify as a MULTIPLE
COMMERCIAL PROJECT (MCP) for purposes of this section, a development must
contain uses in two or more of the following categories, and the combined floor
areas of the uses in each category must equal or exceed the following
percentages of the total floor area of the project:
 
MC-1 AND MC-2 DISTRICTS
Use Category             % of Total Floor Area
Lodging                     15%
Office                      15%
Retail and personal service 10%
 
 
MC-3 AND MC-4 DISTRICTS
Use Category             % of Total Floor Area
Lodging                     10%
Office                      15%
Retail and personal service 5%
 
   (c)   Multiple commercial project (MCP) regulations.
      (1)   If an MCP is proposed, a project plan must be submitted to and
approved by the building official.
      (2)   If an MCP is constructed in phases:
         (A)   the first phase must independently qualify as an MCP under
Subsection (b); and
         (B)   each subsequent phase combined with all previous phases already
completed or under construction must also qualify as an MCP under Subsection
(b).
      (3)   An MCP may consist of two or more building sites if they are
developed under a unified development plan. The plan must be:
         (A)   signed by or on behalf of all of the owners of the property
involved;
         (B)   approved by the building official; and
         (C)   filed in the deed records of the county where the property is
located.
      (4)   When an MCP consists of multiple building sites, its development
standards and off-street parking regulations are calculated by combining the
sites and treating them as a single building site.
   (d)   MC-1 district.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development of moderate density
lodging, office, and retail uses in or adjacent to a residential community
where development options need to remain flexible, and where a moderate density
mixed use development having a residential component could adversely impact the
community.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Catering service.
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory. [SUP]
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR] or [SUP] [See Section
51A-4.205(1).]
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory or fraternity or sorority house.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs. [RAR]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside). [SUP]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Convenience store with drive-through. [SUP]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
[SUP]
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Personal service use.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Mini-warehouse. [SUP]
            --   Recycling buy-back center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. Generally speaking, an accessory use is permitted
in any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   The following accessory use is permitted by SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure above 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
               (bb)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure above 45 feet in height, up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. Not applicable.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) varies
depending on whether the development is a “multiple commercial project” as
follows:
[Note: The first column is the base FAR, which applies when there is no MCP.
The second column is the FAR for an MCP with a mix of two use categories. The
third column is the FAR for an MCP with a mix of three or more use categories.]
 
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO
Use Categories              Base (No MCP) MCP with Mix of 2 MCP with Mix of 3
                                          Categories        Categories
Lodging                     0.8           0.85              0.85
Office                      0.8           0.85              0.85
Retail and personal service 0.3           0.4               0.5
TOTAL DEVELOPMENT           0.8           0.9               1.0
 
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 70 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is five. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803  before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 1,000 trips per day or 100 trips per hour as calculated in
the trip generation worksheet approved by the director.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope which originates in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
   (e)   MC-2 district.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development of moderate density
lodging, office, and retail uses adjacent to a residential community where
development options need to remain flexible, and where a moderate density mixed
use development having a residential component could adversely impact the
community.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Catering service.
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory. [SUP]
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR] or [SUP] [See Section
51A-4.205(1).]
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory or fraternity or sorority house.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs. [RAR]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [RAR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside). [SUP]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Convenience store with drive-through. [SUP]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
[SUP]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquor store.
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Personal service use.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Railroad passenger station. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Mini-warehouse. [SUP]
            --   Recycling buy-back center [See Section
51A-4.213 (11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. Generally speaking, an accessory use is permitted
in any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in this district:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Home occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   The following accessory use is permitted by SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In this district, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure above 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
               (bb)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure above 45 feet in height up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. Not applicable.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) varies
depending on whether the development is a “multiple commercial project” as
follows:
[Note: The first column is the base FAR, which applies when there is no MCP.
The second column is the FAR for an MCP with a mix of two use categories. The
third column is the FAR for an MCP with a mix of three or more use categories.]
 
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO
Use Categories              Base (No MCP) MCP with Mix of 2 MCP with Mix of 3
                                          Categories        Categories
Lodging                     0.8           0.85              0.85
Office                      0.8           0.85              0.85
Retail and personal service 0.5           0.5               0.5
TOTAL DEVELOPMENT           0.8           0.9               1.0
 
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is 90 feet.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories. Maximum number of stories above grade is seven. Parking
garages are exempt from this requirement, but must comply with the height
regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope which originates in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412.) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
   (f)   MC-3 and MC-4 districts.
      (1)   Purpose. To provide for the development of medium density lodging,
office, and retail uses in areas where a medium density mixed use development
having a residential component could adversely impact a residential community.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Catering service.
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Labor hall. [SUP]
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
            --   Tool or equipment rental.
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum. [SUP]
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open-enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school.
[RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Extended stay hotel or motel. [SUP]
            --   Hotel or motel. [RAR] or [SUP] [See Section
51A-4.205(1).]
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter. [See Section
51A-4.205(2.1).]
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Attached non-premise sign. [SUP]
            --   Carnival or circus (temporary). [By special authorization of
the building official.]
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Financial institution with drive-in window. [DIR]
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Country club with private membership.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory or fraternity or sorority house.
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Ambulance service. [RAR]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs. [RAR]
            --   Auto service center. [RAR]
            --   Business school.
            --   Car wash. [RAR]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [SUP may be required. See
Section
51A-4.210(b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial amusement (outside). [SUP]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage. [RAR]
            --   Convenience store with drive-through. [SUP]
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
            --   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
[SUP]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Liquor store.
            --   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
            --   Motor vehicle fueling station.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Personal service use.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service. [RAR]
            --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service. [DIR]
            --   Swap or buy shop. [SUP]
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater.
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Heliport. [SUP]
            --   Helistop. [SUP]
            --   Railroad passenger station. [SUP]
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
            --   Transit passenger station or transfer center. [By SUP or city
council resolution. See Section
51A-4.211.]
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
            --   Electrical substation.
            --   Local utilities. [SUP or RAR may be required. See Section
51A-4.212(4).]
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Radio, television, or microwave tower. [SUP]
            --   Tower/antenna for cellular communication. [See Section
51A-4.212(10.1).]
            --   Utility or government installation other than listed. [SUP]
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Mini-warehouse. [SUP]
            --   Recycling buy-back center [See Section
51A-4.213 (11).]
            --   Recycling collection center. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.1).]
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213 (11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213 (11.3).]
            --   In MC-4 only: Trade center.
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in these
districts:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Home Occupation.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   The following accessory use is permitted by SUP only:
            --   Accessory helistop.
         (C)   In these districts, an SUP may be required for the following
accessory uses:
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator. [See Section
51A-4.217 (3.1).]
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, Division
51A-4.400 controls.)
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   Minimum front yard is 15 feet.
            (ii)   Urban form setback. An additional 20-foot front yard setback
is required for that portion of a structure above 45 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   Minimum side and rear yard is:
               (aa)   20 feet where adjacent to or directly across an alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, or MF(A) district; and
               (bb)   no minimum in all other cases.
            (ii)   Tower spacing. An additional side and rear yard setback of
one foot for each two feet in height above 45 feet is required for that portion
of a structure above 45 feet in height up to a total setback of 30 feet. This
subparagraph does not require a total side or rear yard setback greater than 30
feet.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density. Not applicable.
         (D)   Floor area ratio. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) varies
depending on whether the development is a “multiple commercial project” as
follows:
[Note: The first column is the base FAR, which applies when there is no MCP.
The second column is the FAR for an MCP with a mix of two use categories. The
third column is the FAR for an MCP with a mix of three or more use categories.]
 
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO IN THE MC-3 DISTRICT
Use Categories              Base (No MCP) MCP with Mix of 2 MCP with Mix of 3
                                          Categories        Categories
Lodging                     1.2           1.3               1.3
Office                      1.2           1.3               1.3
Retail and personal service 0.6           0.6               0.6
TOTAL DEVELOPMENT           1.2           1.35              1.5
 
 
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO IN THE MC-4 DISTRICT
Use Categories              Base (No MCP) MCP with Mix of 2 MCP with Mix of 3
                                          Categories        Categories
Lodging                     1.6           1.7               1.7
Office                      1.6           1.7               1.7
Retail and personal service 0.75          0.75              0.75
TOTAL DEVELOPMENT           1.6           1.8               2.0
 
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure is
over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
            (ii)   Maximum height. Unless further restricted under Subparagraph
(i), maximum structure height is:
               (aa)   115 feet in the MC-3 district; and
               (bb)   135 feet in the MC-4 district.
         (F)   Lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Aboveground
parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface parking
lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories.
            (i)   Maximum number of stories above grade is:
               (aa)   9 in the MC-3 district; and
               (bb)   10 in the MC-4 district.
            (ii)   Parking garages are exempt from this requirement, but must
comply with the height regulations of Subparagraph (E).
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape regulations. See
Article X.
      (8)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Development impact review. A site plan must be submitted and
approved in accordance with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 before an application is made for a permit for work in this district
if the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot collectively is equal
to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per acre per day. See
Table 1 in Section
51A-4.803 to calculate estimated trip generation.
         (B)   Visual intrusion. No portion of any balcony or opening that
faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF- 2
(A), or MF-2(SAH) district may penetrate or be located above a residential
proximity slope which originates in that district. (See Section
51A-4.412 .) For purposes of this paragraph, the term “opening” means an open
and unobstructed space or a transparent panel in an exterior wall or door from
which there can be visual surveillance into the yard of a residential use.
(Ord. Nos. 19786; 19806; 19808; 19873; 20242; 20273; 20380; 20382; 20625;
20895; 20902; 20920; 20950; 21002; 21044; 21259; 21314; 21399; 21400; 21442;
21663; 21735; 21796; 22204; 22531; 22782; 24232; 24271; 24543; 24857; 25785;
25815; 26920; 28079; 28214; 32209; 32482; 32659; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.127.   URBAN CORRIDOR DISTRICTS.
   (a)   In general. A minimum of two land uses must be developed on a lot in
an urban corridor district, with one use being residential use above street
level. Density bonuses are awarded to lots that have parking structures. There
are three types of urban corridor districts, differing principally in their
density and height allowances: UC-1, UC-2, and UC-3. The urban corridor
district regulations apply to all frontages of the lot, except where otherwise
specified.
   (b)   Qualifying a segment of a street as an urban corridor.
      (1)   Urban corridor requirements. A segment of street must have all of
the following characteristics to be an urban corridor:
         (A)   A minimum outside lane width of 10 feet.
         (B)   A road composition that supports buses.
         (C)   No speed bumps.
         (D)   A minimum turning radius of 50 feet.
         (E)   A minimum overhead clearance of 11 feet.
      (2)   Community collectors and arterial streets. An urban corridor
segment of street must be built in accordance with the city's thoroughfare
plan, and must be the following type of thoroughfare for each urban corridor
district:
         (A)   UC-1: community collector or four-or six-lane arterial.
         (B)   UC-2: four-or six-lane arterial.
         (C)   UC-3: six-lane arterial.
      (3)   State highways. A UC-1, UC-2, or UCÐ3 district may exist along a
segment of a state highway designated by the Texas Department of Transportation
if the segment has all of the characteristics required for an urban corridor,
and the department determines the frontage to be safe (based on vehicular
traffic speed and volume) for the level of pedestrian traffic expected for the
type of urban corridor district requested.
      (4)   Ineligible streets. Interstate highways, freeways, expressways, and
their frontage roads are ineligible streets for urban corridors.
   (c)   UC districts.
      (1)   Purpose. To encourage medium density mixed use development with a
required above-grade residential component, pedestrian-friendly site design,
and an urban street character, in order to increase pedestrian traffic, reduce
vehicular traffic, promote innovative use of space, promote energy efficient
design, conserve land, and accommodate a range of compatible land uses through
appropriate site design.
      (2)   Main uses permitted.
         (A)   Agricultural uses.
            --   Crop production.
         (B)   Commercial and business service uses.
            --   Catering service.
            --   Custom business services.
            --   Electronics service center.
            --   Job or lithographic printing.
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory. [SUP]
         (C)   Industrial uses.
            --   Gas drilling and production. [SUP]
            --   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant. [SUP] 
         (D)   Institutional and community service uses.
            --   Child or adult care facility.
            --   Church.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center. [SUP]
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions.
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Hospital. [SUP]
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Open enrollment charter school or private school. [SUP]
            --   Public school other than open enrollment charter school. [RAR]
         (E)   Lodging uses.
            --   Short-term rental lodging.
         (F)   Miscellaneous uses.
            --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (G)   Office uses.
            --   Alternative financial establishment. [SUP in UC-2 and UC-
3 only.]
            --   Financial institution without drive-in window.
            --   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Office.
         (H)   Recreation uses.
            --   Private recreation center, club, or area. [UC-2 and UC-
3 only.]
            --   Public park, playground, or golf course. [DIR]
         (I)   Residential uses.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house. [SUP]
            --   Group residential facility. [SUP]
            --   Handicapped group dwelling unit. [SUP]
            --   Multifamily.
            --   Retirement housing. [SUP]
         (J)   Retail and personal service uses.
            --   Alcoholic beverage establishments. [See Section
51A-4.210(b)(4).]
            --   Animal shelter or clinic without outside runs.
            --   Business school. [UC-2 and UC-3 only.]
            --   Commercial amusement (inside). [UC-2 and UC-3 only. SUP may be
required. See Section
51A-4.210 (b)(7)(B).]
            --   Commercial parking lot or garage.
            --   Dry cleaning or laundry store without drive-in or drive-
through service.
            --   Furniture store.
            --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
            --   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet [UC-2 and UC-3 only.]
            --General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
[SUP]
            --   Household equipment and appliance repair.
            --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
            --   Personal service uses.
            --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service.
            --   Temporary retail use.
            --   Theater [DIR required. This use is limited to a theater with
less than 1,000 seats. See Section
51A-4.210(b)(30).]
         (K)   Transportation uses.
            --   Transit passenger shelter.
         (L)   Utility and public service uses.
            --   Local utilities.
            --   Police or fire station.
            --   Post office.
            --   Mounted cellular antenna. [UC-3 only.]
            --   Utility or other government installation other than listed.
         (M)   Wholesale, distribution, and storage uses.
            --   Recycling drop-off container. [See Section
51A-4.213(11.2).]
            --   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection. [See
Section
51A-4.213(11.3).]
      (3)   Accessory uses. As a general rule, an accessory use is permitted in
any district in which the main use is permitted. Some specific types of
accessory uses, however, due to their unique nature, are subject to additional
regulations contained in Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding accessory uses, consult Section
51A-4.217.
         (A)   The following accessory uses are not permitted in these
districts:
            --   Accessory helistop.
            --   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
            --   Accessory outside storage.
            --   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
            --   Amateur communication tower.
            --   Day home.
            --   General waste incinerator.
            --   Private stable.
         (B)   The following accessory uses are permitted in these districts by
SUP only:
            --   Accessory community center (private).
            --   Pedestrian skybridges.
      (4)   Yard, lot, and space regulations. (Note: The yard, lot, and space
regulations in this subsection must be read together with the yard, lot, and
space regulations contained in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and Division
51A-4.400, this subsection controls.)
         (A)   Front yard.
            (i)   There is no minimum front yard.
            (ii)   The maximum front yard is the smallest possible distance
that meets the requirements for buffer zone and pedestrian zone in the curb-to-
building area, except for any area in the front yard that meets the
qualifications for a pedestrian plaza in Subparagraph (iii) below. See
Subsection (c)(8)(B) for details about the curb-to-building area.
            (iii)   Part of the front yard may be used for a pedestrian plaza.
A plaza may have a maximum depth of 50 feet (measured perpendicular from the
frontage to the opposite side of the plaza) and a maximum length (measured
along the side of the plaza parallel to the frontage) of 20 percent of the
length of the building along the frontage.
            (iv)   Urban form setback. An additional front yard setback of one
foot for each two feet in height above 55 feet is required for that portion of
a building above 55 feet in height.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   No side yard is required on a side of the lot that is
adjacent to a central area, mixed use, or urban corridor district; however, if
a side yard is provided, it must be at least five feet wide.
            (ii)   The minimum side yard is 10 feet on any side of a lot where
that side of the lot is directly across a street 64 feet or less in width from,
or is directly across an alley from, an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH
district, or where part of a structure on that side of the lot is within 330
feet of an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district.
            (iii)   The minimum side yard is five feet in all other cases.
            (iv)   The minimum rear yard is 10 feet in UC-1, and 15 feet in UC-
2 and UC-3.
         (C)   Dwelling unit density.
            (i)   The minimum number of dwelling units per acre is 10 in UC-1;
35 in UC-2; and 45 in UC-3.
            (ii)   The minimum dwelling unit area is 500 square feet.
         (D)   Floor area ratio.
            (i)   The maximum floor area ratio without any bonuses is 0.6 in
UC-1; 0.85 in UC-2; and 1.0 in UC-3.
            (ii)   The maximum floor area ratio with a bonus for having an
above-grade parking structure is 1.8 in UC-1; 3.0 in UC-2; and 4.0 in UC-3.
            (iii)   The maximum floor area ratio with a bonus for having a
below-grade parking structure is 2.0 in UC-1; 3.6 in UC-2; and 4.5 in UC-3.
         (E)   Height.
            (i)   The maximum structure height without any bonuses is 30 feet
in UC-1; 40 feet in UC-2; and 55 feet in UC-3.
            (ii)   The maximum structure height with a bonus for having an
above-or below-grade parking structure is 55 feet in UC-1; 80 feet in UC-2; and
100 feet in UC-3.
            (iii)   Residential proximity slope. If any portion of a structure
is over 26 feet in height, that portion may not be located above a residential
proximity slope. Exception: Except for chimneys, structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
Chimneys may project through the slope to a height 12 feet above the slope and
12 feet above the maximum structure height.
         (F)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage is 80 percent. Above-
ground parking structures are included in lot coverage calculations; surface
parking lots and underground parking structures are not.
         (G)   Lot size. There is no minimum lot size.
         (H)   Stories.
            (i)   The minimum number of stories above street level is two in
UC-1; three in UC-2; and four in UC-3.
            (ii)   The maximum number of stories above street level with
bonuses for an above-or below-street-level parking structure is four in UC-1;
six in UC-2; and eight in UC-3.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading. Consult the use regulations
(Division
51A-4.200 ) for the specific off-street parking requirements for each use.
Consult the off-street parking and loading regulations (Divisions
51A-4.300  et seq.) for information regarding off-street parking and loading
generally.
      (6)   Environmental performance standards. See
Article VI.
      (7)   Landscape and open space provisions.
         (A)   In general. See
Article X. Section
51A-10.126 does not apply, and Subsections (b)(2) and (b)(4) of Section
51A-10.125 are superseded by this subsection. All private licensing
requirements must be met.
         (B)   Parking lot screening. Except as otherwise provided, all
requirements of Section
51A-4.301(f) apply to parking lots and parking structures in urban corridor
districts, and to remote parking lots and parking structures serving a building
in an urban corridor district. A five-foot-wide landscaped strip must be
located along any edge of the parking lot or parking structure that is visible
at grade level from a street or alley, in accordance with the following
provisions:
            (i)   Small trees must be located every 15 feet, or fraction
thereof, or clustered every 30 feet, within the landscaped strip. A small tree
must have a minimum caliper width of three inches, with the exception of multi-
trunk trees, which may have a minimum caliper width of two inches per trunk.
            (ii)   A continuous row of large evergreen shrubs must be located
in the landscaped strip.
            (iii)   For every four rows of parking, parking lots must contain
at least one interior landscaped strip of at least 15 linear feet that is
planted with ground cover, shrubbery of 24-36 inches in height, and at least
one large tree.
            (iv)   Fences may complement but not substitute for parking lot
trees and shrubbery screening.
            (v)   Covered parking may substitute for trees and shrubbery in the
interior of the parking area, but not for those required along its perimeter.
Covered parking may not replace shrubbery or substitute for trees that provide
buffering between parking lots or parking structures and the street.
         (C)   Screening of off-street loading spaces.
            (i)   All off-street loading spaces must be screened from all
public streets adjacent to the lot.
            (ii)   Screening of all off-street loading spaces must be at least
six feet high.
            (iii)   Garbage storage areas must be visually screened on all
sides by a brick, stone, or concrete masonry, stucco, concrete, or wood wall or
fence. Screening is not required on a side adjacent to an alley or easement
used for garbage pick-up service. Trellises or other coverings must be used to
screen the top of garbage storage areas.
         (D)   Street trees. A small street tree must be provided for every 50
feet of frontage, with a minimum of two trees per lot. A small tree must have a
minimum caliper width of three inches, with the exception of multi-trunk trees
which may have a minimum caliper width of two inches per trunk. Street trees
must be located in the buffer zone between the street curb and the sidewalk. If
the buffer zone is located in the public right-of-way, street trees must be
located in the public right-of way. The city arborist recommends the following
list of trees as being most suitable for planting in the buffer zone in all
urban corridor districts, and the city strongly encourages the use of these
trees in the buffer zone:
            (i)   Japanese Maple, Acer palmatum.
            (ii)   Eastern Redbud, Cercis canadensis.
            (iii)   Thornless Cockspur Hawthorne, Crataegus crus-galli
Ôinermis.'
            (iv)   Thornless Honeylocust, Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis.
            (v)   Possumhaw Holly, Ilex decidua.
            (vi)   Yaupon Holly, Ilex vomitoria.
            (vii)   Eastern Red Cedar, Juniperus virginia.
            (viii)   Eldarica, Mondell, or Afghan Pine, Pinus eldarica.
            (ix)   Austrian or Black Pine, Pinus nigra.
            (x)   Japanese Black Pine, Pinus thunbergii.
            (xi)   Chinese Pistachio, Pistachia chinensis.
            (xii)   Mexican Plum, Prunus mexicana.
            (xiii)   Western Soapberry, Sapindus drumondii.
            (xiv)   Eve's Necklace, Sophora affinis.
            (xv)   Rusty Blackhaw, Vibernum rufidulum.
         (E)   Tree grates. Any tree within 18 inches of a curb must be
protected by a tree grate.
         (F)   Permeable surface area. A minimum of 10 percent of the lot area
must be open space in the form of permeable surfaces such as perimeter
landscape buffer strip, recreation area, or conservation area. Discrete open
space areas smaller than 25 square feet or less than 5 feet wide, and
landscaping in the public right-of-way, are not counted towards this 10 percent
requirement.
      (8)   Site design requirements.
         (A)   Land use placement.
            (i)   Off-street parking. Parking is permitted on any level of a
building, but no part of any parking area or parking structure may front on an
urban corridor or be located directly across a street 64 feet or less in width
from, or be directly across an alley from, an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or
CH district, or be within 330 feet of an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH
district. The length of any portion of a parking lot or structure that is
visible at grade-level from a street may not exceed 24 feet.
            (ii)   Street level uses. Residential uses are not permitted at
street-level along an urban corridor frontage.
            (iii)   Residential uses are the only uses permitted at street
level along frontages that are not on an urban corridor and:
               (aa)   the frontage is directly across a street 64 feet or less
in width from, or is directly across an alley from, an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH
(A), or CH district; or
               (bb)   any part of a structure on that frontage is within 330
feet of an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district.
            (iv)   Uses above street level. Residential uses are the only uses
permitted on all levels above street level, except that adult daycare uses,
child-care facility uses, and office uses that are accessory to street-level
uses in the building are permitted on the second level of a building that has
three or more levels.
         (B)   Curb-to-building area. The area between the curb and the
building line must meet the following standards:
            (i)   It must have a width of 10 feet in a UC-1 district; 12 feet
in a UC-2 district; and 15 feet in a UC-3 district.
            (ii)   Where public right-of-way provides insufficient space, the
curb-to-building area must be provided on private property until the prescribed
width is met.
            (iii)   It must include a buffer zone, located between the curb and
the pedestrian zone, that contains all required street trees [see Subsection
(c)(7)(D)] as well as trees and shrubs provided as pedestrian amenities [see
Subsection (c)(8)(E)]. Other pedestrian amenities may also be located in the
buffer zone.
            (iv)   It must include a pedestrian zone, located between the
buffer zone and the building line, that contains a sidewalk that meets urban
corridor district sidewalk standards. [See Subsection (c)(8)(C).] The
pedestrian zone may contain pedestrian amenities that are attached to the
building facade and do not impede pedestrian movement or visually obstruct the
street-level windows. [See Subsection (c)(8)(F)(iii).]
            (v)   A pedestrian plaza located on a frontage is considered to
begin at the building line for purposes of this Subparagraph (B).
         (C)   Sidewalk standards. Sidewalks must be located in the pedestrian
zone for the entire length of the frontage, and must meet the following
standards:
            (i)   In a UC-1 district, they must have a minimum clear zone of
five feet.
            (ii)   In a UC-2 district, they must have a minimum clear zone of
seven feet.
            (iii)   In a UC-3 district, they must have a minimum clear zone of
10 feet.
            (iv)   Sidewalk widths must match up with the width of existing
sidewalks in front of adjacent properties at the point of intersection. Where
there are different sidewalk widths on each side of the urban corridor district
frontage, the width matched must be that which most closely approximates the
required 5- to 10-foot width, and the new sidewalk must taper to meet the
incongruous sidewalks.
            (v)   Additional pedestrian pathways that are not in the pedestrian
zone must have a minimum width of four feet.
         (D)   Pedestrian amenities.
            (i)   At least three of the following types of pedestrian amenities
must be provided within the curb-to-building area of the lot:
               (aa)   Awnings/canopies with a minimum overhang of 4 feet and a
minimum length of 25 feet per 100 feet of building facade along the frontage;
or a combination of street trees and evergreen shrubs with a minimum of one
small tree per 25 feet of frontage and a minimum of one shrub per 5 feet of
frontage.
               (bb)   Benches at one per 100 feet of frontage, with a minimum
of two per lot.
               (cc)   Trash receptacles at one per 100 feet of frontage, with a
minimum of two per lot.
               (dd)   Bicycle parking at one 5- bicycle unit per 100 feet of
frontage, with a minimum of two per lot.
               (ee)   Pedestrian street lamps (free-standing or wall-mounted)
at one per 50 feet of frontage.
               (ff)   Enhanced sidewalk with stamped concrete or brick pavers
in the pedestrian zone for the full width of the sidewalk, along the entire
frontage.
               (gg)   Public art or water features costing no less than $2,500,
at one per lot.
               (hh)   Drinking fountains at one per lot.
            (ii)   Amenities must be placed far enough from the street curb so
as not to create a physical barrier to buses.
            (iii)   Canopies, awnings, and pedestrian street lamp fixtures must
have a minimum nine-foot clearance. Lamp fixtures may not exceed 14 feet in
height. Light fixtures may not emit light upward into the windows of dwelling
units.
            (iv)   All pedestrian amenities must be maintained by the owner of
the lot; if there is more than one owner, all owners are jointly and severally
liable for maintenance.
         (E)   Driveway design requirements.
            (i)   Pedestrian crosswalks must be clearly marked to indicate
where the crosswalk crosses the driveway.
            (ii)   Common or joint driveways are required when adjacent lots
have direct vehicular access.
            (iii)   Curb cuts must be no less than 12 and no more than 24 feet
in length (measured parallel to the frontage). Each lot may have a maximum of
one curb cut for each frontage.
            (iv)   Driveways into parking areas or structures must be from an
urban corridor.
            (v)   No part of a circular or semi-circular driveway is permitted
on an urban corridor.
         (F)   Building envelope design requirements.
            (i)   Building facades. Building facades must be as close as
possible to the pedestrian zone. Columns of an arcade must be on the building
line, and the internal facade of an arcade must be set back from the building
line no more than 10 feet. Parking deck and garage facades visible at ground
level from any street or alley must have the appearance of a multiple-story
building. It is recommended that parking deck and garage facades visible at
ground level from any street or alley have the appearance of similar material
finish as the building on the site for which the parking is being provided.
            (ii)   Building height and setback. Building height and setback is
subject to both residential proximity slope and urban form setback
requirements. In all instances, residential proximity slope requirements
supersede all other height allowances.
            (iii)   Storefront treatments. The following provisions apply to
all uses at ground level except church use and residential uses.
               (aa)   All street-fronting street- level portions of a building
must have windows and primary entrances facing the street or a plaza. No more
than 10 continuous linear feet of street-fronting street- level facade may lack
a transparent opening (e.g. a window or a transparent door).
               (bb)   Corner lot structures must have corner entrances in
compliance with the visibility triangle standards set by the department of
development services.
               (cc)   Street-fronting, street- level windows must:
                  (I)   cover 50 percent or more of street-level frontage;
                  (II)   not have a bottom edge higher than three feet above
the base of building; and
                  (III)   be less than 10 feet high.
               (dd)   It is recommended that street-fronting, street-level
windows be clear, unpainted, or made of similarly treated glass allowing
visibility within street-level uses.
            (iv)   Pedestrian access to the building. Primary pedestrian (i.e.
residential and customer) ingress and egress must be to or from an urban
corridor. Pedestrian ingress and egress for all other functions must be to or
from rear or side yard entrances. Pedestrian pathways must be provided to
connect the pedestrian zone to the parking lot, rear entrances to dwellings,
and to emergency exits.
   (d)   Site plan.
      (1)   A site plan must be submitted in accordance with the requirements
of this subsection before an application is made for a permit for work on a lot
in an urban corridor district.
      (2)   Procedure. The applicant should contact the department to arrange a
pre-application conference, at which the applicant should provide a sketch plan
of the site with the information requested by the department. When the
applicant is ready to apply for site plan review, the applicant must provide a
detailed site plan.
      (3)   The site plan must:
         (A)   satisfy the requirements of Subparagraphs (A) through (G), (J),
and (N) through (Q) in Section
51A-4.803(d)(1);
         (B)   show all existing and proposed points of ingress and egress,
building entrances, exits, service areas, and windows;
         (C)   show all public right-of-way lines;
         (D)   show the location and indicate the type, size, and height of
perimeter fencing, screening, and buffering elements proposed or required;
         (E)   show all provisions to be made to direct and detain storm water
and to mitigate erosion both during and following the completion of
construction;
         (F)   show the location and indicate the type, orientation, size, and
height of light standards that will illuminate any portion of a required yard;
         (G)   show the location of existing and proposed signs;
         (H)   show the existing and proposed locations of all exterior
loudspeakers and sound amplifiers;
         (I)   show the existing and proposed locations for all mechanical
equipment capable of producing high levels of noise;
         (J)   show all existing and proposed provisions for pedestrian
circulation on the lot including the location of the pedestrian amenity zones
and the location and description of amenities provided to satisfy the three-
amenity rule and the requirements for parking reductions;
         (K)   demonstrate how the urban corridor district site meets the
minimum open space requirements showing location and landscape plans of all
open space including buffer zones and screening areas;
         (L)   demonstrate eligibility for parking requirement reduction or
density bonuses, if requested by applicant; and
         (M)   any other reasonable and pertinent information that the director
determines to be necessary for site plan review. (Ord. Nos. 24718; 25785;
26920; 28125; 28214; 28424; 28700; 31607; 32002; 32209; 32482; 32659; 33112)
[To view charts, click on the link below. Adobe Acrobat Reader is required to
view charts.
[Cover_Page]
[Chart_4.201]
[Chart_4.202]
[Chart_4.203]
[Chart_4.204]
[Charts_4.205_and_4.206]
[Charts_4.207_and_4.208]
[Chart_4.209]
[Chart_4.210]
[Chart_4.211]
[Chart_4.212]
[Chart_4.213]
[Chart_4.217]
Division 51A-4.200. Use Regulations.
SEC. 51A-4.201.   AGRICULTURAL USES.
      (1)   Animal production.
         (A)   Definition: An area which is used for the raising of animals
(including fish) and the development of animal products on a commercial basis.
Typical uses include beef or sheep ranching, dairy farming, piggeries, poultry
farming, and fish farming.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in the A(A) district. By SUP only
in non-residential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In an A(A) district, a person shall not operate this use upon
an area less than three acres. In non-residential districts, no minimum acreage
is required.
            (ii)   Animals include but are not limited to pigs, chickens,
turkeys, cows, sheep, goats, and horses.
            (iii)   Structures may be erected for a private stable, pen, barn,
shed, or silo for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the
premises. A dwelling unit is permitted either as part of this structure or as a
separate structure.
            (iv)   Standings under roofed stables must be made of a material
that provides for proper drainage so as not to create offensive odors, fly
breeding, or other nuisances.
            (v)   The keeping of horses is subject to the requirements under
the private stable accessory use.
            (vi)   Fences for pens, corrals, or similar enclosures for
livestock must be of sufficient height and strength to retain the animals. No
pen, corral, fence or similar enclosure may be closer than 20
feet to an adjacent property line. The widths of alleys, street rights-of-way,
or other public rights-of-way may be used to calculate the 20 foot requirement.
            (vii) The regulations under this use do not apply to government
agencies, governmentally supported organizations, or educational agencies that
keep and maintain animals for health research or similar purposes, nor do these
regulations apply to special events such as circuses and livestock exhibitions
which are otherwise regulated by the city.
      (2)   Commercial stable.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the business of boarding horses or
renting horses to the public.
         (B)   Districts permitted: A(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use does not include sales, auction, or similar trading
activity.
      (3)   Crop production.
         (A)   Definitions. In this paragraph:
            (i)   AQUACULTURE means the cultivation, maintenance, and
harvesting of aquatic species.
            (ii)   AQUAPONICS means the combination of aquaculture (fish) and
hydroponics (plants) to grow food crops or ornamental crops and aquatic species
together in a recirculating system without discharge or exchange of water.
            (iii)   BED COVER means a hoop-house, shade structure, or similar
structure located above a planting bed to assist with the growing or shading of
food crops or ornamental crops.
            (iv)   COMMUNITY GARDEN means an URBAN GARDEN as that use is
defined in this subparagraph. Except in those Chapter 51P articles where
community garden is specifically defined, any reference to community garden in
Chapter 51P is a reference to an urban garden in this subparagraph.
            (v)   FARM OR RANCH means an area which is used for growing farm
products or keeping farm poultry and farm livestock.
            (vi)   URBAN GARDEN means an area managed and maintained to grow
and harvest food crops and/or ornamental crops for personal or group use,
consumption, sale, or donation. Urban gardens may be divided into separate
plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively
by members of the group and may include common areas maintained and used by
group members.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in all districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions for urban gardens:
            (i)   An urban garden must comply with the regulations for the
zoning district in which the urban garden is located.
            (ii)   Aquaponics, aquaculture, and the raising of chickens are
permitted. All other animal grazing and animal production are prohibited.
            (iii)   For an urban garden in a residential district, the combined
floor area of structures may not exceed 10 percent of the lot, with no single
structure exceeding 200 square feet in floor area. Structures that assist in
the growing of vegetation, such as bed covers and raised planting beds, are not
included in floor area calculations. Structures must comply with yard, lot, and
space regulations for the district.
            (iv)   For an urban garden in a residential district, one single,
non-illuminated, flat sign of no more than six square feet must be provided.
The sign must contain the phone number of an emergency contact person for the
urban garden. If animals are present in the urban garden, the sign must also
contain the contact information for Dallas 311 city services. In residential
districts, no other signage is permitted.
            (v)   Each bed cover may only cover one planting bed.
            (vi)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, maximum height of a
bed cover is four feet from the growing surface or eight feet, measured from
grade, whichever is less. Within the required front yard, maximum height of a
bed cover is four feet, measured from grade.
            (vii)   The on-site sale of food crops, ornamental crops, and eggs
produced at the urban garden is allowed only in non-residential districts. No
other items may be sold.
         (F)   Additional provisions for farms:
            (i)   A person shall not operate a farm upon an area less than
three acres.
            (ii)   Structures may be erected for a private pen, barn, shed, or
silo for the treating, and storing of products raised on the premises. A
dwelling unit is permitted either as part of this structure or as a separate
structure.
            (iii)   Animal grazing is allowed as part of this use; however,
animal production, as defined in Section
51A-4.201(1), is not permitted.
      (4)   Private stable.
         (A)   Definition: An area for the keeping of a horse or horses for the
private use of the property owner or the owner of the horse(s).
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in all residential districts when
located on a lot that is at least one acre in size, otherwise by SUP in all
residential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A private stable is permitted only on a lot that has at least
15,000 square feet of land and a person may keep only the number of horses
permitted for the lot area as described in the following chart:
 
LOT AREA                                                NUMBER OF HORSES
At least 15,000 square feet but less than one-half acre 1
At least one-half acre but less than one acre           2
At least one acre but less than two acres               3
At least one-half acre per horse                        4 or more
 
            (ii)   A private stable must include a pen, corral, fence, or
similar enclosure containing at least 800 square feet of land for each animal
with a stable under a roof containing at least 100 square feet for each animal.
            (iii)   A stable must have proper drainage so as not to create
offensive odors, fly breeding, or other nuisances.
            (iv)   A pen, corral, fence, or similar enclosure may not be closer
than 20 feet to an adjacent property line. The widths of alleys, street rights-
of-way, or other public rights-of-way may be used in establishing the 20 foot
distance to the adjacent property line.
            (v)   A pen, corral, fence, or similar enclosure must be of a
sufficient height and strength to retain the horse(s). (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786;
20493; 21001; 23302; 24718; 28125; 29687; 30890; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.202.   COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS SERVICE USES.
      (1)   Building repair and maintenance shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility providing for general building repair and
maintenance, including the installation of plumbing, electrical, air
conditioning, and heating equipment.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, and
central area districts. RAR required in CR, RR, CS, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), none. One space per 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Retail sales of supplies is permitted as an accessory use.
      (2)   Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the maintenance, repair, or storage
of bus, rail, or other transit vehicles.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in industrial and central area
districts. When located at least 500 feet from a residential district, by right
in the CS district with RAR required; otherwise, by SUP only in the CS
district. RAR required in industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (3)   Catering service.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the preparation and storage of food
and food utensils for off-premise consumption and service.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central
area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts. By right as
a limited use only in LO(A), MO(A), and GO(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: One space per 200 square feet of
floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
50,000 to 100,000                           1 additional
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provision: Vehicles being displayed, sold, serviced,
or repaired must be parked on site.
      (4)   Commercial cleaning or laundry plant.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the cleaning or laundering of
garments, fabrics, rugs, draperies, or other similar items on a commercial or
bulk basis.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, industrial, and central
area districts. RAR required in CS and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   One space per 200 square feet of floor area when located in
an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in existence on May 14, 2025.
            (iii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area is required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
group dwelling use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (5)   Custom business services.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for providing custom services and
activities which are performed according to a personal order and require
individualized treatment of items. Typical custom business services include
etching, engraving, laminating, binding, or the assembly, repair, and sale of
such items as trophies, books, documents, window shades, and venetian blinds.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central
area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section 51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space
per 500 square feet of floor area only when contiguous to a property containing
a single-family or handicapped group dwelling use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (6)   Custom woodworking, furniture construction, or repair.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the custom making, repairing, or
refinishing of furniture or wood products on an individualized, single item
basis.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, industrial, and central
area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Specialized equipment for custom making, repairing, or
reupholstering furniture is permitted under this use.
      (7)   Electronics service center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the repair and service of computers
and computer equipment, stereo equipment, televisions, radios, and other such
electronic items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central
area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts. By right as
a limited use only in MO(A) and GO(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   One space per 300 square feet of floor area when located in
an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence on May 14, 2025.
            (iii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area is required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Retail sales of electronic items or parts is permitted as an
accessory use.
      (8)   Job or lithographic printing.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the commercial reproduction, cutting,
printing, or binding of written materials, drawings, or labels on a bulk basis
using lithography, offset printing, blueprinting, and similar methods.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, industrial, central area,
and urban corridor districts. RAR required in CS and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 600 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (8.1)   Labor hall.
         (A)   Definitions. In this paragraph:
            (i)   LABOR HALL means any profit or non-profit public or private
entity, whether a corporation, partnership, natural person, or any other legal
entity, whose business involves securing temporary unskilled or agricultural
employment for a client through the use of a hiring hall or facility where
unskilled workers gather to await employment.
            (ii)   UNSKILLED WORKER means an individual who performs labor
involving physical toil that does not require persons engaged in a particular
occupation, craft, or trade, or practical or familiar knowledge of the
principles or processes of an art, science, craft, or trade.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in IR and IM districts when
located at least:
            (i)   1000 feet from all conforming residential uses; and
            (ii)   500 feet from all "public or private school" uses.
Otherwise, by SUP in IR and IM districts. By SUP only in RR, CS, LI, central
area, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)    Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0,000 to 50,000                             NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must have a lobby or waiting room with a floor area
of not less than the greater of 500 square feet or 50 percent of the total
floor area of the premises.
            (ii)   Food may be prepared and served as an accessory use.
            (iii)   No SUP for a labor hall may be granted for more than a two-
year time period. An SUP for a labor hall is not eligible for automatic
renewal.
            (iv)   In determining whether to grant a specific use permit for a
labor hall, the city council shall consider its proximity to the main uses
listed in Subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, and require that the labor hall
meet, as nearly as practicable, the distance requirements set out in that
subparagraph.
            (v)   Measurements of distance under this paragraph are taken
radially. "Radial" measurement means a measurement taken along the shortest
distance between the nearest point of the building site of the labor hall and
the nearest point of the building site of another use.
            (vi)   This use must comply with all applicable licensing
provisions.
      (9)   Machine or welding shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility where material is processed by machining,
cutting, grinding, welding, or similar processes.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS and industrial districts.
RAR required in CS and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (10)   Machinery, heavy equipment, or truck sales and service.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the display, sale, rental, or service
of machinery, heavy equipment, oversized motor vehicles, or oversized trailers.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in RR, CS, and industrial
districts. RAR required in RR, CS, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)    Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 1,000 square feet of sales area (whether
inside or outside) is required only when contiguous to a property containing a
single-family handicapped group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provision: Vehicles being displayed, sold, serviced,
or repaired must be parked on site.
      (11)   Medical or scientific laboratory.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for testing and analyzing medical or
scientific problems.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in MO(A), GO(A), CS, industrial,
central area, MU-2, MU- 2(SAH), MU-3, MU-3(SAH), MC-3, and MC-4 districts. By
SUP only in LO(A), CR, RR, MU-1, MU-1(SAH), MC-1, MC-2, and urban corridor
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area is required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (12)   Technical school.
         (A)   Definition: A business enterprise offering instruction and
training in trades or crafts such as auto repair, cooking, welding,
bricklaying, machinery operation, or other similar trades or crafts.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, industrial, and central
area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use. Any personal service uses accessory to a technical school
must be parked to the personal service use parking requirement.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (13)   Tool or equipment rental.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for renting tools or equipment.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central
area, MU-2; MU-2(SAH), MU-3, MU-3(SAH), MC-3, and MC-4 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area is required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
group dwelling use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (14)   Vehicle or engine repair or maintenance.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the repair, maintenance, or
restoration of motor vehicles, motor vehicle engines, electrical motors, or
other similar items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in RR, CS, industrial, and central
area districts. RAR required in RR, CS, and IM districts. DIR required in
central area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area; with a minimum
of five spaces is required only when contiguous to a property containing a
single-family or handicapped group dwelling unit use.
            (iii)   Parking spaces that are used to repair vehicles and located
in a structure are not counted in determining the required parking.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   If an inoperable or wrecked motor vehicle remains outside on
the premises for more than 24 hours, the premises is an outside salvage or
reclamation use. However, a premise is not an outside salvage or reclamation
use if the premise stores not more than four inoperable or wrecked motor
vehicles each of which having a valid state registration, current safety
inspection certificate, and documentary record of pending repairs or other
disposition, and if the premise has a current certificate of occupancy for a
motor vehicle related use.
            (ii)   Vehicles being displayed, sold, serviced, or repaired must
be parked on site. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20493; 20902; 21001; 21663; 23910;
24718; 28803; 30890; 32907; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.203.   INDUSTRIAL USES.
   (a)   Potentially incompatible industrial uses.
      (1)   A “potentially incompatible industrial use” listed in this
subsection is permitted by SUP only in the IM district.
      (2)   The following main uses, activities, operations, and processes are
hereby declared to be potentially incompatible industrial uses:
         -   Asphalt or concrete batching
         -   Bulk processing, washing, curing, or dyeing of hair, felt, or
feathers
         -   Concrete crushing
         -   Fat rendering
         -   Foundries, ferrous or non-ferrous
         -   Grain milling or processing
         -   Leather or fur tanning, curing, finishing, or dyeing
         -   Metal or metal ore reduction, refining, smelting, or alloying
         -   Metal or metal product treatment or processing, including
enameling, japanning, lacquering, galvanizing, or similar processes
         -   Petroleum or petroleum product refining
         -   Radioactive waste disposal services involving the handling or
storage of radioactive waste, excluding hazardous waste management facilities
as defined in this chapter
         -   Solvent extracting
         -   Slaughtering of animals, fish, or poultry
         -   Sugar refining
         -   Textile bleaching
         -   Wood or bone distillation
         -   Wood or lumber processing, including sawmills or planing mills,
wood-preserving treatment, and similar processes
         -   Wood pulp or fiber reduction or processing, including paper mill
operations
         -   Wool scouring or pulling
      (3)   Main uses that manufacture the following products are hereby
declared to be potentially incompatible industrial uses:
         -   Asphalt or asphalt products
         -   Brick, tile, or clay
         -   Cement
         -   Charcoal, lampblack, or fuel briquettes
         -   Chemicals, including acetylene, aniline dyes, ammonia, carbide,
caustic soda, cellulose, chlorine, carbon black or bone black, cleaning or
polishing preparations, creosote, exterminating agents, hydrogen or oxygen,
industrial alcohol, potash, plastic materials or synthetic resins, rayon yarns,
or hydrochloric, picric, or sulphuric acids or derivatives
         -   Coal, coke, or tar products
         -   Excelsior or packing materials
         -   Fertilizers
         -   Gelatin, glue, or size
         -   Glass or glass products, including structural or plate glass or
similar products
         -   Graphite or graphite products
         -   Gypsum
         -   Heavy metal casting or foundry products, including ornamental iron
work or similar products
         -   Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants, or related industrial or
household chemical compounds
         -   Linoleum or oil cloth
         -   Lumber, plywood, veneer, or similar wood products
         -   Matches
         -   Miscellaneous metal alloys or foil, including solder, pewter,
brass, bronze, or tin, lead, or gold foil, or similar products
         -   Paint, varnishes, or turpentine
         -   Paper
         -   Porcelain products, including bathroom or kitchen equipment, or
similar products
         -   Raw plastic
         -   Rubber, natural or synthetic, including tires, tubes, or similar
products
         -   Soaps or detergents
         -   Stone products, including abrasives, asbestos, stone screenings,
and sand or lime products
   (b)   Specific uses.
      (0)   Alcoholic beverage manufacturing.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment for the manufacture, blending,
fermentation, processing, and packaging of alcoholic beverages with a floor
area exceeding 10,000 square feet that takes place wholly inside a building. A
facility that only provides tasting or retail sale of alcoholic beverages is
not an alcoholic beverage manufacturing use.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in industrial districts with RAR
required. By SUP only in central area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 200 square feet of floor area used for retail
sales and seating.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF MANUFACTURING OR STORAGE FLOOR TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
AREA
10,000 to 50,000                              1
50,000 to 100,000                             2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof   1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Retail sales of alcoholic beverages and related items and
tastings or sampling are allowed in accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission regulations.
            (ii)   Except for loading, all activities must occur within a
building.
            (iii)   Silos and containers of spent grain are allowed as outdoor
storage. Containers of spent grain must be screened. All other outdoor storage
or repair is prohibited.
            (iv)   If an SUP is required, silos and outdoor storage areas for
spent grain must be shown on the site plan.
            (v)   Drive-through facilities are prohibited.
      (1)   Industrial (inside).
         (A)   Definition: An industrial facility where all processing,
fabricating, assembly, or disassembly takes place wholly within an enclosed
building.
         (B)   Districts permitted: If this use is "potentially incompatible"
[See Subsection (a)], it is permitted by SUP only in the IM district;
otherwise, it is permitted by right in industrial districts with RAR required.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space per 600 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Accessory outside storage is limited to five percent of the
lot. Outside storage that occupies more than five percent of the lot is only
allowed in a district where outside storage is permitted as a main use. For
more information regarding accessory outside storage, see Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding outside storage as a main use, see
Section
51A-4.213.
            (ii)   Accessory inside retail sales may occupy up to 10 percent of
the total floor area of the main use.
      (1.1)   Industrial (inside) for light manufacturing.
         (A)   Definition: A light industrial use where all processing,
fabricating, assembly, or disassembly of items takes places wholly within an
enclosed building. Typical items for processing, fabricating, assembly, or
disassembly under this use include but are not limited to apparel, food,
drapes, clothing accessories, bedspreads, decorations, artificial plants,
jewelry, instruments, computers, and electronic devices.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 600 square feet of floor area is required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Potentially incompatible industrial uses, as defined in this
section, are prohibited as part of any activity, operation, or processing
conducted under this use.
            (ii)   This use may not exceed 10,000 square feet of floor area.
      (2)   Industrial (outside).
         (A)   Definition: An industrial facility where any portion of the
processing, fabricating, assembly, or disassembly takes place outside or in an
open structure.
         (B)   Districts permitted: If this use is "potentially incompatible"
[See Subsection (a)], it is permitted by SUP only in the IM district; otherwise
it is permitted:
            (i)   by right in the IM district with RAR required; and
            (ii)   by SUP only in the IR district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 600 square feet of floor area, plus one space
per 600 square feet of outside manufacturing area is required only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Accessory outside storage may occupy to 50 percent of the
lot. Outside storage that occupies more than 50 percent of the lot is only
allowed in a district where outside storage is permitted as a main use. For
more information regarding accessory outside storage, see Section
51A-4.217. For more information regarding outside storage as a main use, see
Section
51A-4.213.
            (ii)   Any portion of the building site containing this use that is
adjacent to or directly across a street or alley from a district other than an
IR or IM district must be screened from that district.
            (iii)   Accessory inside retail sales may occupy up to 10 percent
of the total floor area of the main use.
      (2.1)   Medical/infectious waste incinerator.
         (A)   Definition: A facility used to incinerate plastics, special
waste, and waste containing pathogens or biologically active material, which
because of its type, concentration, and quantity, is capable of transmitting
disease to persons exposed to the waste.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in IR and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 1,000 square feet of floor area is required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   All medical/infectious waste incinerators must be located at
least:
               (aa)   1,000 feet from all lots containing residential; public
or private school; church; and public park, playground, or golf course uses;
and
               (bb)   one mile from all lots containing municipal and hazardous
waste incinerators.
            (ii)   A medical/infectious waste incinerator used to incinerate up
to 225 pounds of waste per hour must be located:
               (aa)   on a lot that is no smaller than one acre in size;
               (bb)   at least 100 feet from the lot line; and
               (cc)   at least one-fourth mile from all lots containing main
use medical/infectious and pathological waste incinerators.
            (iii)   A medical/infectious waste incinerator used to incinerate
more than 225 pounds of waste per hour must be located:
               (aa)   on a lot that is no smaller than five acres in size;
               (bb)   at least 200 feet from the lot line; and
               (cc)   at least one mile from all lots containing main use
medical/infectious and pathological waste incinerators.
            (iv)   No outside storage is permitted in conjunction with this
use.
            (v)   The area of notification for a public hearing to consider an
SUP application for this use is 500 feet.
      (3)   Metal salvage facility.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that collects, separates, and processes
scrap metal in bulk form for reuse and manufacturing.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in the IM district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), the off-street parking requirement may be established in
the ordinance granting the SUP, otherwise a minimum of five spaces required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must have a visual screen of at least nine feet in
height which consists of a solid masonry, concrete, or corrugated sheet metal
wall, or a chain link fence with metal strips through all links.
            (ii)   The owner of a metal salvage facility shall not stack
objects higher than eight feet within 40 feet of the visual screen. The owner
of a metal salvage facility may stack objects one foot higher than eight feet
for each five feet of setback from the 40 foot point.
            (iii)   If an inoperable or wrecked motor vehicle remains outside
on the premises for more than 24 hours, the premises is an outside salvage or
reclamation use. However, a premise is not an outside salvage or reclamation
use if the premise stores not more than four inoperable or wrecked motor
vehicles each of which having a valid state registration, current safety
inspection certificate, and documentary record of pending repairs or other
disposition, and if the premise has a current certificate of occupancy for a
motor vehicle related use.
            (iv)   A minimum distance of 500 feet is required between a metal
salvage facility and an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, MF(A), MH, or MH
(A) district.
      (3.1)    Mining.
         (A)   Definition: The extraction, removal, or stockpiling of earth
materials, including soil, sand, gravel, oil, or other materials found in the
earth. The excavation of earth materials for ponds or lakes, including
excavations for fish farming ponds and recreational lakes, are considered
mining unless otherwise expressly authorized by another provision of this code.
The following are not considered mining:
            (i)   The extraction, removal, or stockpiling of earth materials
incidental to an approved plat or excavation permit, incidental to construction
with a building permit, or for governmental or utility construction projects
such as streets, alleys, drainage, gas, electrical, water, and telephone
facilities and similar projects.
            (ii)   The extraction, removal, or stockpiling of earth materials
incidental to construction of landscaping, retaining walls, fences, and similar
activities consistent with the land use allowed at the site of removal.
            (iii)   Gas drilling and production. See Section
51A-4.203(b)(3.2).
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in A(A) and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The applicant shall submit a site plan of existing
conditions, operations plan, reclamation plan, and the proposed bond to the
director for review and recommendation.
            (ii)   If a specific use permit is granted, the city shall inspect
and monitor the mining and reclamation operation at least once annually.
            (iii)   A specific use permit may not be issued for mining on city
park land.
         (F)   Site plan of existing conditions: The applicant shall submit a
site plan of existing conditions that includes:
            (i)   a site location map on a small scale showing major
circulation routes and other landmarks which would aid in the location of the
site;
            (ii)   contours shown at no greater than five-foot intervals;
            (iii)   connections to roads outside the site;
            (iv)   location, identification, and dimensions of all public and
private easements;
            (v)   location of flood plain, water bodies, natural and man-made
channels (wet and dry), and subsurface channels;
            (vi)   tree and other vegetation groupings, rock outcroppings, and
any other significant natural features;
            (vii) location and depth of any known former or current mines or
landfills in or within 500 feet of the boundaries of the excavation and an
indication of the type of fill used;
            (viii) analyzed core samples if the city determines that
contaminants may be present; and
            (ix)   any other information the director determines is reasonably
necessary for a complete review of the proposed operations.
         (G)   Operations plan: The applicant shall submit an operations plan
that includes:
            (i)   storage of reclamation topsoil and methods of disposing of
all material not to be sold or reclaimed;
            (ii)   hours of operation;
            (iii)   location and depth of excavation;
            (iv)   drainage and erosion control measures;
            (v)   method for the disposal of contaminants, if present;
            (vi)   roads to be used for transportation of stone, sand, or
gravel;
            (vii)   fences or any other barriers necessary for safety;
            (viii)   noise and dust control measures;
            (ix)   the length of time necessary to complete the mining and
reclamation of the site; and
            (x)   any other information the director determines is reasonably
necessary for a complete review of the proposed operations.
         (H)   Reclamation plan: The applicant shall submit a reclamation plan
that is verified by a registered surveyor. The reclamation plan must show the
reclamation of the entire site upon completion of operation and the phases of
reclamation to be completed at no greater than five-year intervals. The
reclamation plan must include the following information:
            (i)   contours shown at no greater than five-foot intervals with
slopes not steeper than a three-to-one (horizontal to vertical) ratio;
            (ii)   circulation routes, including roadways, any internal
circulation, rights-of-way, and connections to roads outside the site;
            (iii)   location, identification, and dimensions of all public and
private easements;
            (iv)   location of flood plain, water bodies, natural and man-made
channels (wet and dry), subsurface dams, dikes, or channels;
            (v)   location of any areas to be filled with water including a
description of the source of the water, the means of water retention, and the
prevention of stagnation and pollution;
            (vi)   location and type of vegetation;
            (vii)   structures (including height), utilities, and proposed land
uses, if any;
            (viii)   the amount of the performance bond that will be posted in
accordance with Subparagraph (I) below; and
            (ix)   any other information the director determines is reasonably
necessary for a complete review of the proposed operation.
         (I)   Performance bond:
            (i)   The applicant shall post a performance bond with the city
controller before passage of the ordinance granting the specific use permit.
The performance bond must be approved as to form by the city attorney.
            (ii)   The bond must be twice the estimated cost to the city of
restoring the premises in a manner shown on the reclamation plan. The amount of
the bond shall be determined by the director on the basis of relevant factors
including expected changes in the price index, topography of the site, project
methods being employed, depth and composition of overburden, and data provided
in the reclamation plan.
            (iii)   The bond must be issued by a surety company licensed to do
business in Texas. The applicant may deposit cash, certificates of deposit, or
government securities in lieu of a bond. Interest received on deposits and
securities must be returned to the applicant upon the approval of reclamation
of the site.
            (iv)   The director shall conduct a final inspection to determine
whether the site has been reclaimed in accordance with the specific use permit.
Final inspection must be made not more than two years after the expiration of
the specific use permit. A registered surveyor provided by the applicant shall
verify the final topography of the site.
            (v)   The director shall report to the city council on the
completion of the project. The city council shall determine by resolution
whether the reclamation has been completed in accordance with the specific use
permit and whether the performance bond should be released.
            (vi)   The city controller shall release the bond or deposit if the
city council finds that the applicant has completed reclamation of the site in
accordance with the specific use permit. If the site is not restored in
accordance with the reclamation plan, the director shall use the bond or
deposit to restore the site in accordance with the plan.
      (3.2)   Gas drilling and production.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   BOUNDARY means the perimeter of the operation site. OPERATION
SITE means the area identified in the SUP to be used for drilling, production,
and all associated operational activities after gas drilling is complete.
            (ii)    ENVIRONMENTALLY SIG- NIFICANT AREA means an area:
               (aa)   with slopes greater than three to one;
               (bb)   containing endangered species of either flora or fauna;
               (cc)   that is geologically similar to the Escarpment Zone, as
defined in Division
51A-5.200, “Escarpment Regulations,” of
Article V, “Flood Plain and Escarpment Zone Regulations;”
               (dd)   identified as wetlands or wildlife habitat;
               (ee)   determined to be an archeological or historical site; or
               (ff)   containing more than 1,000 inches of trunk diameter of
protected trees, in the aggregate, within a 10,000 square foot area. Trunk
diameter is measured at a point 12 inches above grade. To be included in the
aggregate calculations of trunk diameter, a protected tree must have a trunk
diameter of six inches or more. For purposes of this provision, a protected
tree is defined in Section 5A-10.101.
            (iii)   GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION means the activities related to
the extraction of any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, that is
produced in a natural state from the earth and that maintains a gaseous or
rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions, or the
extraction of any gaseous vapors derived from petroleum or natural gas.
            (iv)   HABITABLE STRUCTURE means any use or structure that is not a
protected use but has a means of ingress or egress, light, and ventilation.
Habitable structure does not include an accessory structure, such as a garage
or shed.
            (v)   PROTECTED USE means institutional and community service uses
(except cemetery or mausoleum); lodging uses; office uses; recreation uses
(except when the operation site is on a public park, playground, or golf
course); residential uses; and retail and personal service uses (except
commercial motor vehicle parking or commercial parking lot or garage). Parking
areas and areas used exclusively for drainage detention are not part of a
protected use.
            (vi)   See
Article XII for additional definitions that apply to gas drilling and
production.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in all districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   See
Article XII for additional regulations relating to gas drilling and production.
No provision found in Articles IV or XII may be waived through the adoption of
or amendment to a planned development district.
            (ii)   Before an SUP for a gas drilling and production use within a
public park, playground, or golf course may be processed, city council must
hold a public hearing and make a determination in accordance with Texas Parks
and Wildlife Code
Chapter 26, “Protection of Public Parks and Recreational Lands.”
            (iii)   A favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the
city council is required to approve a gas drilling and production use on a
public park, playground, or golf course if city council finds that the approval
will not harm the public health, safety, or welfare.
            (iv)   In addition to the findings required in Section
51A-4.219 for the granting of an SUP, city plan commission and city council
must consider the:
               (aa)   proximity of a proposed gas drilling and production use
to an environmentally significant area; and
               (bb)   potential impact the proposed gas drilling and production
use may have on the environmentally significant area.
            (v)    Compliance with federal and state laws and regulations and
with city ordinances, rules, and regulations is required, and may include
platting, a flood plain fill or alteration permit, building permits, and gas
well permits. Compliance with these additional regulations may be required
before, concurrently with, after, or independently of the SUP process.
            (vi)    Trailers or mobile homes that are temporarily placed on the
operation site and used by gas drilling workers as a residence are a permitted
accessory use.
            (vii)   Once any gas drilling related activity begins on the
operation site, the applicant shall limit access to the operation site by
erecting an eight-foot-tall temporary chain-link fence. Within 30 days after
any well completion activity ceases, an eight-foot-tall permanent fence must be
erected and maintained around the perimeter of the operation site. This
provision controls over the fence height regulations of the zoning district.
City council, by SUP, may require a different form of screening, but may not
reduce the fence height requirements of this provision.
            (viii)   Access to the operation site must comply with the Dallas
Fire Code. The operation site plan must be reviewed and approved by the fire
marshal before an SUP can be granted.
            (ix)   The operation site may not have a slope greater than 10
degrees unless the director determines that all equipment is located and
activities occur on a portion of the operation site that does not have a slope
greater than 10 degrees, there is adequate erosion control, and the slope of
the operation site will not be a threat to the public safety or welfare.
            (x)   The operator shall provide the director with a statement of
intent to enter into a road repair agreement before an SUP may be scheduled for
a public hearing.
            (xi)   The director shall revise the zoning district maps upon the
granting of an SUP for a gas drilling and production use, to provide a 1,000
foot gas drilling and production use notice overlay around the boundary of the
operation site.
         (F)   Spacing:
            (i)   Habitable structure.
               (aa)   Except as otherwise provided in this provision, a gas
drilling and production use must be spaced at least 300 feet from a habitable
structure.
               (bb)   If a gas drilling and production use is located on the
same property as a habitable structure, the spacing requirements in this
provision may be waived for that habitable structure with a favorable vote of
two-thirds of all members of the city council if city council finds that the
reduction will not harm the public health, safety, or welfare.
               (cc)   Spacing is measured from the boundary of the operation
site in a straight line, without regard for intervening structures or objects,
to the closest point of the habitable structure.
            (ii)   Protected use.
               (aa)   Except as otherwise provided in this provision, a gas
drilling and production use must be spaced at least 1,500 feet from a protected
use (except trailers or mobile homes placed on the operation site as temporary
residences for workers).
               (bb)   City council may reduce the minimum 1,500 foot spacing
requirement from a protected use by not more than 500 feet with a favorable
vote of two-thirds of all members of the city council if city council finds
that the reduction will not harm the public health, safety, or welfare.
               (cc)   If a gas drilling and production use is located on the
same property as a protected use, the spacing requirements in this provision
may be waived for that protected use with a favorable vote of two-thirds of all
members of the city council if city council finds that the reduction will not
harm the public health, safety, or welfare.
               (dd)   If a gas drilling and production use is located on a
public park, playground, or golf course, the spacing requirements in this
subparagraph do not apply to protected uses or habitable structures located on
the public park, playground, or golf course. The spacing requirements in this
provision for protected uses and habitable structures off the public park,
playground, or golf course use still apply.
               (ee)   Spacing is measured as follows:
                  (11)   For institutional and community service uses (except
cemetery or mausoleum), and residential uses, from the boundary of the
operation site in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, to the property line of the institutional and community service use
(except cemetery or mausoleum) or the residential use.
                  (22)   For recreation uses (except when the operation site is
on a public park, playground, or golf course), lodging uses, office uses, and
retail and personal service uses (except commercial motor vehicle parking or
commercial parking lot or garage) from the boundary of the operation site in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the
closest point of a physical barrier or demarcation that establishes a boundary
of the protected use. Examples of physical barriers or demarcations include
fencing around activity areas, such as play fields, courts, or pools; or edges,
borders, or boundaries of maintained areas adjacent to trails, golf courses, or
active recreation areas. If the protected use is conducted exclusively inside,
from the boundary of the operation site in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures of objects, to the closest point of the structure
housing the protected use.
         (G)   Neighborhood meeting:
            (i)   Within 60 days after filing an SUP application, the applicant
or operator shall, at the applicant or operator’s expense, provide notice of a
neighborhood meeting regarding the pending SUP application.
            (ii)   The applicant or operator shall mail notice of the
neighborhood meeting by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage
paid in the United States mail. The notice must be written in English and
Spanish. The applicant or operator shall mail notice of the neighborhood
meeting to all real property owners as indicated by the most recent appraisal
district records and all mailing addresses within 2,000 feet of the boundary of
the proposed gas drilling and production use operation site.
            (iii)   The notice of the neighborhood meeting must include:
               (aa)   the date, time, and location of the neighborhood meeting;
               (bb)   the identity of the applicant and the operator;
               (cc)   the location of the pending SUP application;
               (dd)   information about the proposed gas drilling and
production use;
               (ee)   the purpose of the neighborhood meeting; and
               (ff)   information about subscribing to the operator’s
electronic notification list to receive updates about when specific operations
will occur, including site preparation, drilling, casing, fracturing, pipeline
construction, production, transportation, and maintenance of the operation
site.
            (iv)   Within five days after mailing the notice of the
neighborhood meeting, the applicant shall file an affidavit with the director
swearing and affirming that all real property owners and mailing addresses
within 2,000 feet of the boundary of the proposed gas drilling and production
use operation site were mailed notice of the neighborhood meeting in accordance
with this subparagraph. The affidavit must include a list of the real property
owners and mailing addresses to which notice was sent.
            (v)   The applicant and operator shall attend and conduct the
neighborhood meeting not less than seven or more than 21 days after providing
notice of the neighborhood meeting. The neighborhood meeting must be held at a
facility open to the public near the proposed gas drilling and production use.
            (vi)   The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is for the applicant
or operator to:
               (aa)   inform the community about the proposed gas drilling and
production use;
               (bb)   explain the operations associated with gas drilling and
production, including site preparation, site development and construction,
drilling, casing, fracturing, pipeline construction, production,
transportation, and maintenance of the operation site; and
               (cc)   explain and provide information about subscribing to the
operator’s electronic notification list to receive updates about when specific
operations will occur, including site preparation, drilling, casing,
fracturing, pipeline construction, production, transportation, and maintenance
of the operation site.
      (3.3)   Gas pipeline compressor station.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   BOUNDARY means the perimeter of the compressor station site.
GAS PIPELINE COMPRESSOR STATION SITE means the area identified in the SUP to be
used for the gas pipeline compressor station.
            (ii)   GAS PIPELINE COMPRESSOR STATION means a facility for devices
that raise the pressure of a compressible fluid (gas) in order for the gas to
be transported through a transmission pipeline. This use does not include
compressors that are part of a gas drilling and production use that only
provide compression for gas to circulate into a gathering system.
            (iii)   PROTECTED USE means institutional and community service
uses (except cemetery or mausoleum); lodging uses; office uses; recreation uses
(except when the operation site is on a public park, playground, or golf
course); residential uses; and retail and personal service uses (except
commercial motor vehicle parking or commercial parking lot or garage). Parking
areas and areas used exclusively for drainage detention are not part of a
protected use.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in IM district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), five spaces are required only when contiguous to a property
containing a single-family or handicapped group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A gas pipeline compressor station must be spaced at least
1,500 feet from a protected use, measured from the boundary of the gas pipeline
compressor station site in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the closest point of the protected use or areas of
the protected use activity.
            (ii)   To reduce noise, all compressors must be fully enclosed in a
building.
            (iii)   Except as otherwise provided in this subparagraph, the
perimeter of the gas pipeline compressor station site must be screened from
public view. City council may, by SUP, require a different form of screening
but may not reduce the height requirements in this subparagraph. Screening must
be at least six feet in height and must be constructed of:
               (aa)   earthen berm planted with turf grass or ground cover that
does not have a slope that exceeds one foot of height for each two feet of
width;
               (bb)   brick, stone, metal, or masonry wall that significantly
screens equipment and structures from view;
               (cc)   landscaping materials recommended for local area use by
the chief arborist. The landscaping must be located in a bed that is at least
three feet wide with a minimum soil depth of 24 inches. The initial plantings
must be capable of obtaining a solid appearance within 18 months; or
               (dd)   any combination of the above.
            (iv)   Unless a specific color is required by federal or state law,
all equipment and structures must be painted with a neutral color to match the
nearby surroundings as nearly as possible.
            (v)    To reduce noise and emissions, electric motors must be used
on the gas pipeline compressor station unless the operator submits a report to
the gas inspector and the gas inspector finds that electric motors cannot be
used.
            (vi)    Internal combustion engines and compressors, whether
stationary or mounted on wheels, must be equipped with an exhaust muffler or a
comparable device that suppresses noise and disruptive vibrations and prevents
the escape of gases, fumes, ignited carbon, or soot.
            (vii)   Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor
may not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust
muffler or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of non-combustible
materials sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and prevent
the escape of noxious gases, fumes, ignited carbon, or soot.
            (viii)   Compressors must comply with the low and high frequency
noise requirements in Section
51A-12.204(1), “Noise.”
      (4)   Municipal waste incinerator.
         (A)   Definition: A facility used to
incinerate solid waste, other than industrial or hazardous waste, resulting
from or incidental to municipal, community, institutional, and recreational
activities, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, and abandoned automobiles.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in IR and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 1,000 square feet of floor area is required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A municipal waste incinerator must front on a principal
arterial.
            (ii)   The incinerator must be located on a lot that is no smaller
than five acres in size, and be located at least 200 feet from the lot line.
            (iii)   The incinerator must be located at least:
               (aa)   1,500 feet from all lots containing residential; public
or private school; church; public park, playground, or golf course;
convalescent or nursing home; medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center; and
hospital uses;
               (bb)   two miles from all lots containing municipal and
hazardous waste incinerators; and
               (cc)   one mile from all lots containing medical/infectious and
pathological waste incinerators.
            (iv)   No outside storage is permitted in conjunction with this
use.
            (v)   The area of notification for a public hearing to consider an
SUP application for this use is 750 feet.
      (4.1)   Organic compost recycling facility.
         (A)   Definition: A commercial facility where the production of
compost from organic materials takes place outside or in an open structure. For
purposes of this definition, organic materials mean leaves, grass clippings,
yard and garden debris, and brush, including clean woody vegetative material
not greater than six inches in diameter that results from landscape maintenance
and land-clearing operations. Tree stumps, roots, and shrubs with intact root
balls are not organic materials.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in the IM district with RAR
required. By SUP only in A(A) and IR districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area is required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In an IM district, an organic compost recycling facility must
be visually screened on any side that is within 200 feet of and visible from a
thoroughfare or an adjacent property that is not zoned an IM district. For
purposes of this paragraph, adjacent means across the street or sharing a
common lot line.
      (5)   Outside salvage or reclamation.
         (A)   Definition: A facility which stores, keeps, dismantles, or
salvages scrap or discarded material or equipment outside. Scrap or discarded
material includes but is not limited to metal, paper, rags, tires, bottles, or
inoperable or wrecked motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts, machinery, and
appliances.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in the IM district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)    Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), the off-street parking requirement may be established in
the ordinance granting the SUP, otherwise a minimum of five spaces is required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must have a visual screen of at least nine feet in
height which consists of a solid masonry, concrete, or corrugated sheet metal
wall, or a chain link fence with metal strips through all links.
            (ii)   The owner of an outside salvage or reclamation use shall not
stack objects higher than eight feet within 40 feet of the visual screen. The
owner of an outside salvage or reclamation use may stack objects one foot
higher than eight feet for each five feet of setback from the 40 foot point.
            (iii)   If an inoperable or wrecked motor vehicle remains outside
on the premises for more than 24 hours, the premises is an outside salvage or
reclamation use. However, a premise is not an outside salvage or reclamation
use if the premise stores not more than four inoperable or wrecked motor
vehicles each of which having a valid state registration, current safety
inspection certificate, and documentary record of pending repairs or other
disposition, and if the premise has a current certificate of occupancy for a
motor vehicle related use.
            (iv)   A minimum distance of 500 feet is required between an
outside salvage or reclamation use and an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF,
MF(A), MH, or MH(A) district.
      (5.1)   Pathological waste incinerator.
         (A)   Definition: A facility used to incinerate organic human or
animal waste, including, but not limited to:
            (i)   Human materials removed during surgery, labor and delivery,
autopsy, or biopsy, including body parts, tissues or fetuses, organs, and bulk
blood and body fluids.
            (ii)   Products of spontaneous human abortions, regardless of the
period of gestation, including body parts, tissue, fetuses, organs, and bulk
blood and body fluids.
            (iii)   Anatomical remains.
            (iv)   Bodies for cremation.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in IR and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 1,000 square feet of floor area is required
only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped
group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A pathological waste incinerator must be located on a lot
that is no smaller than one acre in size, and be at least 100 feet from the lot
line.
            (ii)   The incinerator must be located at least:
               (aa)   1,000 feet from all lots containing residential; public
or private school; church; and public park, playground, or golf course uses;
               (bb)   one mile from all lots containing municipal and hazardous
waste incinerators; and
               (cc)   one-fourth mile from all lots containing medical/
infectious and pathological waste incinerators.
            (iii)   Reserved.
            (iv)   All waste must be disposed of within a 24 hour period.
            (v)   No outside storage is permitted in conjunction with this use.
      (6)   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant.
         (A)   Definition: A temporary facility for mixing cement or asphalt.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in all districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)    Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), two spaces are required only when contiguous to a property
containing a single-family or handicapped group dwelling unit use. Off-street
parking requirements for this use may be satisfied by providing temporary
parking spaces that do not strictly comply with the construction and
maintenance provisions for off- street parking in this chapter. The operator of
this use has the burden of demonstrating to the satisfaction of the building
official that the temporary parking spaces:
               (aa)   are adequately designed to accommodate the parking needs
of the use; and
               (bb)   will not adversely affect surrounding uses.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   An application for specific use permit must consider if on-
site fencing, screening, or buffering elements provide adequate protection for
adjacent property.
            (ii)   A person to whom a temporary certificate of occupancy is
issued shall:
               (aa)   comply with city, state and federal laws at the batching
plant site;
               (bb)   clear the site of equipment, material and debris upon
completion of the project;
               (cc)   repair or replace any public improvement that is damaged
during the operation of the temporary batching plant; and
               (dd)   locate and operate the temporary plant in a manner which
eliminates unnecessary dust, noise, and odor (as illustrated by, but not
limited to covering trucks, hoppers, chutes, loading and unloading devices and
mixing operations, and maintaining driveways and parking areas free of dust).
            (iii)   A person shall only furnish concrete, asphalt, or both, to
the specific project for which the specific use permit is issued. (Ord. Nos.
19455; 19786; 20411; 20478; 20493; 21002; 21456; 22026; 22255; 22388; 22392;
24792; 25047; 26920; 28553; 28700; 28803; 29228; 29557; 29917; 30890; 32209;
33112)
SEC. 51A-4.204.   INSTITUTIONAL AND COMMUNITY SERVICE USES.
      (1)   Reserved.
      (2)   Cemetery or mausoleum.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A cemetery is a place designated for burial of the dead.
            (ii)   A mausoleum is a building with places for the entombment of
the dead.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in all residential and
nonresidential districts except the P(A) and urban corridor districts.
         (C)    Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Cemeteries are subject to
Chapter 11 of this code.
      (3)   Child or adult care facility.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that provides care, training, education,
custody, treatment, or supervision for persons of any age who are not related
by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility,
whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services
it offers. This use does not include:
            (i)   a facility that is operated in connection with a shopping
center, business, religious organization, hospital, medical clinic or
ambulatory surgical center, or establishment where persons in need of care are
cared for during short periods while parents or persons responsible for the
persons in need of care are attending religious services or activities,
receiving or providing inpatient or outpatient care, shopping, or engaging in
other activities on or near the premises;
            (ii)   a school or class for religious instruction that does not
last longer than two weeks and is conducted by a religious organization during
the summer months;
            (iii)   an educational facility accredited by the Texas Education
Agency or the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, or their successor
agencies, and which operates primarily for educational purposes in grades
kindergarten and above;
            (iv)   an educational facility that operates solely for educational
purposes in grades kindergarten through at least grade two, that does not
provide custodial care for more than one hour during the hours before or after
the customary school day, and that is a member of an organization that
promulgates, publishes, and requires compliance with health, safety, fire, and
sanitation standards equal to standards required by state, municipal, and
county codes;
            (v)   a kindergarten or preschool educational program that is
operated as part of a public school or a private school accredited by the Texas
Education Agency or its successor agency, that offers educational programs
through grade six, and does not provide custodial care during the hours before
or after the customary school day;
            (vi)   an educational facility that is integral to and inseparable
from its sponsoring religious organization or an educational facility both of
which do not provide custodial care for more than two hours maximum per day,
and that offers educational programs for children age five and above in one or
more of the following: kindergarten through at least grade three, elementary,
or secondary grades;
            (vii)   a day home as defined in Section 51A-4.217; or
            (viii)   individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit
in which not more than four individuals are unrelated to the head of the
household by blood, marriage, or adoption.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   By right in A(A), multifamily, MH(A), retail, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, office and urban corridor
districts.
            (ii)   Except as provided in this romanette, by right in R(A), D
(A), TH(A), and CH districts when the child or adult care facility is operated
on property that is operated or was previously operated by a religious
organization, public or private school, or recreation center. Otherwise, by SUP
in R(A), D(A), TH(A), and CH districts.
            (iii)   DIR required in CS and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   When this use is located within a residential district,
outdoor activities are limited to the hours between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m.
            (ii)   The persons being cared for, trained, kept, treated, or
supervised under this use may not use the facility as a residence.
            (iii)   For property zoned as A(A) and multifamily, the board of
adjustment may grant a special exception to the off-street parking requirements
contained in Section
51A-4.301 when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will not
adversely affect neighboring properties.
      (4)   Church.
         (A)   Definition: A facility principally used for people to gather
together for public worship, religious training, or other religious activities.
This use does not include home meetings or other religious activities conducted
in a privately occupied residence.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in all residential and
nonresidential districts except the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Number of spaces required. Except provided in this
subparagraph:
               (aa)   For churches with 20,000 square feet of floor area or
less: None.
               (bb)   For churches with more than 20,000 square feet of floor
area, except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space is required for each four fixed seats in the
sanctuary or auditorium. If fixed benches or pews are provided, each 18 inches
of length of the fixed bench or pew constitutes one fixed seat for purposes of
this paragraph. If portions of seating areas in the sanctuary or auditorium are
not equipped with fixed seats, benches, or pews, the parking requirement for
those portions is one space for each 28 square feet of floor area.
            (ii)   Number of spaces required in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay,
in existence on May 14, 2025. One space per 333 square feet in floor area if a
church has less than 5,000 square feet of floor area and is located in a
shopping center with more than 20,000 square feet in floor area, otherwise one
space for each four fixed seats in the sanctuary or auditorium. If fixed
benches or pews are provided, each 18 inches of length of the fixed bench or
pew constitutes one fixed seat for purposes of this paragraph. If portions of
seating areas in the sanctuary or auditorium are not equipped with fixed seats,
benches, or pews, the parking requirement for those portions is one space for
each 28 square feet of floor area.
            (iii)   Definitions. For purposes of this subsection, “remote
parking” means required off-street parking provided on a lot not occupied by
the main use.
            (iv)    Reconciliation with Divisions
51A-4.300  et seq. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this subsection,
the off-street parking regulations in Divisions
51A-4.300  et seq. apply to this use. In the event of a conflict between this
subsection and Divisions
51A-4.300  et seq., this subsection controls.
            (v)   Remote parking.
               (aa)    Distance extension with shuttle service. A remote
parking lot for a church may be located up to one and one-half miles (including
streets and alleys) from the lot occupied by the church if a shuttle service is
provided to transport persons between the church and the remote parking lot.
The shuttle service route must be approved by the traffic engineer.
               (bb)    Remote parking agreement. An agreement authorizing a
church to use remote parking may be based on a lease of the remote parking
spaces if:
                  (I)    the lease is for a minimum term of three years; and
                  (II)    the agreement provides that both the owner of the lot
occupied by the church and the owner of the remote lot shall notify the city of
Dallas in writing if there is a breach of any provision of the lease, or if the
lease is modified or terminated.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A church may permit passengers of mass transportation and car
pools to park on the church parking lot.
            (ii)   The following structures, when located on top of a church
building, are excluded from the height measurement of the church building:
               (aa)   Belfries.
               (bb)   Bell towers.
               (cc)   Campaniles.
               (dd)   Carillons.
               (ee)   Crosses.
               (ff)   Cupolas.
               (gg)   Spires.
               (hh) Steeples.
            (iii)   A rectory, convent, or monastery is permitted as an
accessory use.
      (5)   College, university, or seminary.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A college or university is an academic institution of higher
learning beyond the level of secondary school.
            (ii)   A seminary is an institution for the training of candidates
for the priesthood, ministry, or rabbinate.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in A(A), LO(A), MO(A), GO(A), CR,
RR, CS, industrial, central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban
corridor districts. By SUP only in single family, duplex, townhouse, CH,
multifamily, NO(A), and NS(A) districts.
         (C)    Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (6)   Repealed. (Ord. 21044)
      (7)   Community service center.
         (A)   Definition: A multi-functional facility where a combination of
social, recreational, welfare, health, habilitation, or rehabilitation services
are provided to the public. For purposes of this definition, a facility where
only business transactions or administrative, educational, school support,
counseling, informational, referral, or out-patient medical, dental, or optical
treatment services (or any combination of these activities) take place is not
considered to be a community service center.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in RR, IR, and CA-2(A) districts.
By SUP only in all residential, office, NS(A), CR, CS, LI, CA-1(A), mixed use,
multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (8)   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   This use includes both:
               (aa)   an establishment which furnishes (in single or multiple
facilities) food and shelter to five or more persons who are not related by
blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or proprietor of the establishment
and, in addition, provides minor treatment under the direction and supervision
of a physician, or services which meet some need beyond the basic provision of
food, shelter, and laundry; and
               (bb)   an establishment conducted by or for the adherence of any
well-recognized church or religious denomination for the purpose of providing
facilities for the care or treatment of the sick who depend exclusively upon
prayer or spiritual means for healing, without the use of any drug or material
remedy, provided safety, sanitary, and quarantine laws and regulations are
complied with.
            (ii)   This use does not include:
               (aa)   a hotel or similar place that furnishes only food and
lodging, or either, to its guests;
               (bb)   a hospital; or
               (cc)   an establishment that furnishes only baths and massages
in addition to food, shelter, and laundry.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in multifamily, central area mixed
use, and urban corridor districts. By SUP only in agricultural, TH(A), and CH
districts. RAR required in multifamily and mixed use districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In townhouse, RTN, CH, and multifamily districts, this use is
subject to the following density restrictions:
ZONING DISTRICT MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS MAXIMUM NO. OF BEDS PER NET
CLASSIFICATION  OR SUITES* PER NET ACRE       ACRE
ZONING DISTRICT       MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS MAXIMUM NO. OF BEDS PER NET
CLASSIFICATION        OR SUITES* PER NET ACRE       ACRE
TH-1(A) and RTN       35                            70
TH-2(A) and TH-3(A)   40                            80
CH                    45                            90
MF-1(A) and MF-1(SAH) 50                            100
MF-2(A) and MF-2(SAH) 60                            120
MF-3(A)               90                            180
MF-4(A)               160                           320
*For purposes of this subparagraph, the term “suite” means one or more rooms
designed to accommodate one family, containing living, sanitary, and sleeping
facilities, but not containing a kitchen.
 
            (ii)   This use must comply with statutory licensing requirements,
if any.
            (iii)   This use may include dwelling units that are exclusively
restricted to visitors, patients, or members of the staff.
      (9)   Convent or monastery.
         (A)   Definition: The living quarters or dwelling units for a
religious order or for the congregation of persons under religious vows.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in A(A), multifamily, office,
retail, CS, central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor
districts. By SUP only in single family, duplex, townhouse, and CH districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (10)   Repealed. (Ord. 21044)
      (11)   Foster home.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that provides room, board, and
supervision to five or more persons under 18 years of age who are not related
by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CH, multifamily, CA-2(A), and
mixed use districts. By SUP only in A(A), single family, duplex, townhouse, MH
(A), and CA-1(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must comply with statutory licensing requirements.
      (12)   Reserved.
      (13)   Halfway house.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the housing, rehabilitation, and
training of persons on probation, parole, or early release from correctional
institutions, or other persons found guilty of criminal offenses.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in LI, RR, CS, MU-2, MU-2(SAH),
MU-3, MU-3(SAH), and central area districts. A halfway house may not be located
in a planned development district unless all of the requirements of this
paragraph are met.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: Determined by the specific use
permit. Areas of anticipated loading and unloading must be identified at time
of permitting.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No more than 50 residents are permitted in a halfway house.
Halfway houses must be located at least 1000 feet from residential districts,
single family, duplex, and multifamily uses, public parks and recreational
facilities, child-care facilities, and public or private schools.
            (ii)   A halfway house may not be located within one mile from
another halfway house.
            (iii)   A specific use permit for a halfway house shall be issued
for a two year time period. Periodic review periods may be established as part
of the specific use permit.
            (iv)   The treatment of alcoholic, narcotic, or psychiatric
problems is allowed under this use if expressly permitted by the specific use
permit.
            (v)   This use shall comply with all applicable city, state, and
federal codes and regulations.
            (vi)   Halfway houses must be located within 1200 feet of mass
transit service.
            (vii)   A halfway house specific use permit application must
include evidence of meetings between the applicant and property owners within
the notification area. Evidence of meetings must include records reflecting the
dates of the meetings, the individuals or organizations involved, and the
issues discussed and resolved.
            (viii)   Signs identifying a use as a halfway house are not
permitted.
            (ix)   Halfway house premises must be properly maintained in good
condition at all times.
            (x)   A security plan must be submitted with an application for a
specific use permit for a halfway house. The security plan must demonstrate
compliance with the security requirements of state law. The director shall
furnish a copy of security plans for halfway houses to appropriate city,
county, and state agencies for their review before the commission’s
consideration of an application. Provisions addressing security must be
included in any ordinance granting a specific use permit for a halfway house. A
compliance report must be submitted to the director every two years after the
date of passage of an ordinance granting a specific use permit and with each
application for renewal of a specific use permit for a halfway house.
            (xi)   Measurements of distance under this paragraph are taken
radially. “Radial” measurement means a measurement taken along the shortest
distance between the nearest point of the building site of the halfway house
and the nearest point of the building site of another use, or of a zoning
district boundary.
      (14)   Hospital.
         (A)   Definition: An institution where sick or injured patients are
given medical treatment.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in GO(A), RR, CS, LI, IR, central
area, MU-3, and MU–3(SAH) districts. By SUP only in A(A), multifamily, MO(A),
CR, IM, MU-1, MU-1(SAH), MU-2, MU-2(SAH), multiple commercial, and urban
corridor districts. RAR required in GO(A), RR, CS, LI, IR, MU-3, and MU-3(SAH)
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must be licensed by the state as a hospital.
      (15)   Repealed. (Ord. 21044)
      (16)   Library, art gallery, or museum.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment for the loan or display of books or
objects of art, science, or history.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in office, retail, central area,
mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts. By SUP only in
residential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must be sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency
and open and available to the general public.
            (ii)   Retail sales in a library, art gallery, or museum is
permitted as a limited accessory use.
      (17)   Public or private school.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   OPEN-ENROLLMENT CHARTER SCHOOL means a public school that is
operated under a charter granted under Subchapter D of Chapter 12 of the Texas
Education Code.
            (ii)   PRIVATE SCHOOL means a school that a student may attend and
thereby be exempt from state law requirements of compulsory attendance at a
public school, and that exists apart from the student’s home.
            (iii)   PUBLIC SCHOOL means a kindergarten, elementary, or
secondary educational institution that is owned or operated by a local
independent school district, or operated under a charter granted under Chapter
12 of the Texas Education Code.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school:
By right in A(A), office, retail, CS, central area, mixed use, multiple
commercial, and urban corridor districts. By SUP only in single family, duplex,
townhouse, CH, multifamily, MH(A), and industrial districts. RAR required in A
(A), office, retail, CS, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor
districts.
            (ii)   Open-enrollment charter school or private school: By SUP
only in residential, office, retail, CS, industrial, central area, mixed use,
multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), nine and one- half spaces for each senior high school
classroom; otherwise, none required;
            (ii)   If an SUP is required for this use, the off-street parking
requirement may be established in the ordinance granting the SUP.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use does not include business, commercial, trade, or
craft schools.
            (ii)   This use must comply with all applicable licensing
requirements.
            (iii)   If this use is nonconforming, the board of adjustment shall
not establish a compliance date for the use under Section
51A-4.704(a)(1) unless the owners of more than 50 percent of the land within
200 feet of the lot containing the school or a lot used by an entity affiliated
with the school that is within 200 feet of the lot containing the school file a
written petition with the board requesting that a compliance date be
established. In computing the percentage of land area under this subparagraph,
the area of public rights-of-way and city-owned property is excluded. The area
of the lots used or owned by the school or by an entity affiliated with the
school is also excluded from the computation.
            (iv)   This use, if nonconforming, may expand its total floor area
by up to ten percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less, without obtaining
an SUP. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19913; 19931; 20037; 20159; 20493; 20731;
20752; 20807; 20845; 20920; 21044; 21442; 21663; 22026; 24271; 24718; 25047;
27495; 28096; 28424; 28803; 30890; 30896; 32659; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.205.   LODGING USES.
      (1)   Hotel or motel.
         (A)   Definition: A facility containing six or more guest rooms that
are rented to occupants on a daily basis.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraphs (B)(iii) or (B)
(iv), by right in MO(A), GO(A), RR, CS, LI, IR, IM, central area, MU-1, MU-1
(SAH), MU-2, MU-2(SAH), MU-3, MU-3(SAH) and multiple commercial districts.
            (ii)   By SUP only in the CR district.
            (iii)   By SUP only for a hotel or motel use that has 60 or fewer
guest rooms.
            (iv)   If an SUP is not required, RAR required in MO(A), GO(A), RR,
CS, LI, IR, IM, MU-1, MU-1(SAH), MU-2, MU-2(SAH), MU-3, MU-3(SAH), and multiple
commercial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space for each unit for units 1 to 250; 3/4 space for each
unit for units 251 to 500; 1/2 space for all units over 500; plus one space per
200 square feet of meeting room.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: For facilities containing 80 or
more guest rooms, one off-street loading space is required and must be located
outside of a fence or gate. For all hotel or motel uses, the following must be
identified at the time of permitting:
            (i)   areas of anticipated loading and unloading;
            (ii)   relevant building components used for loading and unloading
such as freight elevators and freight entrances; and
            (iii)   areas designated for short-term pick-up and drop-off.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Suite hotels may have kitchens in the guest rooms.
      (1.1)   Extended stay hotel or motel.
         (A)   Definition: A lodging facility containing six or more guest
rooms, in which:
            (i)   25 percent or more of the guest rooms have a kitchen that
includes a sink, a full-size stove, and a full-size refrigerator (a cooking
area limited to a microwave, mini-refrigerator, or cook-top does not constitute
a “kitchen” for purposes of this definition); and
            (ii)   10 percent or more of the guest rooms contain a sleeping
area that is separated from a sitting area by a wall or partition.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP in MO(A), GO(A), RR, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: For facilities containing 80 or
more guest rooms, one off-street loading space is required and must be located
outside of a fence or gate. For all extended stay hotel or motel uses, the
following must be identified at the time of permitting:
            (i)   areas of anticipated loading and unloading;
            (ii)   relevant building components used for loading and unloading
such as freight elevators and freight entrances; and
            (iii)   areas designated for short-term pick-up and drop-off.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Amenities such as maids, laundry, concierge, meeting rooms,
exercise rooms, pool, and business services (fax, internet, voice mail,
courier, etc.) may only be provided to guests.
      (2)   Lodging or boarding house.
         (A)   Definition: A facility containing at least one but fewer than
six guest rooms that are separately rented to occupants.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in MF-2(A), MF-2(SAH), MF-3(A),
MF-4(A), RR, CS, LI, IR, and central area districts. By SUP only in CR and IM
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The operator of this use may serve meals to the occupants.
            (ii)   This use may not have kitchens in the guest rooms.
      (2.1)   Overnight general purpose shelter.
         (A)   Definitions: In these use regulations:
            (i)   BED means a piece of furniture, mat, cushion, or other device
on or in which a person may lie and sleep.
            (ii)   OVERNIGHT GENERAL PURPOSE SHELTER means an emergency lodging
facility (as opposed to a residential or medical treatment facility) that
provides room and board to more than four persons who are not related by blood,
marriage, or adoption to the head of the household or the owner or operator of
the facility, and that negotiates sleeping arrangements on a daily basis,
whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services
it offers. This definition does not include:
               (aa)   dwelling units occupied exclusively by families (Note:
Dwelling units occupied exclusively by families are considered to be single
family, duplex, or multifamily uses, as the case may be); or
               (bb)   any other use specifically defined in this chapter.
            (iii)   THIS USE means an overnight general purpose shelter as
defined in this paragraph.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   If this use provides shelter for 20 or less overnight guests,
it is permitted by SUP only in LO(A), MO(A), GO(A), CR, RR, CS, LI, IR, central
area, MU-2, MU-2(SAH), MU-3, MU-3(SAH), and multiple commercial districts.
            (ii)   If this use provides shelter for more than 20 overnight
guests, it is permitted by SUP only in GO(A), CS, LI, IR, and central area
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The maximum number of overnight guests permitted under this
use is:
               (aa)   20 in LO(A), MO(A), CR, RR, MU-2, MU-3, and multiple
commercial districts; and
               (bb)   200 in all other cases.
            (ii)   The cumulative maximum number of beds permitted for all of
these uses combined on building sites located wholly or partially in the
central business district is 250.
            (iii)   The cumulative maximum number of beds permitted for all of
these uses combined on building sites located wholly or partially in the area
including and within one-third of a mile of the central business district is
1100.
            (iv)   In the event of a conflict between Subparagraphs (ii) and
(iii) and the provisions of any special purpose, planned development, or
conservation district ordinances, Subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) control.
            (v)   This use must be spaced at least 1,000 feet away from:
               (aa)   a church;
               (bb)   a public or private elementary or secondary school;
               (cc)   any residential use listed in Section
51A-4.209 except a “college dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house”;
               (dd)   any residential district, historic overlay district, or
public park; and
               (ee)   any other overnight general purpose shelter.
If this use provides shelter for more than 50 overnight guests, it must be
spaced at least one-half mile from any other overnight general purpose shelter.
For purposes of these use regulations, measurement is made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest boundary
of the building site containing the overnight general purpose shelter to the
nearest boundary of the building site containing the church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, or residential use, or to the nearest boundary
of the residential or historic overlay district or public park, whichever is
applicable. The distance between overnight general purpose shelters is measured
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
between the nearest boundaries of the building sites on which the shelters are
located.
            (vi)   This use must be located within one-half mile of public
transit.
            (vii)   This use must comply with all applicable licensing
requirements.
            (viii)   The board of adjustment shall not establish a termination
date for this use under Section
51A-4.704(a)(1).
            (ix)   Whenever an overnight general purpose shelter operating on
city-owned land in full compliance with all applicable laws is, through no
fault of its own, forced to vacate its current location as a result of the
direct, positive, and affirmative action of the city, and if the requirements
of this subparagraph are met, the shelter shall be permitted to relocate in any
nonresidential district for a period of time of one year without applying for
an SUP. The SUP requirement shall be suspended only if the proposed new
building site is located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any building site
containing any residential use listed in Section
51A-4.209 except a “college dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house”; and a
minimum of 1,000 feet from any building site containing another shelter. All
measurements shall be taken radially between the building sites in question. In
addition, the shelter must obtain a certificate of occupancy and any other
required licenses and approvals before it may begin operating. A shelter that
relocates in accordance with this subparagraph shall not acquire any
nonconforming rights during the period of suspension, and any investment made
in land, buildings, or structures during that period shall be at the complete
risk of the shelter that an SUP may not ultimately be granted. At or before the
end of the one-year period, the shelter shall either file an application for an
SUP or cease operations. A shelter that files an application for an SUP in
accordance with this subparagraph may remain operating while the application is
pending before the city plan commission or city council; however, if the
application is denied or withdrawn, the shelter shall cease operations no later
than 60 days after the date the final decision is made to deny the application,
or the date the application is withdrawn, whichever is applicable.
      (3)   Short-term rental lodging.
         (A)   Definition: A full or partial rentable unit containing one or
more kitchens, one or more bathrooms, and one or more bedrooms that is rented
to occupants for fewer than 30 consecutive days per rental period.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in MO(A), GO(A), multifamily,
central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: none.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must comply with
Chapter 42B, "Short-Term Rentals," of the Dallas City Code.
            (ii)   The number of short-term rentals in a single rentable unit
may not exceed one.
            (iii)   A short-term rental must not be used as a commercial
amusement (inside), commercial amusement (outside), restaurant with drive-in or
drive-through service, restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service, or
any other use unless it is located in a zoning district in which the use is
permitted and a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use.
            (iv)   Short-term rental lodging is prohibited in a multifamily
structure that has received a density bonus under Division
51A-4.1100.
            (v)   For purposes of this paragraph, rentable unit means one or
more rooms designed to accommodate tenants containing one or more kitchens, one
or more bathrooms, and one or more bedrooms. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19873;
20038; 20493; 20920; 21663; 22139; 24857; 25435; 30890; 32482; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.206.   MISCELLANEOUS USES.
   (1)   Attached non-premise sign.
      (A)   Definition: A “non-premise sign” as defined in
Article VII that is also an “attached sign” as defined in that article.
      (B)   Districts permitted:
         (i)   By express authorization in special provision sign districts.
         (ii)   By express authorization and SUP only in planned development
districts.
         (iii)   By SUP only in office, retail, CS, industrial, central area,
mixed use, and multiple commercial districts.
      (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
      (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (E)   Additional provisions:
         (i)   This use must be located in or within one mile of the central
business district, and be spaced at least 1,000 feet from all other attached
non-premise signs.
         (ii)   The effective area of this use may not exceed 25 percent of the
area of the facade to which it is attached, or 672 square feet, whichever is
less. No more than 10 percent of the effective area of this use may contain
words, and this use may not contain more than eight words.
         (iii)   An SUP granted for this use must have a time limit of no more
than three years, and is not eligible for automatic renewal.
         (iv)   These use regulations cannot be modified in an ordinance
establishing or amending regulations governing a planned development district.
         (v)   Subparagraphs (i), (ii), and (iii) do not apply when this use is
expressly authorized in a special provision sign district.
         (vi)   No certificate of occupancy is required for this use.
      (2)   Carnival or circus (temporary).
         (A)   Definition: A temporary traveling show or exhibition that has no
permanent structure or installation.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Special authorization by the building
official as approved in Resolution No. 65-1854.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Off-street loading requirements for this use may be satisfied
by using existing loading spaces for other uses located within 500 feet of the
carnival or circus, or by providing temporary loading spaces that do not
strictly comply with the construction and maintenance provisions for off-street
loading in this chapter. The operator of this use has the burden of
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the building official that the temporary
loading spaces are adequately designed to accommodate the loading needs of the
use without adversely affect surrounding uses.
      (3)   Detached non-premise sign.
         (A)   Definition: A “non-premise sign” as defined in
Article VII that is also a “detached sign” as defined in that article.
         (B)   Districts permitted: See Section
51A-7.306.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Legal and non-conforming detached non-premise signs may be
relocated under certain circumstances. See Section
51A-7.307.
            (ii)   No certificate of occupancy is required for this use.
      (4)   Hazardous waste management facility.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for which a person is required to obtain
a hazardous waste permit from the Texas Water Commission pursuant to the Texas
Solid Waste Disposal Act (Chapter 361 of the Texas Health and Safety Code). The
term “hazardous waste permit” means that permit required to be obtained from
the Texas Water Commission pursuant to Section 361.082 of that Act for the
processing, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste. In accordance with that
Act:
            (i)   DISPOSAL means the discharging, depositing, injecting,
dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of hazardous waste, whether
containerized or uncontainerized, into or on land or water so that the
hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may be emitted into the air,
discharged into surface water or groundwater, or introduced into the
environment in any other manner.
            (ii)   FACILITY means all contiguous land, including structures,
appurtenances, and other improvements on the land, used for the processing,
storage, or disposal of hazardous waste on the building site.
            (iii)   HAZARDOUS WASTE means solid waste, as defined by state law,
identified or listed as hazardous waste by the administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal
Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as
amended (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.).
            (iv)   PROCESSING means the extraction of materials from or the
transfer, volume reduction, conversion to energy, or other separation and
preparation of hazardous waste for reuse or disposal. The term includes the
treatment or neutralization of hazardous waste designed to change the physical,
chemical, or biological character or composition of a hazardous waste so as to
neutralize the waste, recover energy or material from the waste, render the
waste nonhazardous or less hazardous, make it safer to transport, store, or
dispose of, or render it amenable for recovery or storage, or reduce its
volume. The term does not include activities concerning those materials
exempted by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et
seq.), unless the Texas Water Commission or the Texas Department of Health
determines that regulation of the activity under the Texas Solid Waste Disposal
Act is necessary to protect human health or the environment.
            (v)   STORAGE means the temporary holding of hazardous waste, after
which the waste is processed, disposed of, or stored elsewhere. [Note: The term
“temporary holding” in this definition is subject to interpretation by the
Texas Water Commission.]
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in the IM district when operated
as a hazardous waste incinerator; otherwise by right in IR and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must fully comply with all applicable local, state,
and federal laws and regulations.
            (ii)   This use must not be located within 1,000 feet of an
established residence, church, school, or dedicated public park which is in use
at the time the notice of intent to file a hazardous waste permit application
is filed with the Texas Water Commission, or if no such notice is filed, at the
time the permit application is filed with the commission.
            (iii)   This use shall at all times be considered a separate main
use. This use cannot be an accessory use within the meaning of Section
51A-4.217.
            (iv)   When operated as a hazardous waste incinerator, this use
must front on a principal arterial and be located:
               (aa)   on a lot that is no smaller than five acres in size;
               (bb)   at least 200 feet from the lot line;
               (cc)   at least two miles from all lots containing municipal and
hazardous waste incinerators;
               (dd)   at least one mile from all lots containing medical/
infectious and pathological waste incinerators; and
               (ee)   at least 1,500 feet from all lots containing residential;
public or private school; church; public park, playground, or golf course;
convalescent or nursing home; medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center; and
hospital uses.
            (v)   No outside storage is permitted in conjunction with this use
when it is operated as a hazardous waste incinerator.
            (vi)   In the event of a conflict between these use regulations and
any other provision in this chapter, these use regulations control.
      (5)   Placement of fill material.
         (A)   Definition: The placement or deposit of fill material, which is
composed of nonhazardous earth material. This does not include industrial or
municipal waste as defined in
Chapter 18 of the Dallas City Code, as amended or solid waste as defined in
51A-2.102 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended. For the purposes of this
paragraph:
            (i)   Hazardous earth material means: earth material containing
hazardous material, as defined in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Except as otherwise provided in this
paragraph, by SUP in all districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In addition to the findings required by Section
51A-4.219 of this chapter, a specific use permit may not be granted for this
use except upon a finding that the placement of fill material:
               (aa)   will not adversely affect surrounding uses;
               (bb)   will be conducted in a manner which eliminates
unnecessary dust, noise and odor;
               (cc)   will not damage any public improvement or public
infrastructure as a result of the filling operation;
               (dd)   will not be placed in a flood plain, escarpment or
geologically similar area unless authorized in accordance with the Dallas City
Code;
               (ee)   will not alter drainage of the property that adversely
affects the site or adjacent properties;
               (ff)   will be accomplished with safe and adequate ingress and
egress to the site; and
               (gg)   will not damage or destroy any protected trees during the
filling operation unless mitigation measures are provided in accordance with
Article X of the Dallas Development Code.
            (ii)   Automatic renewal. A specific use permit granted for this
use is not eligible for automatic renewal.
            (iii)   Exemptions from the specific use permit requirement.
Placement of fill material is permitted by right in all districts if it:
               (aa)   is incidental to on-site filling operations necessary to
the development of a subdivision pursuant to an approved plat and a private
development contract executed with the city;
               (bb)   is for the site where the filling is being done and in
connection with one of the following approved permits: permit for construction,
fill permit, escarpment permit, excavation permit, or landscape permit;
               (cc)   is incidental to on-site filling operations necessary for
governmental or utility construction projects such as streets, alleys,
drainage, gas, electrical, water, cable, and telephone facilities, and similar
projects;
               (dd)   is incidental to on-site filling operations necessary to
the construction of paving for parking areas and similar activities consistent
with the allowed land use; or
               (ee)   does not exceed five truck loads or 50 cubic yards of
fill material, whichever is less, during any 12 month period. For purposes of
this provision, a truck is defined as a truck-tractor, road tractor, semi-
trailer, trailer or truck with a rated capacity in excess of one and one-half
tons according to the manufacturer’s classification.
Note: If the placement of fill material exceeds the level stated above in
provision (E)(iii)(ee) and does not qualify for an exemption, the operator of
the use must file an application for a specific use permit.
            (iv)   Operations plan. An applicant shall submit to the director
of development services an operations plan which includes:
               (aa)   hours of operation;
               (bb)   location and depth of fill;
               (cc)   fences or any other barriers necessary for safety and
screening;
               (dd)   drainage and erosion control measures, if required;
               (ee)   means for protection of trees;
               (ff)   truck routes to be used (usage of truck routes must be in
compliance with
Article X of Chapter 28 of the Dallas City Code);
               (gg)   the length of time necessary to complete the filling;
               (hh)   sufficient ingress and egress to and from the site; and
               (ii)   any other information the director determines is
reasonably necessary for a complete review of the proposed filling operations.
            (v)   Illegally deposited material. Any material illegally
deposited in the placement of fill material must be removed within 60 days
after notice from the director of the Department of Streets, Sanitation and
Code Enforcement.
      (6)   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (A)   Definition: A facility temporarily used as a construction or
sales office.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in all residential and
nonresidential districts except the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A temporary construction or sales office must be located on a
platted lot or on a site that is part of a preliminary plat approved by the
commission.
            (ii)   The building official shall issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a period of one year for a temporary construction or sales
office. The building official may grant up to four extensions of six months
each to the certificate of occupancy for a construction office if the builder
maintains active or continuous construction on the site or within the
subdivision, and for a sales office if a minimum of ten lots in the subdivision
are unsold.
            (iii)   A temporary construction or sales office may not be located
in another subdivision or used for construction or sales in another
subdivision. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20478; 20493; 21002; 22996; 23239; 24232;
25047; 28073; 30890; 32002; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.207.   OFFICE USES.
      (1)   Alternative financial establishment.
         (A)   Definitions: In this paragraph:
            (i)   ALTERNATIVE FINANCIAL ESTABLISHMENT means a car title loan
business or money services business. An alternative financial establishment
does not include state or federally chartered banks, community development
financial institutions, savings and loans, credit unions, or regulated lenders
licensed in accordance with Chapter 342 of the Texas Finance Code. If a
regulated lender licensed in accordance with Chapter 342 of the Texas Finance
Code also offers services as a credit access business under Chapter 393 of the
Texas Finance Code, that business is an alternative financial establishment.
            (ii)   CAR TITLE LOAN BUSINESS means an establishment that makes
small, short-term consumer loans secured by a title to a motor vehicle.
            (iii)   MONEY SERVICES BUSINESS means a business that provides or
assists a consumer in obtaining a payday cash advance, payroll advance, short-
term cash loan, short term cash advance, instant payday cash advance, short-
term money loan services, or similar services to individuals for a specified
fee.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in all nonresidential districts
except the NO(A), NS(A), MU-1, MU-1(SAH), UC-1, and P(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No alternative financial establishment may be located within
1,500 feet, measured from property line to property line, of any other
alternative financial establishment.
            (ii)   No alternative financial establishment may be located within
300 feet, measured from property line to property line, of a lot in a
residential district.
            (iii)   An alternative financial establishment may only be a main
use that requires a specific use permit and a certificate of occupancy. An
alternative financial establishment may not be an accessory use within the
meaning of Section
51A-4.217.
      (2)   Financial institution without drive-in window.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the extension of credit and the
custody, loan, or exchange of money which does not provide drive-in window
service for customers. A financial institution without drive-in window includes
regulated lenders licensed in accordance with Chapter 342 of the Texas Finance
Code, but does not include lenders that also offer any services as credit
access businesses under Chapter 393 of the Texas Finance Code.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in all nonresidential districts
except the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 333 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (3)   Financial institution with drive-in window.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the extension of credit and the
custody, loan, or exchange of money which provides drive-in window service for
customers in motor vehicles. A financial institution with drive-in window
includes regulated lenders licensed in accordance with Chapter 342 of the Texas
Finance Code, but does not include lenders that also offer any services as
credit access businesses under Chapter 393 of the Texas Finance Code.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in MO(A), GO(A), CR, RR, CS,
industrial, central area, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts. By SUP
only in LO(A) districts. DIR required in MO(A), GO(A), CR, RR, mixed use,
central area, and multiple commercial districts. RAR required in CS and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subsection, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 333 square feet of floor area.
            (iii)   See the additional provisions [Subparagraph (E)] for off-
street stacking requirements.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The following off-street stacking requirements apply to this
use (See Section
51A-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally):
               (aa)   The total number of stacking spaces required for teller
windows or stations is as follows:
 
NO. OF TELLER WINDOWS OR STATIONS TOTAL NUMBER OF STACKING SPACES REQUIRED
1                                 5
2                                 10
3                                 15
4                                 18
Each additional teller window or  3 additional
station
 
               (bb)   For purposes of Subparagraph (aa), the term “teller
window or station” means a location where customers in motor vehicles transact
business with an employee of the financial institution by deal drawer or
through the use of a pneumatic tube system or equivalent.
               (cc)   Each unmanned transaction station must have a minimum of
two stacking spaces. For purposes of this subparagraph, the term “unmanned
transaction station” means a location where customers in motor vehicles
transact business with a machine.
      (4)   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for examining, consulting with, and
treating patients with medical, dental, or optical problems on an out-patient
basis.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in all nonresidential districts
except the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subsection, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Offices and laboratories are permitted as accessory uses.
      (5)   Office.
         (A)   Definition: A place for the regular transaction of business.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in all nonresidential districts
except the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subsection, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 333 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Retail sales, the transfer of manufactured goods, or the
storage of commodities is not permitted except as a limited accessory use.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19806; 20493; 21001; 28214; 29208; 29589; 30890;
33112)
SEC. 51A-4.208.   RECREATION USES.
      (1)   Country club with private membership.
         (A)   Definition: A private recreational club containing a golf course
and a club house that is available only to the country club membership and
their guests.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CH, multifamily, MH(A), and all
nonresidential districts except the P(A), and urban corridor districts. By SUP
only in A(A), single family, duplex, and townhouse districts. RAR required in
CH, multifamily, and MH(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may contain a private bar, dining room, a swimming
pool, and tennis courts and similar services and recreational facilities.
      (2)   Private recreation center, club, or area.
         (A)   Definition: An area providing private recreational facilities
such as playgrounds, parks, game courts, swimming pools, and playing fields.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in GO(A), CR, RR, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, UC-2 and UC-3 districts. By SUP
only in all residential districts except MH(A), and in NO(A), LO(A), MO(A), and
NS(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (3)   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         (A)   Definition: Land planned, developed, or used for active or
passive recreational use by the public that is owned or operated by a public
agency for those purposes.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in all residential and
nonresidential districts except the P(A) district. DIR required in urban
corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions.
            (i)   Lighting standards for this use for facilities other than
parking may:
               (aa)   be built to any height below the residential proximity
slope; or
               (bb)   project above the residential proximity slope to a height
not to exceed 40 feet. This provision is an exception to the maximum structure
height that would otherwise apply in the zoning district.
            (ii)   Lighting standards for this use for parking facilities must
not exceed 20 feet in height.
            (iii)   Spillover light on neighboring residential lots must not
exceed 0.1 footcandle measured at a point five feet inside the residential lot
line and five feet above the ground surface.
            (iv)   The board may grant a special exception to the height
restrictions applicable to lighting standards for this use upon making a
special finding from the evidence presented that:
               (aa)   strict compliance with those restrictions will
unreasonably burden the use of the property; and
               (bb)   the special exception will not adversely affect
neighboring property. The board shall not grant a special exception to the
spillover light restriction in Subparagraph (iii).
            (v)   The heights of nonconforming lighting standards for this use
may be increased by up to 10 percent without board approval, provided that the
spillover light restriction in Subparagraph (iii) is complied with. The
cumulative additional height authorized by this subparagraph is 10 percent of
the height of the lighting standard at the time it became nonconforming. (Ord.
Nos. 19455; 19786; 20344; 20384; 20493; 24718; 27183; 28803; 30890; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.209.   RESIDENTIAL USES.
   (a)   General provisions. Notwithstanding any other provision in this
chapter, a facility that meets all of the requirements of Article 1011n,
V.T.C.A., may locate in any residential zone or district in the city as a
matter of right. Unless otherwise directed by the city attorney, the building
official and any other city officer or employee charged with enforcement of
this chapter shall construe Article 1011n by substituting Congress’ definition
of a handicapped person in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as amended,
for the state's definition of “disabled person” in that article.
   (b)   Specific uses.
      (1)   College dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
         (A)   Definition: A college resident hall or a facility for housing a
social or service organization of college students.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in A(A), multifamily, MH(A), LO
(A), MO(A), GO(A), CR, RR, CS, central area, mixed use, and multiple commercial
districts. By SUP only in NO(A), NS(A), and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
      (2)   Duplex.
         (A)   Definition: Two dwelling units located on a lot.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in duplex, townhouse, CH, MF-1(A),
MF-1(SAH), MF-2(A), MF-2(SAH), central area, and mixed use districts. By right
as a restricted component of a building in the GO(A) district. [See Section
51A-4.121(d).]
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per dwelling unit in D, TH, and RTN districts.
None in other districts.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Only one main building may be placed on a building site under
this use.
            (ii)   In a duplex district, a lot for a duplex use may be supplied
by not more than one electrical utility service and metered by not more than
two electrical meters. The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to
authorize more than one electrical utility service or more than two electrical
meters on a lot for a duplex use in a duplex district when, in the opinion of
the board, the special exception will:
               (aa)   not be contrary to the public interest;
               (bb)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
               (cc) not be used to conduct a use not permitted in the district
where the building site is located.
            (iii)   In addition to any other applicable regulations,
industrialized housing must comply with the following additional provisions.
For purposes of this subparagraph, “industrialized housing” means
industrialized housing as defined by Section 1202.002 of the Texas Occupations
Code, as amended.
               (aa)   Industrialized housing must have all local permits and
licenses that are applicable to other single family or duplex dwellings.
               (bb)   Industrialized housing must have a value equal to or
greater than the median taxable value of each single family dwelling located
within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to
be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll of
the appraisal district. For purposes of this subparagraph, the “value” of the
industrialized housing means the taxable value of the industrialized housing
and the lot after installation of the industrialized housing.
               (cc)   Industrialized housing must have exterior siding,
roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the
single family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the
industrialized housing is proposed to be located. “Compatible” as used in this
subparagraph means similar in application, color, materials, pattern, quality,
shape, size, slope, and other characteristics; but does not necessarily mean
identical. The burden is on the property owner or applicant to supply proof of
compatibility. The property owner or applicant may appeal a decision of the
building official to deny a permit due to lack of compatibility to the board of
adjustment.
               (dd)   Industrialized housing must comply with municipal
aesthetic standards; yard, lot, and space regulations; subdivision regulations;
landscaping; and any other regulations applicable to single family dwellings.
               (ee)   Industrialized housing must be securely fixed to a
permanent foundation.
               (ff)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed in a
historic overlay district unless the industrialized housing conforms to the
preservation criteria of the historic overlay district.
               (gg)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed in a
conservation district unless the industrialized housing conforms to the
conservation district regulations.
               (hh)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed unless it
complies with public deed restrictions for the property.
      (3)   Group residential facility.
         (A)   Definition: An interim or permanent residential facility (as
opposed to a lodging or medical treatment facility) that provides room and
board to a group of persons who are not a “family” as that term is defined in
this chapter, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for
the services it offers. This use does not include:
            (i)   facilities that negotiate sleeping arrangements on a daily
basis;
            (ii)   dwelling units occupied exclusively by families (Note:
Dwelling units occupied exclusively by families are considered to be single
family, duplex, or multifamily uses, as the case may be); or
            (iii)   any other use specifically defined in this chapter.
         (B)   Districts permitted: When located at least 1,000 feet from all
other group residential facilities and licensed handicapped group dwelling
units (as defined in this chapter), by right in CH, multifamily, central area,
and mixed use districts; otherwise, by SUP only in the same districts. For
purposes of this provision, the term “licensed” means licensed by the Texas
Department of Human Services, or its successor, and the distance between uses
is measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, between the nearest boundaries of the building sites on which the uses
are located. (Note: The spacing component of these use regulations is based,
not on the handicapped status of the residents, but on the non-family status of
the groups. [See Section
51A-1.102(b)(2).]) By SUP only in urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use is subject to the following density restrictions:
ZONING DISTRICT MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS MAXIMUM NO. OF BEDS* PER NET
CLASSIFICATION  OR SUITES* PER NET ACRE       ACRE
ZONING DISTRICT       MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING  MAXIMUM NO. OF BEDS* PER NET
CLASSIFICATION        UNITS OR SUITES* PER NET ACRE
                      ACRE
TH-1(A) and RTN       35                       70
TH-2(A) and TH-3(A)   40                       80
CH                    45                       90
MF-1(A) and MF-1(SAH) 50                       100
MF-2(A) and MF-2(SAH) 60                       120
MF-3(A)               90                       180
MF-4(A)               160                      320
*For purposes of this subparagraph, the term “suite” means one or more
rooms designed to accommodate one family, containing living, sanitary, and
sleeping facilities, but not containing a kitchen; and the term “bed” means
a piece of furniture, mat, cushion, or other device on or in which one may
lie and sleep.
 
            (ii)   This use must comply with statutory licensing requirements,
if any.
            (iii)   This use may include dwelling units or suites that are
exclusively restricted to visitors or members of the staff.
      (3.1)   Handicapped group dwelling unit.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   DOMICILE means the legal, established, fixed, and permanent
place of residence of a person, as distinguished from a temporary and
transient, though actual, place of residence.
            (ii)   HANDICAPPED GROUP DWELLING UNIT means a single dwelling unit
that is the domicile of not more than eight handicapped persons who are not a
“family” as that term is defined in this chapter, and who are living together
as a single housekeeping unit. Up to two supervisory personnel may reside on
the premises, provided that the total number of residents, including
supervisory personnel, does not exceed eight.
            (iii)   HANDICAPPED PERSON means a handicapped person as defined in
the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as amended.
            (iv)   LICENSED means licensed by the Texas Department of Human
Services, or its successor.
         (B)   Districts permitted: When located at least 1,000 feet from group
residential facilities and all other licensed handicapped group dwelling units
(as defined in this chapter), by right in the following districts:
agricultural, single family, duplex, townhouse, CH, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2
(A), MF-2(SAH), MH(A), GO(A), central area, MU-1, and MU-1(SAH) districts;
otherwise, by SUP only in the same districts. In the GO(A) district, the total
floor area of this use in combination with all single family, duplex, and
multifamily uses may not exceed five percent of the total floor area of the
building in which the use is located. For purposes of this provision, the
distance between uses is measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, between the nearest boundaries of the
building sites on which the uses are located. (Note: The spacing component of
these use regulations is based, not on the handicapped status of the residents,
but on the non-family status of the groups.) By SUP only in urban corridor
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No certificate of occupancy is required for this use.
            (ii)   This use liberalizes current restrictions on the number of
unrelated persons who may reside together in a dwelling unit in the city for
the exclusive benefit of handicapped persons seeking to permanently reside
together as a single housekeeping unit. Its purpose is to comply with the
substance and spirit of the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as
amended, which requires that reasonable accommodations be made in rules,
policies, and practices to permit persons with handicaps equal opportunity to
use and enjoy a dwelling. [See Section
51A-1.102(b)(2).]
            (iii)   This use is exempt from payment of SUP application fees.
            (iv)   Any owner of property on which this use is located or
proposed to be located may request a letter from the director confirming that
no SUP is required for the use. No fee is required to apply for such a letter.
Application must be on a form furnished by the director. The director shall
issue the requested letter unless, within 30 days after submission of a
complete application, the director gives written notice to the applicant that
the use or proposed use will require an SUP. For purposes of this paragraph,
notice is given to the applicant by depositing the same properly addressed and
postage paid in the United States mail. The proper address for purposes of this
notice requirement is the address provided by the applicant on the application.
No SUP shall be required for uses that operate in justifiable reliance upon a
valid confirmation letter issued by the director.
            (v)   Any aggrieved person may appeal a decision of the director
that an SUP is required for this use. Such appeals shall be heard and decided
by the board of adjustment. An appeal to the board must be made within 15 days
after the director gives written notice that the SUP is required. Appeal is
made by filing a written notice of appeal on a form approved by the board. [See
Section
51A-4.703.] No fee is required to appeal the decision of the director to the
board.
            (vi)   If two or more facilities are within 1,000 feet of each
other and otherwise in permissible locations, the first one lawfully
established and continually operating thereafter is the conforming use. For
purposes of this subparagraph, “continually operating” means that the use has
not been discontinued for six months or more.
      (4)   Manufactured home park, manufactured home subdivision, or
campground.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A manufactured home park is a unified development of
transient stands arranged on a lot under single ownership.
            (ii)   A manufactured home subdivision is a plat designed
specifically for manufactured home development.
            (iii)   A campground is a lot used to accommodate recreation
vehicles, tents, or manufactured homes on a rental basis for temporary camping
purposes.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in the MH(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The owner of a manufactured home park must have a site plan
approved by the commission before the building official may issue a building
permit for the manufactured home park. The site plan must include the
dimensions, bearings, and street frontage of the property; the location of
buildings, structures, lots, stands, and uses; the method of ingress and
egress; off-street parking and loading arrangements; screening, lighting, and
landscaping, if appropriate; and any other information the director determines
necessary for a complete review of the proposed development.
            (ii)   The owner of a manufactured home subdivision must have a
plat approved by the commission and filed in the county records before the
building official may issue a building permit for the manufactured home
subdivision.
            (iii)   One caretaker’s dwelling unit and one office is permitted
under this use.
            (iv)   Uses that are customarily incidental to this use, including
an employee’s washroom, a manager’s office, laundry room, swimming pool, and
game courts are permitted provided they are located no closer than 50 feet to
an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, or TH(A) district. The game courts, laundry room, and
swimming pool must be for the exclusive use of the residents and their guests.
No exterior advertising of the uses is permitted.
            (v)   The owner under this use must provide and maintain a
permanent steel chain link fence or its equivalent. The fence must be at least
five feet in height and must completely surround the rear and all sides of this
use that are not exposed to a dedicated street.
            (vi)   Open playground space must be provided under this use at a
ratio of 500 square feet of open space for each of the first 20 lots or
transient stands provided, and at a ratio of 250 square feet for all additional
lots or transient stands.
            (vii)   This use must comply with the requirements of
Chapter 47 of this code.
      (5)   Multifamily.
         (A)   Definitions: Three or more dwelling units located on a lot.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CH, multifamily, central area,
mixed use, and urban corridor districts. By right as a restricted component of
a building in the GO(A) district. [See Section
51A-4.121(d).]
         (C)   Off-street parking:
            (i)   Required off-street parking: Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B) and this subparagraph:
               (aa)    None required for multifamily developments with 20
dwelling units or less.
               (bb)   One half space per dwelling unit for multifamily
developments with more than 20 but less than 200 dwelling units.
               (cc)   One space per dwelling unit for multifamily developments
with 200 dwelling units or more.
               (dd)   No additional parking is required for accessory uses that
are limited principally to residents.
            (ii)   Guest parking: For multifamily uses with more than 20 but
less than 100 dwelling units, 10 percent of required parking spaces must be
marked for use by guests. For multifamily uses with 100 dwelling units or more,
15 percent of required parking spaces must be marked for use by guests. All
guest parking must be clearly marked at the driveway entrance or walking gate
            (iii)   The number of off-street parking spaces required under this
subparagraph may be reduced to provide adequate area for the placement of
recycling containers in accordance with Section 18-5.1(e) according to the
following table:
 
No. of Dwelling Units No. of Required Parking Spaces Reduced
8 - 100               3
101 - 400             3% or 6, whichever is less
401 +                 9
 
This parking reduction only applies to structures built before August 12, 2020.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: For multifamily uses with 150
dwelling units or more, one off-street loading space of adequate size to
accommodate a typical moving or delivery van is required and must be located
outside of a fence or gate. For all multifamily uses, the following must be
identified at the time of permitting:
            (i)   areas of anticipated loading and unloading;
            (ii)   relevant building components used for loading and unloading
such as freight elevators and freight entrances; and
            (iii)   areas designated for short-term pick-up and drop-off.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Uses that are customarily incidental to the multifamily use
and that include an employee’s washroom, a manager’s office, laundry room,
swimming pool, and game courts are permitted provided they are located no
closer than 50 feet to an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, or TH(A) district. The game
courts, laundry room, and swimming pool must be for the exclusive use of the
residents and their guests. No exterior advertising of the uses is permitted.
            (ii)   The minimum space between exterior walls of a multifamily
dwelling must be 10 feet between the walls if only one wall has an opening for
light and air and 20 feet if both walls have an opening for light and air. This
provision applies to multifamily buildings with a common roof and free standing
multifamily buildings. This provision does not apply to walls located entirely
within a dwelling unit.
            (iii)   This use does not include a hotel or motel.
      (5.1)   Residential hotel.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that receives more than 50 percent of its
rental income from occupancies of 30 consecutive days or more and contains:
            (i)   six or more guest rooms with living and sleeping
accommodations, but no kitchen or kitchenette;
            (ii)   six or more guest rooms with living, sleeping, and kitchen
or kitchenette facilities that are offered for rental on a daily basis; or
            (iii)   six or more guest rooms with living and sleeping
accommodations, each of which is individually secured and rented separately to
one or more individuals who have access to bathroom, kitchen, or dining
facilities outside the guest room on a common basis with other occupants of the
structure.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in MF-2(A), MF-2(SAH), MF-3(A),
MF-4(A), central area, and mixed use districts when located at least one mile,
measured from property line to property line, from all other residential hotel
uses.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use is subject to the regulations in
Article VII of
Chapter 27 of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
            (ii)   For a use holding an occupancy record card pursuant to
Chapter 27 on August 10, 1994, the nonconformity as to the minimum distance
requirement set out in Subparagraph (B) does not render it subject to
amortization by the board of adjustment.
            (iii)   The operator of this use shall maintain a registry showing
the name, address, date of arrival, and date of departure of each guest. The
operator of this use shall make the registry available to the building
official.
      (5.2)   Retirement housing.
         (A)   Definition: A residential facility principally designed for
persons 55 years of age or older. This use does not include a “convalescent and
nursing homes, hospice care, and related institutions” use, which is defined as
a separate main use in Section
51A-4.204(8).
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CH, multifamily, central area,
and mixed use districts. By SUP only in townhouse and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In these regulations:
               (aa)   ELDERLY RESIDENT means a resident that is 55 years of age
or older.
               (bb)   SUITE means one or more rooms designed to accommodate one
family containing living, sanitary, and sleeping facilities, but not containing
a kitchen.
            (ii)   In townhouse, RTN, CH, and multifamily districts, this use
is subject to the following density restrictions:
ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS OR SUITES* PER NET
                               ACRE
ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS OR SUITES* PER NET
                               ACRE
TH-1(A) and RTN                25
TH-2(A) and TH-3(A)            35
CH                             40
MF-1(A) and MF-1(SAH)          45
MF-2(A) and MF-2(SAH)          55
MF-3(A)                        90
MF-4(A)                        160
 
            (iii)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraphs (iv) and (v),
each occupied dwelling unit or suite must have at least one elderly resident.
Failure to comply with this provision shall result in the facility being
reclassified as another residential or lodging use.
            (iv)   One dwelling unit or suite may be designated as a caretaker
unit whose occupants are not subject to the age restriction in Subparagraph
(iii).
            (v)   Those persons legally re-siding with an elderly resident at
the facility may continue to reside at the facility for a period not to exceed
one year if the elderly resident dies or moves out for medical reasons. The
board may grant a special exception to authorize an extension of the length of
time a person may continue to reside at the facility if the board finds, after
a public hearing, that literal enforcement of this provision would result in an
unnecessary personal hardship. In determining whether an unnecessary personal
hardship would result, the board shall consider the following factors:
               (aa)   The physical limitations of the resident, if any.
               (bb)   Any economic constraints which would make it difficult
for the resident to relocate.
               (cc)   Whether the resident is dependent on support services or
special amenities provided by the retirement housing project.
                (dd)   Whether there are any alternative housing or market
constraints which would impair the ability to relocate.
            (vi)   No use with exterior advertising or signs may be considered
accessory to this use.
      (6)   Single family.
         (A)   Definition: One dwelling unit located on a lot.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in agricultural, single family,
duplex, townhouse, CH, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2(A), MF-2(SAH), MH(A), central
area, MU-1, and MU-1(SAH) districts. By right as a restricted component of a
building in the GO(A) district. [See Section
51A-4.121(d).]
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per dwelling unit in single family, duplex,
townhouse, and RTN districts.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Additional dwelling unit. The board of adjustment may grant a
special exception to authorize an additional dwelling unit in any district
when, in the opinion of the board, the additional dwelling unit will not:
               (aa)   be used as rental accommodations; or
               (bb)   adversely affect neighbor ing properties.
            (ii)   In granting a special exception under Subparagraph (i), the
board shall require the applicant to deed restrict the subject property to
prevent use of the additional dwelling unit as rental accommodations.
            (iii)   Accessory dwelling unit.
               (aa)   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to
authorize a rentable accessory dwelling unit in any district when, in the
opinion of the board, the accessory dwelling unit will not adversely affect
neighboring properties.
               (bb)   If a minimum of one additional off-street parking space
is not provided, the board shall determine if that will create a traffic
hazard. The board may require an additional off-street parking space be
provided as a condition of granting this special exception.
               (cc)   In granting a special exception under this subparagraph,
the board shall require the applicant to:
                  (I)   deed restrict the subject property to require owner-
occupancy on the premises; and
                  (II)   annually register the rental property with the city's
single family non-owner occupied rental program.
            (iv)   Dwelling units in general.
               (aa)   Except for the foundation, a dwelling unit must be
physically separable from contiguous dwelling units in the event of removal of
a dwelling unit. Each party wall must be governed by a set of deed
restrictions, stipulating that if a dwelling unit is removed, the party wall
stays with the remaining dwelling unit.
               (bb)   Each dwelling unit must have separate utility services;
however, general utility services on land owned and maintained by a homeowner's
association is allowed.
            (v)   Utility meters. In a single family, duplex, or townhouse
district, a lot for a single family use may be supplied by not more than one
electrical utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter.
The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than
one electrical utility service or more than one electrical meter on a lot in a
single family, duplex, or townhouse district when, in the opinion of the board,
the special exception will:
               (aa)   not be contrary to the public interests;
               (bb)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
               (cc)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in the
district where the building site is located.
            (vi)   Industrialized housing. In addition to any other applicable
regulations, industrialized housing must comply with the following additional
provisions. For purposes of this subparagraph, "industrialized housing" means
industrialized housing as defined by Section 1202.002 of the Texas Occupations
Code, as amended.
               (aa)   Industrialized housing must have all local permits and
licenses that are applicable to other single family or duplex dwellings.
               (bb)   Industrialized housing must have a value equal to or
greater than the median taxable value of each single family dwelling located
within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to
be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll of
the appraisal district. For purposes of this subparagraph, the "value" of the
industrialized housing means the taxable value of the industrialized housing
and the lot after installation of the industrialized housing.
               (cc)   Industrialized housing must have exterior siding,
roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the
single family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the
industrialized housing is proposed to be located. "Compatible" as used in this
subparagraph means similar in application, color, materials, pattern, quality,
shape, size, slope, and other characteristics; but does not necessarily mean
identical. The burden is on the property owner or applicant to supply proof of
compatibility. The property owner or applicant may appeal a decision of the
building official to deny a permit due to lack of compatibility to the board of
adjustment.
               (dd)   Industrialized housing must comply with municipal
aesthetic standards; yard, lot, and space regulations; subdivision regulations;
landscaping; and any other regulations applicable to single family dwellings.
               (ee)   Industrialized housing must be securely fixed to a
permanent foundation.
               (ff)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed in a
historic overlay district unless the industrialized housing conforms to the
preservation criteria of the historic overlay district.
               (gg)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed in a
conservation district unless the industrialized housing conforms to the
conservation district regulations.
               (hh)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed unless it
complies with public deed restrictions for the property.
            (vii)   Accessory structures. Except in the agricultural district,
accessory structures are subject to the following regulations:
               (aa)   Except as provided in this section, no person shall rent
an accessory structure. For purposes of this section, rent means the payment of
any form of consideration for the use of the accessory structure.
               (bb)   Except for accessory dwelling units, no person shall use
an advertisement, display, listing, or sign on or off the premises to advertise
the rental of an accessory structure.
               (cc)   The height of an accessory structure may not exceed the
height of the main building.
               (dd)   The floor area of any individual accessory structure on a
lot, excluding floor area used for parking, may not exceed 25 percent of the
floor area of the main building.
               (ee)   The total floor area of all accessory structures on a
lot, excluding floor area used for parking, may not exceed 50 percent of the
floor area of the main building.
               (ff)   Accessory structures must have a roof-pitch and
fenestration compatible with the main building. It is recommended that
accessory structures have exterior siding, roofing, and foundation fascia
compatible with the main building. "Compatible" as used in this provision means
similar in application, color, pattern, shape, size, slope, and other
characteristics; but does not necessarily mean identical. The burden is on the
property owner or applicant to supply the proof of compatibility. Use of
similar materials or materials of similar quality to the main building serves
as additional evidence that the property owner's burden of proof of
compatibility has been met. This provision does not apply to accessory
structures with a floor area of 200 square feet or less. (Ord. Nos. 19455;
19786; 19912; 20360; 20493; 20953; 21044; 21663; 22139; 22390; 23897; 24585;
24718; 24857; 25133; 25486; 25977; 27495; 28803; 29208; 30184; 30890; 30930;
31607; 31608; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.210.   RETAIL AND PERSONAL SERVICE USES.
   (a)   General provisions. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the
following general provisions apply to all uses listed in this section:
      (1)   All uses must be retail or service establishments dealing directly
with consumers. No person may produce goods or perform services on the premises
unless those goods or services are principally sold on the premises to
individuals at retail.
      (2)   Outside sales, outside display of merchandise, and outside storage
may be classified as either main or accessory uses. Accessory outside sales,
accessory outside display of merchandise, and accessory outside storage are
limited to five percent of the lot. If these uses occupy more than five percent
of the lot, they are only allowed in districts that permit them as a main use.
      (3)   In a GO(A) district, a retail and personal service use:
         (A)   must be contained entirely within a building; and
         (B)   may not have a floor area that, in combination with the floor
areas of other retail and personal service uses in the building, exceeds 10
percent of the total floor area of the building.
   (b)   Specific uses.
      (1)   Ambulance service.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the housing, maintenance, and
dispatch of vehicles designed to transport sick or injured persons to medical
facilities.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, central area, MC-3,
and MC-4 districts. RAR required in CR, RR, CS, MC-3, and MC-4 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provision: Vehicles being displayed, sold, serviced,
or repaired must be parked on site.
      (2)   Animal shelter or clinic.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the diagnosis, treatment,
hospitalization, or harboring of animals including, but not limited to dogs,
cats, birds, and horses.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Without outside runs: By right in A(A), CR, RR, CS, LI, IR,
IM, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts. RAR required
in CR, RR, CS, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts.
            (ii)   With outside runs: By right in CS, LI, IR, and IM districts
when located at least 1,000 feet from residential districts; otherwise, by SUP
only in the same districts. By SUP only in A(A) and RR districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (3)   Auto service center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the servicing or minor repair,
maintenance, alteration, upholstering, reupholstering, or inspection of motor
vehicles. This use may include the retail sale of lubricating oils, tires, or
parts for use in motor vehicles. This use does not include the disassembly,
rebuilding, and replacement of motor vehicle engines, transmissions, or other
major machinery components, nor auto body repair or painting.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central
area, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts. RAR required in CR, RR, CS,
industrial, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 500 square feet of floor area; a minimum of four
spaces is required. Parking spaces that are used to repair motor vehicles and
located in a structure are not counted in determining the required parking.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 60,000                                1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   If an inoperable or wrecked motor vehicle remains outside on
the premises for more than 24 hours, the premises is an outside salvage or
reclamation use. However, a premise is not an outside salvage or reclamation
use if the premise stores not more than four inoperable or wrecked motor
vehicles each of which having a valid state registration, current safety
inspection certificate, and documentary record of pending repairs or other
disposition, and if the premise has a current certificate of occupancy for a
motor vehicle related use.
            (ii)   The servicing or repair of oversized motor vehicles is not
permitted under this use.
            (iii)   Vehicles being displayed, sold, serviced, or repaired must
be parked on site.
      (4)   Alcoholic beverage establishments.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   BAR, LOUNGE, OR TAVERN means an establishment principally for
the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises that derives 75
percent or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly (three-month) basis from
the sale or service of alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code, for on-premise consumption.
            (ii)   MICROBREWERY, MICRO- DISTILLERY, OR WINERY means an
establishment for the manufacture, blending, fermentation, processing, and
packaging of alcoholic beverages with a floor area of 10,000 square feet or
less that takes place wholly inside a building. A facility that only provides
tasting or retail sale of alcoholic beverages is not a microbrewery,
microdistillery, or winery use.
            (iii)   PRIVATE-CLUB BAR means an establishment holding a private
club permit under Chapter 32 or 33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code that
derives 35 percent or more of its gross revenue from the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption and that is located within a dry
area as defined in Title 6 (Local Option Elections) of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code. PRIVATE-CLUB BAR does not include a fraternal or veterans
organization, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, holding a
private club permit under Chapter 32 or 33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code. PRIVATE-CLUB BAR does not include the holder of a food and beverage
certificate, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Bar, lounge, or tavern and private club-bar. By SUP only in
GO(A)*, CR, RR, CS, industrial, central area, mixed use, multiple commercial,
MF-4(A), LO(A), MO(A), UC-2, and UC-3 districts. *Note: This use is subject to
restrictions in the GO(A) district. See Subsection (a)(3).
            (ii)   Microbrewery, micro-distillery, or winery. By right in
industrial districts with RAR required. By SUP only in CR, RR, CS, central
area, mixed-use, urban corridor, and walkable urban mixed use districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Bar, lounge, or tavern and private club-bar.
               (aa)    Except as provided in this romanette and Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B):
                  (11)    One space per 200 square feet of floor area used for
retail sales and seating. No parking is required for any other floor area.
                  (22)    No parking is required for a building with 2,500
square feet or less of floor area.
               (bb)    When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in
existence on May 14, 2025:
                  (11)    Except as otherwise provided, one space per 100
square feet of floor area.
                  (22)    One space per 500 square feet of floor area used for
the manufacture of alcoholic beverages as an accessory use to the bar, lounge,
or tavern use.
            (ii)    Microbrewery, micro-distillery, or winery.
               (aa)    Except as provided in this romanette and Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B):
                  (11)    One space per 200 square feet of floor area used for
retail sales and seating. No parking is required for any other floor area.
                  (22)    No parking is required for buildings less than 2,500
square feet of floor area.
               (bb)    When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in
existence on May 14, 2025:
                  (11)    Except as otherwise provided, one space per 600
square feet of floor area.
                  (22)    One space per 1,000 square feet of floor area used
for storage.
                  (33)    One space per 100 square feet of floor area used for
retail sales and seating.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 5,000                                 NONE
5,000 to 25,000                            1
25,000 to 50,000                           2
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Bar, lounge, or tavern and private club-bar.
               (aa)   Food may be prepared and served as an accessory use.
               (bb)   Music, entertainment, or facilities for dancing may be
provided under this use.
               (cc)   The person owning or operating the use shall, upon
request, supply the building official with any records needed to document the
percentage of gross revenue for the previous 12 month period derived from the
sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption.
               (dd)   Unless the person owning or operating the use supplies
the building official with records to prove otherwise, an establishment holding
a private club permit under Chapter 32 or 33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code is presumed to derive 35 percent or more of its gross revenue from the
sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption.
            (ii)   Microbrewery, micro-distillery, or winery.
               (aa)   Retail sales of alcoholic beverages and related items and
tastings or sampling are allowed in accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission regulations.
               (bb)   Except for loading, all activities must occur within a
building.
               (cc)   Silos and containers of spent grain are allowed as
outdoor storage. Containers of spent grain must be screened. All other outdoor
storage or repair is prohibited.
               (dd)   If an SUP is required, silos and outdoor storage areas
for spent grain must be shown on the site plan.
               (ee)   Drive-through facilities are prohibited.
      (5)   Business school.
         (A)   Definition: A facility offering instruction and training in a
service or the arts such as secretarial, barber, commercial artist, computer
software, medical technician, and similar training.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in LO(A), MO(A), GO(A)*, CR, RR,
CS, industrial, central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, UC-2, and UC-
3 districts. By SUP only in the NO(A) district. *Note: This use is subject to
restrictions in the GO(A) district. See Subsection (a)(3).
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (6)   Car wash.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the washing or steam cleaning of
passenger vehicles. A car wash may be:
            (i)   a single unit type which has a single bay or a group of
single bays with each bay to accommodate one vehicle only; or
            (ii)   a tunnel unit type which allows washing of multiple vehicles
in a tandem arrangement while moving through the structure.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, mixed
use, MC-2, MC-3, and MC-4 districts. DIR required in the CR district. RAR
required in RR, CS, industrial, mixed use, MC-2, MC-3, and MC-4 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None. Except for tunnel-type car
washes see the additional provisions [Subparagraph (E)] for off-street stacking
requirements.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Required off-street stacking: Three stacking spaces for each
bay in a single unit car wash; 25 stacking spaces for each tunnel unit car
wash. See Section
51A-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
            (ii)   Spaces used to wash motor vehicles and located in a
structure are not counted in determining the required stacking.
      (7)   Commercial amusement (inside).
         (A)   Definitions. In this paragraph:
            (i)   AMUSEMENT CENTER means a facility for which an amusement
center license is required under
Chapter 6A of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
            (ii)   BILLIARD HALL means a facility for which a billiard hall
license is required under
Chapter 9A of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
            (iii)   CHILDREN’S AMUSEMENT CENTER means a facility with amusement
rides, games, play areas, and other activities, catering primarily to children
12 years of age and younger.
            (iv)   CLASS E DANCE HALL means a facility for which a Class E
dance hall license is required under
Chapter 14 of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
            (v)   COMMERCIAL AMUSE- MENT (INSIDE) means a facility wholly
enclosed in a building that offers entertainment or games of skill to the
general public for a fee. This use includes but is not limited to an adult
arcade, adult cabaret, adult theater, amusement center, billiard hall, bowling
alley, children’s amusement center, dance hall, motor track, or skating rink.
            (vi)   DANCE HALL means a dance hall as defined in
Chapter 14 of the Dallas City Code, as amended, but excludes those uses
described in Section
14-2(d). This definition includes a Class E dance hall.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraphs (B)(ii), (B)
(iii), and (B)(iv), by right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central area, mixed
use, multiple commercial, UC-2, and UC-3 districts.
            (ii)   Amusement center: An SUP is required for an amusement center
in a CR, RR, CS, industrial, central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, UC-
1, or UC-2 district if it has a floor area of 2,500 square feet or more and is
located within 300 feet of a residential district.
            (iii)   Bingo parlor: An SUP is required for a bingo parlor in a
CR, UC-2, or UC-3 district.
            (iv)   Dance hall: An SUP is required for any dance hall (including
a Class E dance hall) in a CR, CS, UC-2, or UC-3 district. An SUP is also
required for a Class E dance hall in an RR, industrial, central area, mixed
use, or multiple commercial district if the Class E dance hall is located
within 300 feet of a residential district. RAR is required for any dance hall
that does not require an SUP but is located within 300 feet of a residential
district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   In general. Except as provided in this subparagraph and
Section
51A-4.301 (a)(2)(B):
               (aa)   If an SUP is required for this use, the off-street
parking requirements may be established in the ordinance granting the SUP,
otherwise one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
               (bb)    Bowling alley: one space for each 200 square feet of
floor area dedicated to bowling lanes.
               (cc)    Motor track: none required for the restricted track area
and one space per additional 200 square feet of floor area.
            (ii)   MD-1 district. When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta
Overlay in existence on May 14, 2025:
               (aa)    Bingo parlor: one space per 50 square feet of floor
area.
               (bb)    Bowling alley: six spaces per lane.
               (cc)    Children’s amusement center: one space per 200 square
feet of floor area.
               (dd)    Dance hall: one space per 25 square feet of dance floor
and one space per 100 square feet of floor area for the remainder of the use.
Delta credits, as defined in Section
51A-4.704(b)(4)(A), may not be used to meet this off-street parking
requirement. No special exception may be granted to the parking requirements.
               (ee)    Motor track: one space per 1,000 square feet of
restricted track area and one space per additional 200 square feet of floor
area.
               (ff)    Skating rink: one space per 200 square feet of floor
area.
               (gg)    Other uses: If an SUP is required for this use, the off-
street parking requirements may be established in the ordinance granting the
SUP, otherwise one space per 100 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   For purposes of determining the applicability of regulations
triggered by the proximity of this use to another zoning district, measurements
are made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest boundary of the lot where this use is conducted to
the nearest boundary of the zoning district at issue.
            (ii)   All required off-street parking for a bingo parlor located
within 300 feet of a residential district must be provided on the lot occupied
by the bingo parlor use.
            (iii)   A dance hall shall at all times be considered a separate
main use and cannot be an accessory use within the meaning of Section
51A-4.217.
            (iv)   This use must comply with all applicable licensing
requirements. Amusement center licensing requirements are located in
Chapter 6A, billiard hall licensing requirements are located in
Chapter 9A, dance hall licensing requirements are located in
Chapter 14, and sexually oriented business licensing requirements are located
in
Chapter 41A.
      (8)   Commercial amusement (outside).
         (A)   Definition: A facility offering entertainment or games of skill
to the general public for a fee where any portion of the activity takes place
outside. This use includes, but is not limited to a golf driving range or
miniature golf course.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS and central area districts.
By SUP only in A(A), CR, RR, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts. DIR
required in the CS district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   In general. Except as provided in this subparagraph and
Section
51A-4.301 (a)(2)(B), if an SUP is required for this use, the off-street parking
requirement may be established by the ordinance granting the SUP, otherwise one
space per 200 square feet of floor area.
            (ii)   MD-1 district. When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta
Overlay in existence on May 14, 2025, if an SUP is required for this use, the
off-street parking requirement may be established by the ordinance granting the
SUP, otherwise one space per 200 square feet of floor area, plus one space per
400 square feet of site area exclusive of parking area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (8.1)   Commercial motor vehicle parking.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the temporary, daily, or overnight
parking of oversized motor vehicles primarily designed for the long- distance
transportation of cargo, for no charge or for a fee, regardless of whether that
fee is charged independently of any other use on the lot, if the parking is not
accessory to a main use on the lot.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, LI, IR, and IM districts,
except by SUP only if located within 500 feet of a residential district,
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest boundary of the lot where this use is conducted to
the nearest boundary of the zoning district at issue.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (9)   Commercial parking lot or garage.
         (A)   Definition: A vehicle parking facility that is not managed by a
main use on the same lot.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in nonresidential districts. RAR
required in all nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None; however, if this use is in
the central business district, off-street stacking spaces or passenger
unloading zones may need to be provided. For more information regarding off-
street parking in the central business district, see Section
51A-4.306.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The parking of oversized motor vehicles is prohibited under
this use.
            (ii)   This use must comply with the off-street parking regulations
in Divisions
51A-4.300 et seq.
            (iii)   If located in the CA-1(A) district, this use must comply
with the regulations in Section
51A-4.124(a)(9).
      (9.1)   Convenience store with drive-through.
         (A)   Definition: A business that is primarily engaged in the retail
sale of convenience goods, or both convenience goods and gasoline, that has
drive-in or drive-through service and has less than 10,000 square feet of floor
area. For purposes of this definition, CONVENIENCE GOODS means food, beverage,
household, personal care, and pharmaceutical items. A gasoline pump is not
considered a drive-in or drive-through service.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in CR, RR, CS, IR, IM, MU-2,
MU-3, and multiple commercial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A minimum of two stacking spaces must be provided. See
Section
51A-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
            (ii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of furniture is
permitted if the furniture is:
               (aa)   customarily used outside; and
               (bb)   made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (iii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of furniture, other
than the furniture described in Section
51A-4.210(b)(9.1)(E)(ii), is permitted only on Saturday and Sunday.
            (iv)   This use must comply with
Chapter 12B, “Convenience Stores,” of the Dallas City Code.
      (10)   Drive-in theater.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for showing motion pictures outdoors
where the audience views the motion picture from automobiles or while seated
outside.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in A(A), CS, and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None. The number of stacking spaces
must equal 10 percent of the number of the theater’s stalls.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (11)   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the cleaning or laundering of
garments, principally for individuals.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in GO(A)*, retail, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts. In urban corridor
districts, this use is permitted by right, but the use may not have a drive-in
or drive-through facility. By right as a limited use only in MF-3(A), MF-4(A),
LO(A), and MO(A) districts. *Note: This use is subject to restrictions in the
GO(A) district. See Subsection (a)(3).
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 200 square feet or floor area. If more than 10
off-street parking spaces are required for this use, handicapped parking must
be provided pursuant to Section
51A-4.305.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Garments may be collected at off-site pick-up stations for
laundering and dry cleaning in this use.
            (ii)   This use may occupy no more than:
               (aa)   3,500 square feet of floor area in an NS(A) district; and
               (bb)   7,500 square feet of floor area in all other districts.
            (iii)   If this use has a drive-through facility, a minimum of two
stacking spaces must be provided. See Section
51A-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
      (12)   Furniture store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility principally for the display and retail
sale of new furniture and appliances.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central
area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 500 square feet of floor area open to the
public. One space per 1,000 square feet of floor area for storage or warehouse
areas not open to the public.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 60,000                                1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The outside sale, display, or storage of furniture is
permitted if the furniture is:
               (aa)   customarily used outside; and
               (bb)    made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (ii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of furniture, other
than the furniture described in Section
51A-4.210(b)(12)(E)(i), is permitted only on Saturday and Sunday.
            (iii)   See Section
51A-4.605 for design standards applicable to uses of 100,000 square feet or
more.
      (13)   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
         (A)   Definition: A retail store with a floor area of 3,500 square
feet or less for the sale of general merchandise or food. Typical general
merchandise includes clothing and other apparel, equipment for hobbies and
sports, gifts, flowers and household plants, dry goods, toys, furniture,
antiques, books and stationery, pets, drugs, auto parts and accessories, and
similar consumer goods. The term “food store” includes a grocery store,
delicatessen, convenience store without drive-through, and specialty foods
store. This use does not include other uses in this article that are
specifically listed.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in GO(A)*, retail, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts. By
right as a limited use only in MF-3(A), MF-4(A), LO(A), and MO(A) districts.
*Note: This use is subject to restrictions in the GO(A) district. See
Subsection (a)(3).
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except otherwise provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   If this use has a drive-through facility, a minimum of two
stacking spaces must be provided. See Section
51A-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
            (ii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of furniture is
permitted if the furniture is:
               (aa)   customarily used outside; and
               (bb)    made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (iii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of furniture, other
than the furniture described in Section
51A-4.210(b)(13)(E)(ii), is permitted only on Saturday and Sunday.
      (14)   General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square feet.
         (A)   Definition: A retail store with a floor area greater than 3,500
square feet but less than 100,000 square feet for the sale of general
merchandise or food. Typical general merchandise includes clothing and other
apparel, equipment for hobbies and sports, gifts, flowers and household plants,
dry goods, toys, furniture, antiques, books and stationery, pets, drugs, auto
parts and accessories, and similar consumer goods. The term “food store”
includes a grocery store, delicatessen, convenience store without drive-
through, and specialty foods store. This use does not include other uses in
this article that are specifically listed.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, central area, mixed
use, multiple commercial, UC-2, and UC-3 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 200 square feet of floor area for uses with less
than 10,000 square feet of floor area. One space per 220 square feet of floor
area for uses with a floor area of 10,000 square feet or greater, but less than
40,000 square feet of floor area. One space per 250 square feet of floor area
for uses with a floor area of 40,000 square feet or greater, but less than
100,000 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 60,000                                1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   If this use has a drive-through facility, a minimum of two
stacking spaces must be provided. See Section
51A-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
            (ii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of furniture is
permitted if the furniture is:
               (aa)   customarily used outside; and
               (bb)    made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (iii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of furniture, other
than the furniture described in Section
51A-4.210(b)(14)(E)(ii), is permitted only on Saturday and Sunday.
      (14.1)   General merchandise or food store 100,000 square feet or more.
         (A)   Definition: A retail store with a floor area of 100,000 square
feet or more for the sale of general merchandise or food. Typical general
merchandise includes clothing and other apparel, equipment for hobbies and
sports, gifts, flowers and household plants, dry goods, toys, furniture,
antiques, books and stationery, pets, drugs, auto parts and accessories, and
similar consumer goods. The term “food store” includes a grocery, delicatessen,
and convenience and specialty foods stores. This use does not include other
uses in this article that are specifically listed.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in RR and central area districts.
By SUP only in CR, CS, LI, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
100,000 to 150,000                         3
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   If this use has a drive-through facility, a minimum of two
stacking spaces must be provided. See Section
51A-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
            (ii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of furniture is
permitted if the furniture is:
               (aa)   customarily used outside; and
               (bb)   made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (iii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of furniture, other
than the furniture described in Section
51A-4.210(b)(14.1)(E)(ii), is permitted only on Saturday and Sunday.
            (iv)   See Section
51A-4.605 for design standards applicable to uses of 100,000 square feet or
more.
      (15)   Home improvement center, lumber, brick or building materials sales
yard.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the sale of home, lawn, and garden
supplies, brick, lumber, and other similar building materials.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, and industrial
districts. DIR required in the CR district. RAR required in RR, CS, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In all districts except the CR district, accessory outside
sales, accessory outside display of merchandise, and accessory outside storage
may individually occupy more than five percent of the lot, but may collectively
occupy no more than 25 percent of the lot. In the CR district, these accessory
uses may collectively occupy no more than five percent of the lot.
            (ii)   See Section
51A-4.605 for design standards applicable to uses of 100,000 square feet or
more.
      (16)   Household equipment and appliance repair.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the repair of household and home
equipment, including appliances, lawnmowers, power tools, and similar items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central
area, MU-2, MU-2(SAH), MU-3, MU-3(SAH), MC-2, MC-3, MC-4, and urban corridor
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (16.1)   Liquefied natural gas fueling station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of liquefied natural
gas from pumps to oversized motor vehicles.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   By right in LI, IR, and IM districts, but SUP required if the
use has more than four fuel pumps or is within 1,000 feet of a residential
zoning district or a planned development district that allows residential uses.
            (ii)   By SUP in only in the CS district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: Sufficient space must be allowed
for the unloading of a liquefied natural gas fuel truck.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No overnight parking is allowed.
            (ii)   No signage is permitted on liquefied natural gas storage
tanks except for required safety signage.
            (iii)   A fuel pump island must be constructed in a manner that
allows vehicular access adjacent to the island without interfering with or
obstructing off-street parking. The building official shall not issue a permit
to authorize the construction of a pump island until its placement has been
approved by the director.
            (iv)   Liquefied natural gas storage tanks, fuel pumps, and related
equipment may not be located beneath electric power lines.
            (v)   Liquefied natural gas storage tanks, fuel pumps, and related
equipment must be located at least 10 feet from the nearest building, property
line, any source of ignition, or nearest public street or sidewalk.
            (vi)   Liquefied natural gas storage tanks, fuel pumps, and related
equipment must be located at least 50 feet from the nearest rail of any
railroad main track.
            (vii)   A clear space of at least three feet must be provided for
access to all valves and fittings.
            (viii)   During fueling operations, the point of transfer (the
point where the fueling connection is made) must be at least 10 feet from any
building or public street or sidewalk, and at least three feet from any storage
tanks or containers. The point of transfer may be a lesser distance from
buildings or walls made of concrete or masonry materials, or of another
material having a fire resistance rating of at least two hours, but the point
of transfer must be at least 10 feet away from any building openings.
      (17)   Liquor store.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment principally for the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption, as defined in the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, central area, MU-2,
MU-2 (SAH), MU-3, MU- 3(SAH), MC-2, MC-3, and MC-4 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 60,000                                 1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   If this use has a drive-through facility, a minimum of two
stacking spaces must be provided. See Section
51A-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
            (ii)   If a use has drive-in or drive-through service and has less
than 10,000 square feet of floor area, the use shall be classified as a
convenience store with drive-through under Paragraph (9.1).
      (18)   Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial wedding chapel.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A mortuary or funeral home is a facility in which dead bodies
are prepared for burial or cremation or funeral services are conducted.
            (ii)   A commercial wedding chapel is a facility, not associated
with a church, where a wedding is performed for profit.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, central area, mixed
use, and multiple commercial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in existence
on May 14, 2025:
               (aa)    One space per 300 square feet of floor area other than
the chapel, plus one space for each two seats in the chapel. Up to 50 percent
of the required off-street parking for this use may be tandem spaces.
               (bb)   If all spaces provided are non-tandem, the off-street
parking requirement for this use is one space per 500 feet of floor area other
than the chapel, plus one space for each two seats in the chapel.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A commercial wedding chapel may provide reception areas, but
no alcoholic beverages may be sold.
      (19)   Motor vehicle fueling station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel
dispensed from pumps or electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) excluding
accessory electric vehicle charging station uses. This use does not include a
truck stop or a liquefied natural gas fueling station as defined in this
section.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central
area, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts. By right as a limited use
only in MO(A) and GO(A) districts. By SUP only in MF-3(A), MF-4(A), and NS(A)
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, two spaces.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: Sufficient space must be provided
to allow for the unloading of a fuel truck.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Except for compression cylinder tanks used in connection with
compressed natural gas fueling facilities, all storage tanks for motor vehicle
fuel must be located underground.
            (ii)   A fuel pump island must be constructed in a manner that
allows vehicular access adjacent to the island without interfering with or
obstructing off-street parking. The building official shall not issue a permit
to authorize the construction of a pump island until its placement has been
approved by the director.
            (iii)   Fuel pumps are permitted as an accessory use only if they
comply with the following subparagraphs:
               (aa)   The pumps must be available only to the owner and tenant
of the main building and not available to the general public.
               (bb)   The fuel pump and any sign relating to the pump must not
be visible from the public street. No sign may be erected indicating the
availability of motor vehicle fuel.
            (iv)   Fuel pumps must be located at least 18 feet from the
boundary of the site.
            (v)   Compression cylinder tanks used in connection with compressed
natural gas fueling facilities must be screened from adjacent streets, alleys,
and residential uses.
            (vi)   Charging equipment may not obstruct a required off-street
parking space. A charging cord may not cross over a sidewalk or pedestrian
walkway.
            (vii)   When six feet or less in height, structures and equipment
associated with this use may be located where an off- street parking space is
allowed.
      (20)   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
         (A)   A facility for the growing, display, or sale of plant stock,
seeds, or other horticultural items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in A(A), GO(A)*, CR, RR, CS,
central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts.
*Note: This use is subject to restrictions in the GO(A) district. See
Subsection (a)(3).
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 500 square feet of floor area, plus one space
per 2,000 square feet of outside sales and display area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF SALES AREA                  TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 60,000                                1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In all districts where this use is permitted except the GO(A)
district, accessory outside sales, display of merchandise, or storage may
occupy up to 100 percent of the lot. In the GO(A) district, this use must be
located entirely within a building. See Subsection (a)(3) for more information
about restrictions on retail and personal service uses generally in the GO(A)
district.
      (21)    Outside sales.
         (A)   Definition: A site for the outside sale of general merchandise
or food. This use includes, but is not limited to, outdoor flea markets.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in central area districts. By SUP
only in RR and CS districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, outside sales
is considered to be a separate main use if it occupies more than five percent
of the lot. Outside sales on less than five percent of the lot may qualify as
an accessory use if it is customarily incidental to a main use. See Section
51A-4.217.
      (21.1)   Paraphernalia shop.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment that displays or offers for sale
any "illegal smoking paraphernalia" as that term is defined in Chapter 31 of
the Dallas City Code or any other smoking paraphernalia that is commonly used,
or commonly known to be used, for the inhalation of tobacco or illegal
substances. For purposes of this definition, rolling papers, tobacco
cigarettes, and tobacco cigars are not considered paraphernalia.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in CR, RR, CS, industrial, and
mixed use districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,500 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of any other paraphernalia shop.
            (ii)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,000 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of a lot in a residential
district.
            (iii)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,000 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of a lot with a school.
            (iv)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,000 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of a lot with a child-care
facility.
            (v)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,000 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of a lot with a college,
university, or seminary.
            (vi)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,000 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of a lot with a church.
            (vii)   A paraphernalia shop may not have a drive-in or drive-
through or walk-up window.
            (viii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of products is
prohibited.
            (ix)   A paraphernalia shop may only be a main use that requires a
certificate of occupancy. A paraphernalia shop may not be an accessory use
within the meaning of Section
51A-4.217.
      (22)   Pawn shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for loaning money on the security of
personal property and the sale of unclaimed property.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, IR, and IM
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A pawnshop legally operating as a permitted use or a
nonconforming use on March 1, 1989, is entitled to relocate to another site in
the same zoning district or classification in which it is located on March 1,
1989, provided the relocation is completed before the first anniversary of the
date that the pawnshop ceased doing business at the previous location.
      (23)   Personal service use.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the sale of personal services.
Typical personal service uses include a barber/beauty shop, shoe repair, a
tailor, an instructional arts studio, a photography studio, a laundry or
cleaning pickup and receiving station, a handcrafted art work studio, safe
deposit boxes, a travel bureau, and a custom printing or duplicating shop.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in GO(A)*, retail, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts. By
right as a limited use only in MF-3(A), MF-4(A), NO(A), LO(A), and MO(A)
districts. *Note: This use is subject to restrictions in the GO(A) district.
See Subsection (a)(3).
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   If this use has a drive-through facility, a minimum of two
stacking spaces must be provided. See Section
51A-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
            (ii)   In the NO(A) district, this use may occupy no more than
1,000 square feet of floor area.
      (24)   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment principally for the sale and
consumption of food on the premises. (This use does not include a restaurant
with drive-in or drive-through service.)
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in GO(A)*, retail, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts. By
right as a limited use only in MF-4(A), LO(A), and MO(A) districts. By SUP only
in the NO(A) district. RAR required in MF-4(A), LO(A), MO(A), GO(A), retail,
CS, industrial, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts. *Note: This use
is subject to restrictions in the GO(A) district. See Subsection (a)(3).
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)    Except as provided in this subparagraph and Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B):
               (aa)   One space per 200 square feet of floor area.
               (bb)    None required for the floor area used for the
manufacture of alcoholic beverages as an accessory use to the restaurant
without drive-in or drive- through service use.
               (cc)   No parking is required for the first 2,500 square feet of
floor area.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay, in existence
on May 14, 2025:
               (aa)   As a main use: except as otherwise provided, one space
per 100 square feet of floor area.
               (bb)   As a limited or accessory use: except as otherwise
provided, one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
               (cc)   One space per 500 square feet of floor area used for the
manufacture of alcoholic beverages as an accessory use to the restaurant
without drive-in or drive-through service use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 5,000                                 NONE
5,000 to 25,000                            1
25,000 to 50,000                           2
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The sale and service of alcoholic beverages in conjunction
with the operation of this use is allowed generally, but may be prohibited if
this use is located in a liquor control overlay district. See Section
51A-4.503.
      (25)   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A restaurant with drive-in service is an establishment
principally for the sale and consumption of food where food service is provided
to customers in motor vehicles for consumption on the premises.
            (ii)   A restaurant with drive-through service is an establishment
principally for the sale and consumption of food which has direct window
service allowing customers in motor vehicles to pick up food for off-premise
consumption.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, mixed
use, and multiple commercial districts. By SUP only in central area districts.
DIR required in CR, RR, CS, industrial, mixed use, and multiple commercial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph:
               (aa)   As a main use: except as provided in this romanette and
Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
               (bb)    None required for the floor area used for the
manufacture of alcoholic beverages as an accessory use to the restaurant
without drive-in or drive-through service use.
               (cc)   No parking is required for the first 2,500 square feet of
floor area.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025:
               (aa)    Except as otherwise provided, one space per 100 square
feet of floor area; with a minimum of four spaces. See additional provisions
[Subparagraph (E)] for off-street stacking requirements. See Section
51A-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
               (bb)   One space per 500 square feet of floor area used for the
manufacture of alcoholic beverages as an accessory use to the restaurant with
drive-in or drive-through service use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 5,000                                 NONE
5,000 to 25,000                            1
25,000 to 50,000                           2
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The sale and service of alcoholic beverages in conjunction
with the operation of this use is allowed generally, but may be prohibited if
this use is located in a liquor control overlay district. See Section
51A-4.503.
            (ii)   The total number of stacking spaces required for this use is
as follows:
 
NO. OF DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOWS         TOTAL NUMBER OF STACKING SPACES REQUIRED
1                                    6
2                                    8
Each additional drive-through window 4 additional
 
            (iii)   A remote order station, if any, must be set back at least
27 feet from all streets that allow direct access to the station.
      (26)   Surface parking.
         (A)   Definition: A passenger vehicle parking facility.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   All parking must be at grade level.
            (ii)   A commercial parking lot or garage is not permitted under
this use.
            (iii)   No structures are permitted under this use except signs and
required screening.
            (iv)   The owner of surface parking must maintain a minimum front
yard of ten feet when the surface parking is contiguous to an A, A(A), R, R(A),
D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A) district.
      (27)   Swap or buy shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the purchase and retail sale or
exchange of new or used regulated property where more than 25 percent of the
facility’s total inventory is obtained from a source other than an authorized
vendor or manufacturer. This use includes, but is not limited to, bazaars. For
purposes of this definition:
            (i)   REGULATED PROPERTY means automobile accessories, business
machines, crafted precious metals, electronic equipment, firearms as defined by
state law, household appliances, jewelry, motorcycle accessories, musical
instruments, photographic equipment, power tools, or sporting goods; and
            (ii)   AUTHORIZED VENDOR OR MANUFACTURER means a commercial
supplier who deals in the wholesale distribution of regulated property in the
ordinary course of business.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in CR, RR, CS, central area,
mixed use, and multiple commercial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except otherwise provided below, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (28)   Taxidermist.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for preparing, stuffing, and mounting the
skins of animals, birds, and fish.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, industrial, and central
area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (29)   Temporary retail use.
         (A)   Definition: A temporary facility for the retail sale of seasonal
products, including food, christmas trees, and live plants.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central
area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 500 square feet of site area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Off-street loading requirements for this use may be satisfied
by using existing loading spaces for other uses located within 500 feet of the
temporary retail use, or by providing temporary loading spaces that do not
strictly comply with the construction and maintenance provisions for off-street
loading in this chapter. The operator of this use has the burden of
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the building official that temporary off-
street loading spaces are adequately designed to accommodate the loading needs
of the temporary retail use without adversely affecting surrounding uses.
            (ii)   The building official shall issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a period of 60 days for a temporary retail use. The building
official may grant one 30-day extension of the temporary certificate of
occupancy if the use has fully complied with all applicable city ordinances. No
more than one temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a temporary
retail use at the same location within a 12- month period.
      (30)   Theater.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for showing motion pictures or staging
theatrical performances to an audience inside an enclosed structure.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CR, RR, CS, industrial, central
area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts. In urban
corridor districts, DIR required and this use is limited to a theater with less
than 1,000 seats. By SUP only in MF-4, MO(A), and GO(A)* districts. *Note: This
use is subject to restrictions in the GO(A) district. See Subsection (a)(3).
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 28 square feet of seating area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The sale or service of food or drinks is permitted as a
limited accessory use.
            (ii)   This use may include service of food or drink to the
audience within the main auditorium.
            (iii)   The sale and service of alcoholic beverages in conjunction
with the operation of this use may be prohibited if this use is located in a
liquor control overlay district. See Section
51A-4.503.
      (30.1)   Truck stop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel
dispensed from pumps or electric vehicle charging stations for oversized
vehicles.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in CS, LI, IM, and IR
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: Sufficient space must be provided
to allow for the unloading of a fuel truck.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Except for above-ground storage tanks used in connection with
liquefied natural gas fueling facilities, and compression cylinder tanks used
in connection with compressed natural gas fueling facilities, all storage tanks
for motor vehicle fuel must be located underground.
            (ii)   A fuel pump island must be constructed in a manner that
allows vehicular access adjacent to the island without interfering with or
obstructing off-street parking. The building official shall not issue a permit
to authorize the construction of a pump island until its placement has been
approved by the director.
            (iii)   A truck stop is always a main use, and cannot be an
accessory use within the meaning of Section
51A-4.217. Other than accessory parking, any other use on the same lot is
considered an additional main use, such as on-site restaurants, cleaning
facilities, and repair services.
            (iv)   Fuel pumps must be located at least 18 feet from the
boundary of the site.
            (v)   Compression cylinder tanks used in connection with compressed
natural gas fueling facilities must be screened from adjacent streets, alleys,
and residential uses.
            (vi)   Except as provided in Item (vii), liquefied natural gas
storage tanks are only permitted if approved as part of the specific use permit
process.
            (vii)   For the purposes of Section
51A-4.704, adding liquefied natural gas fueling facilities to a nonconforming
truck stop is not the enlargement of a nonconforming use.
            (viii)   No signage is permitted on liquefied natural gas storage
tanks except for required safety signage.
      (31)   Vehicle display, sales, and service.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the display, service, rental, or
retail sale of new or used automobiles, boats, trucks, motorcycles, motor
scooters, recreational vehicles, or trailers excluding oversized motor vehicles
and oversized trailers.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in RR, CS, and industrial
districts. By SUP only in central area districts. RAR required in RR, CS, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   When located in an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence
on May 14, 2025, one space per 500 square feet of floor and site area exclusive
of parking area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Outside display and storage of new or used vehicles for sale
is permitted under this use without visual screening.
            (ii)   New or used vehicles for sale may be displayed or stored in
the required front yard under this use.
            (iii)   If an inoperable or wrecked motor vehicle remains outside
on the premises for more than 24 hours, the premises is an outside salvage or
reclamation use. However, a premise is not an outside salvage or reclamation
use if the premise stores not more than four inoperable or wrecked motor
vehicles each of which having a valid state registration, current safety
inspection certificate, and documentary record of pending repairs or other
disposition, and if the premise has a current certificate of occupancy for a
motor vehicle related use.
            (iv)   Vehicles being displayed, sold, serviced, or repaired must
be parked on site. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19810; 19928; 20242; 20237; 20257;
20272; 20273; 20425; 20493; 20494; 20895; 21001; 21200; 21209; 21259; 21289;
21291; 21400; 21659; 21663; 21697; 21735; 21796; 21960; 22020; 22204; 22531;
22995; 23739; 24439; 24659; 24718; 24759; 25047; 25056; 25785; 26269; 26513;
26746; 27563; 28073; 28079; 28700; 28737; 28803; 30477; 30890; 32441; 32907;
33112)
SEC. 51A-4.211.   TRANSPORTATION USES.
      (1)   Airport or landing field.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the landing of fixed or rotary wing
aircraft.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in IR and IM districts.
         (C)      Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
            (i)   A minimum of 60 acres is required for this use.
            (ii)   This use must be approved by the city aviation department.
            (iii)   This use is subject to the Federal Aviation
Administration’s rules and regulations.
      (2)   Commercial bus station and terminal.
         (A)   Definition:   A facility operated as a bus or shuttle passenger
station or transfer center serving a privately owned transit operation. For
purposes of this paragraph:
            (i)   Bus means a motor vehicle that has a manufacturer’s rated
seating capacity of more than 15 passengers, and is used for the transportation
of persons from a location in the city to another location either inside or
outside the city.
            (ii)   Shuttle means a van-type motor vehicle that has a
manufacturer’s rated seating capacity of not less than seven passengers and not
more than 15 passengers, and is used for the transportation of persons from a
location in the city to another location either inside or outside the city.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraph (B)(ii), by
right in RR, CS, LI, IR, IM, and central area districts.
            (ii)   By SUP only in the CS district when:
               (aa)   the facility operates with a bus; or
               (bb)   the facility operates with a shuttle within 500 feet of a
residential district.
            (iii)   DIR required in RR and central area districts, and the CS
district when an SUP is not required. RAR required in industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None. Areas of anticipated loading
and unloading must be identified at time of permitting.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A lobby or waiting room with a floor area of not less than
200 square feet must be provided.
            (ii)   Seating in the lobby or waiting room must be provided at a
ratio of one seat for every 25 square feet of floor area in the lobby or
waiting room.
            (iii)   The outdoor sale of general merchandise or food is
prohibited.
            (iv)   No loading or unloading of passengers is permitted on public
right-of-way.
      (3)   Heliport.
         (A)   Definitions: A facility for the landing and taking off of rotary
wing aircraft.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in IR and IM districts. By SUP
only in RR, CS, LI, central area, MU-3, MU-3(SAH), MC-3, and MC-4 districts.
RAR required in IR and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may include fueling or servicing facilities, if
approved by the city aviation department.
            (ii)   This use must be approved by the city aviation department.
            (iii)   This use is subject to the Federal Aviation
Administration’s rules, regulations, and approval.
      (4)   Helistop.
         (A)   Definition: A landing pad for occasional use by rotary wing
aircraft.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in IR and IM districts. By SUP
only in A(A) MO(A), GO(A), RR, CS, LI, central area, MU-2, MU-2(SAH), MU-3, MU-
3(SAH) MC-2, MC-3, and MC-4 districts. RAR required in IR and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Regularly scheduled stops are not permitted under this use.
            (ii)   This use must be approved by the city aviation department.
            (iii)   This use is subject to the Federal Aviation
Administration’s rules, regulations, and approval.
            (iv)   Fueling or servicing facilities are not permitted under this
use.
      (5)   Private street or alley.
         (A)   Definition: A street or an alley whose ownership has been
retained privately.
         (B)   District restrictions:
            (i)   This accessory use is not permitted in agricultural,
multifamily, MH(A), office, retail, commercial service and industrial, mixed
use, and multiple commercial districts.
            (ii)   An SUP is required for this accessory use in single family,
duplex, townhouse, CH, and central area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: See Section
51A-4.303.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Private streets and alleys must be constructed and maintained
to the standards for public rights-of-way and must be approved by the director.
Sidewalks are required and must be constructed and maintained to the standards
for sidewalks in the public right-of-way. Water and sanitary sewer mains must
be installed in accordance with the applicable ordinances.
            (ii)   A legal entity must be created that is responsible for
street lighting, street maintenance and cleaning, and the installation and
maintenance of interior traffic control devices. The legal instruments
establishing the responsibility for a private street or alley must be submitted
to the city plan commission for approval, be approved as to legal form by the
city attorney, and recorded in the appropriate county.
            (iii)   Private streets and alleys must contain private service
easements including, but not limited to, the following easements: utilities;
firelane; street lighting; government vehicle access; mail collection and
delivery access; and utility meter reading access.
            (iv)   Street lights comparable with those required on public
rights-of-way must be provided. Street lighting design plans must be approved
by the director in compliance with applicable standards of the department of
development services.
            (v)   Design plans and location of all traffic control devices must
be approved by the traffic engineer. The design, size, color, and construction
of all traffic control devices must comply with those required in public
rights-of-way.
            (vi)   The fire protection standards in Article XIII of the Dallas
fire code must be followed.
            (vii)   A public school, park or other public facility must be
accessible from public rights-of-way in accordance with this code.
            (viii)   Private streets must comply with the thoroughfare plan and
may not interrupt public through streets.
            (ix)   Private street names and numbers must be approved by the
city plan commission.
            (x)   Private streets and the area they serve must be platted.
            (xi)   Guard houses may be constructed at any entrance to a private
street. All guard houses must be at least 25 feet from a public right-of-way.
            (xii)   Any structure that restricts access to a private street
must provide a passageway 20 feet wide and 14 feet high.
            (xiii)   One private street entrance must remain open at all times.
If an additional private street entrance is closed at any time, it must be
constructed to permit opening of the passageway in emergencies by boltcutters
or breakaway panels.
            (xiv) A private street serving an area containing over 150 dwelling
units must have a minimum of two access points to a public street.
            (xv)   A private street may serve no more than 300 dwelling units.
            (xvi)   The city has no obligation to maintain a private street. If
a private street is not maintained in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, the city, after a public hearing before the city plan commission,
shall have the right, but not the obligation, to take those actions necessary
to put the private street in compliance. The legal entity responsible for
maintaining the private street shall pay the city for the work performed within
a period of 180 days from the presentation of the bill, or the private street
will become a public street of the city.
            (xvii)   A court or plaza may be considered a private street for
the purpose of creating a building site if a specific use permit for a private
street or alley use is obtained.
      (6)   Railroad passenger station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the loading and discharging of train
passengers.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in central area districts. By SUP
only in GO(A), RR, CS, industrial, MU-2, MU-2(SAH), MU-3, MU-3(SAH), MC- 2, MC-
3, and MC-4 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (7)   Railroad yard, roundhouse, or shops.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for storing and repairing railroad
equipment, and making up trains.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in IM and central area districts.
RAR required in the IM district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (8)   STOL (short takeoff or landing) port.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for take-off and landing operations of
fixed wing aircraft designed to land on runways of 1000 feet or less.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in IR, IM, and central area
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may include refueling equipment and passenger
shelters, but may not include maintenance facilities.
            (ii)   This use must be approved by the city aviation department.
            (iii)   This use is subject to the Federal Aviation
Administration’s rules, regulations, and approval.
      (9)   Transit passenger shelter.
         (A)   Definition: A structure which affords protection from the
weather to persons who are waiting to board a publicly owned or franchised
transit vehicle.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in all residential and
nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A site plan must be submitted to and approved by the director
if the location of the proposed shelter structure will be on or within 20 feet
of a lot that is located in a single family or duplex district and occupied by
a residential use. The site plan must show the area within a 50-foot radius of
the proposed shelter structure. No site plan is required if the lot is vacant
or exclusively occupied by one or more nonresidential uses.
            (ii)   The submission and review procedures for a site plan
required under Subparagraph (i) are the same as those required under Section
51A-4.803 for a lot that has residential adjacency. For purposes of these
provisions, the term “lot” in Section
51A-4.803 is construed to mean only that area for which a site plan is
required.
            (iii)   In addition to the requirements of Section
51A-4.803(e), upon the filing of a complete application for review of a site
plan required under Subparagraph (i), the director shall send written notice to
all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the area for which the
site plan is required.
            (iv)   In single family and duplex districts, the shelter structure
must not occupy an area greater than 100 square feet.
            (v)   A litter container of adequate size must be provided on the
site at all times.
            (vi)   This use must be installed by public agencies.
            (vii)   This use is exempt from the front, side, and rear yard
requirements in this chapter, except that the shelter structure must be set
back at least five feet from the edge of the roadway.
            (viii)   No signs are permitted on the transit passenger shelter
site except for governmental signs, transit system logos, schedules, and route
information.
      (10)   Transit passenger station or transfer center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility operated as a bus or rail passenger
station or transfer center serving a publicly-owned or franchised mass transit
operation. Typical facilities may include station platforms, bus bays, off-
street parking, private access roads, and other passenger amenities.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   By right in central area districts.
            (ii)   By SUP only in all residential districts.
            (iii)   By SUP or, in the alternative, by city council resolution
in office, retail, CS, industrial, mixed use, and multiple commercial
districts. Authorization by city council resolution must strictly comply with
the procedures and requirements outlined in the additional provisions below.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Analyses required. In all districts except central area
districts:
               (aa)    transit analysis must be submitted with an application
for a specific use permit or for an approval by city council resolution; and
               (bb)   a traffic impact analysis is required when the same is
requested by the director, or when the proposed facility will generate more
than 1,000 vehicle trips per day.
            (ii)   Landscaping. Landscaping must be provided to comply with
Article X of this chapter, or with a landscape plan approved by the city
council. In approving a landscape plan, the city council shall, as a minimum,
impose landscaping requirements that are reasonably consistent with the
standards and purposes of
Article X.
            (iii)   Screening. Screening must be provided to comply with
Section
51A-4.602, or with a site plan approved by the city council.
            (iv)   Vehicular ingress and egress.
               (aa)   Vehicular ingress and egress between this use and a
residential alley is prohibited. For purposes of this paragraph, the term
“residential alley” means a public alley or access easement that abuts or is in
a single family, duplex, townhouse, or clustered housing district.
               (bb)   Any vehicular ingress and egress between this use and a
minor street must be shown on a site plan approved by the city council.
            (v)   Minimum setbacks for parking and maneuvering. In residential
districts, all off-street parking spaces and bus bays, including maneuvering
areas, must be located behind the required setback lines established in this
chapter, or behind the established setbacks for the blockface, as defined in
Section 51A-4.401, whichever results in the greater setback. A minimum setback
of ten feet must be provided for a side or rear yard adjacent to a residential
use.
            (vi)   Outside speaker restrictions. Outside speakers are not
permitted within 50 feet of another lot in a residential district. Outside
speakers, when permitted, must face away from adjacent properties.
            (vii)   Restrictions on authorization by city council resolution in
certain districts. In NO(A), LO(A), MO(A), NS(A), CR, RR, CS, LI, MU-1, MU- 1
(SAH), MC-1, and MC-2 districts, authorization by city council resolution is
not available unless:
               (aa)   a traffic impact analysis demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the director that the projected traffic from the proposed
facility will not reduce traffic operating conditions on public streets to a
level-of-service “E” or “F” as defined in the Highway Capacity Manual,
Transportation Research Board of the National Research Council, Washington,
D.C.; and
               (bb)   the facility:
                  [1]   is located greater than 330 feet from private property
(as defined in Section
51A-4.412 of the Dallas Development Code) in a single family, duplex,
townhouse, or CH district;
                  [2]   has no parking other than that needed for the drop-off
and pick-up of passengers, and no more than five bus bays; or
                  [3]   is separated from a lot in a single family, duplex,
townhouse, or CH district by a street 64 feet or more in width.
            (viii)   Procedures for authorization by city council resolution.
Authorization by city council resolution must strictly comply with the
following procedures and requirements:
               (aa)   The specific use permit requirement for each particular
station or transfer center site shall remain in effect unless and until the
city council adopts a resolution approving that site in accordance with this
subsection.
               (bb)   An applicant for authorization by city council resolution
shall submit a site plan that complies with the requirements of Section
51A-4.803 to the director. The director shall review the site plan in
accordance with that section and formulate a recommendation for the city
council within 30 calendar days of the date of its submission.
               (cc)   Upon formulating a recommendation regarding the site
plan, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the city council to
receive public comment regarding the plan. The director shall send written
notice of the public hearing to all owners of real property within 500 feet of
the proposed site. The measurement of the 500 feet includes streets and alleys.
The notice must be given not less than 10 days before the date set for the
hearing. Notice is given by depositing the notice properly addressed and
postage paid in the United States mail to the property owners as evidenced by
the last approved city tax roll.
               (dd)   The city secretary shall give notice of the public
hearing in the official newspaper of the city at least 15 days before the
hearing. After the city council holds its public hearing, it shall make a
decision regarding the plan. The decision need not be made on the same day that
the public hearing is held.
               (ee)   The city council may approve or deny the site plan. An
approval must be by resolution adopted by a majority of those councilmembers
present and eligible to vote, and a true and correct copy of the site plan must
be attached to the resolution as an exhibit. The city council may impose
reasonable conditions upon the approval of a site plan consistent with the
purposes stated in Section
51A-1.102 of this chapter. Any conditions imposed must be in writing and made
part of the resolution.
               (ff)   After a final decision is reached by the city council
denying a site plan, no further applications for site plan approval may be
considered for that particular station or transfer center site for two years
from the date of the final decision. If the city council renders a final
decision of denial without prejudice, the two year time limitation is waived. A
property owner may apply for a waiver of the two year time limitation by
submitting a request in writing to the director. Only the city council may
waive the time limitation applicable to site plans reviewed under this
subsection. A simple majority vote by the city council is required to grant the
request. The two year time limitation applicable to site plans reviewed under
this subsection does not affect the ability of a property owner to apply for a
specific use permit for the same site.
               (gg)   Authorization by city council resolution shall no longer
be available for a particular station or transfer center site when an
application is made for a specific use permit for that site unless the
application is withdrawn prior to the mailing of notices for the public hearing
before the city plan commission. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20122; 20493; 20625;
21001; 21663; 22026; 22799; 23735; 23766; 24833; 25047; 28073; 28424; 30890;
30932; 32002; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.212.   UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE USES.
      (1)   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the transmission of commercial
programming by radio or television within the commercial band of the
electromagnetic spectrum.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in GO(A), CR, RR, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts. By SUP only in A
(A), LO(A), and MO(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (2)   Electrical generating plant.
         (A)   Definition: A facility franchised by the city that generates
electricity from mechanical power produced by gas, coal, or nuclear fission.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in the IM district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (3)   Electrical substation.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for transforming electricity for
distribution to individual customers.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in LO(A), MO(A), GO(A), CR, RR,
CS, industrial, central area, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts. By
SUP only in all residential, NO(A), and NS(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (4)   Local utilities.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   UTILITY SERVICES means air pollution monitoring stations,
antennas, cables, dishes, distribution lines, drainage lines, generating
facilities, nodes and hubs, pipes, poles, pumping stations, receivers and
senders, repeating or regenerating devices, storm water facilities, switching
stations, substations, tanks, transmission lines, water wells, wires, or
similar equipment operated by a municipality, a transit authority, or a
certificated, franchised, or licensed utility company providing cable
television, electrical, gas, internet, storm sewer, telecommunications,
telegraph, telephone, water, or wastewater service to the public.
            (ii)   COMMUNICATIONS EX- CHANGE FACILITY means a facility for the
centralized placement of communications equipment used to store, house and
route voice and data transmissions among communications companies.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Utility services:
               (aa)   Except as otherwise provided, by right in all residential
and nonresidential districts.
               (bb)   By SUP only in residential districts if the above-grade
facilities exceed 300 square feet in floor area or structure footprint per lot,
except that no SUP is required for below-grade facilities, distribution lines,
transmission lines, and supporting structures. In this subparagraph, “structure
footprint” means the ground area defined by vertical planes extending downward
from the outermost projection of the structure.
               (cc)   RAR is required if this use is more than 150 square feet
in floor area or more than 10 feet in height, except that no RAR is required
for below-grade facilities, distribution lines, transmission lines, and
supporting structures.
            (ii)   Communications exchange facility: By right in LO(A), MO(A),
GO(A), RR, CS, industrial, central area, mixed use, and multiple commercial
districts. By right in the CR district if this use does not exceed 50,000
square feet in floor area; otherwise, prohibited in the CR district. By right
in nonresidential planned development districts that allow local utilities.
Allowed in residential planned development districts only if specifically
listed as a permitted use, otherwise prohibited in residential planned
development districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
            (i)   Utility services: None.
            (ii)   Communications exchange facility:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Utility services:
               (aa)   Above-ground storage tanks are not permitted under this
use, except accessory above-ground storage tanks to emergency generators. The
capacity of accessory above-ground storage tanks may not exceed 11,000 gallons
in nonresidential districts and 3,500 gallons in residential districts.
               (bb)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraph (E)(i)(dd),
in residential districts, if this use is over seven feet in height, screening
that complies with Section
51A-4.602(b) must be constructed and maintained along the side and rear of the
use.
               (cc)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraph (E)(i)(dd),
if this use is over seven feet in height, a perimeter landscape buffer strip
that complies with Section
51A-10.125 must be provided.
               (dd)   Distribution lines, transmission lines, and supporting
structures are exempt from the requirements of Subparagraphs (E)(i)(bb)and (E)
(i)(cc).
               (ee)   No landscape regulations apply to this use except as
expressly provided in these additional provisions.
               (ff)   This use is not subject to compliance proceedings under
Section
51A-4.704.
            (ii)   Communications exchange facility:
               (aa)   Section
51A-4.408(a)(1), which exempts structures for utility uses from certain height
restrictions, does not apply to this use.
               (bb)   Above-ground storage tanks are not permitted under this
use, except accessory above-ground storage tanks to emergency generators.
Unless located within an enclosed structure or completely screened from
adjacent street right-of-way and all other properties by solid screening, the
capacity of accessory above-ground storage tanks may not exceed 11,000 gallons
in nonresidential districts and 3,500 gallons in residential districts.
      (5)   Police or fire station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility operated by the city as a police or fire
station.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in GO(A), CR, RR, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts. By
SUP only in residential, NO(A), LO(A), MO(A), and NS(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may include emergency medical services.
      (6)   Post office.
         (A)   Definition: A government facility for the transmission, sorting,
and local distribution of mail.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in GO(A), CR, RR, CS, industrial,
central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, and urban corridor districts. By
SUP only in MF-3(A), MF-4(A), LO(A), MO(A), and NS(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use includes main branches, substation branches, and
neighborhood coin-operated self-service stations.
      (7)   Radio, television, or microwave tower.
         (A)   Definition: A structure supporting antennae that transmit or
receive any portion of the electromagnetic spectrum.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in GO(A), CS, industrial, and
central area districts. By SUP only in residential, NO(A), LO(A), MO(A),
retail, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts. RAR required in GO(A),
CS, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (8)   Refuse transfer station.
         (A)   Definition: A privately owned facility for the separation,
transfer, or packing of solid waste materials from smaller collecting vehicles
to larger transport vehicles.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in A(A) and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must comply with
Chapter 18 of the Dallas City Code and all other applicable city ordinances,
rules, and regulations.
      (9)   Sanitary landfill.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the collection, handling, storage,
and disposal of solid waste.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in A(A) and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use is subject to federal and state law requirements.
            (ii)   This use must comply with
Chapter 18 of the Dallas City Code and all other applicable city ordinances,
rules, and regulations.
      (10)   Sewage treatment plant.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for receiving and treating sewage from
the city sanitary sewer system.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in A(A), IM, and central area
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (10.1)   Tower/antenna for cellular communication.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   Mounted cellular antenna means a cellular antenna that is
attached to an existing structure, that complies with the requirements of
Subparagraph (E)(i), and that is part of a cellular system authorized by the
Federal Communications Commission. An auxiliary building housing electronic and
communication equipment is permitted as part of this use.
            (ii)   Monopole cellular tower means a single pole structure that
supports a platform and cellular antennas, that complies with the requirements
of Subparagraphs (E)(ii) and (iii), and that is part of a cellular system
authorized by the Federal Communications Commission. An auxiliary building
housing electronic and communication equipment is permitted as part of this
use.
            (iii)   Other cellular communication tower/antenna means any
cellular communication tower or antenna that is part of a cellular system
authorized by the Federal Communications Commission, but that is not covered by
the definitions contained in Subparagraphs (A)(i) and (A)(ii). An auxiliary
building housing electronic and communication equipment is permitted as part of
this use.
            (iv)   Platform means that portion of a monopole cellular tower
that is located on top of the pole and that supports directional, transmitting,
and receiving antennas.
            (v)   Temporary cellular unit means any cellular communication
structure, vehicle, trailer mounted apparatus, or device that is part of a
system authorized by the Federal Communications Commission that is used to
temporarily provide service where an existing tower/antenna for cellular
communication is not operable for one or more of the following reasons:
               (aa)   The existing tower/ antenna for cellular communication
use is damaged or destroyed other than by the intentional act of the owner or
agent; or
               (bb)   A demolition or construction permit has been issued on a
building site that includes an existing mounted cellular antenna, monopole
cellular tower, or other cellular communica tion tower/antenna.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Mounted cellular antennas: By right in A(A), single family,
duplex, townhouse, CH, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2(A), MF-2(SAH), and MH(A)
districts when attached to an existing structure that is currently occupied or
was last occupied by a nonresidential use. By SUP only in A(A), single family,
duplex, townhouse, CH, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2(A), MF-2(SAH), and MH(A)
districts when attached to an existing structure that is currently occupied or
was last occupied by a nonresidential use and the mounted cellular antenna
exceeds the residential proximity slope height restrictions. The impact of the
mounted cellular antenna height on an adjacent residential district must be
considered in the SUP process.
            (ii)   Mounted cellular antennas: By right in MF-3(A), MF-4(A),
office, retail, CS, industrial, central area, mixed use, multiple commercial, P
(A), and UC-3 districts when attached to any existing structure. By SUP only in
MF-3(A), MF-4(A), office, retail, CS, industrial, central area, mixed use,
multiple commercial, P(A), and UC-3 districts when attached to an existing
structure and the mounted cellular antenna exceeds the residential proximity
slope height restrictions. The impact of the mounted cellular antenna height on
an adjacent residential district must be considered in the SUP process.
            (iii)   Monopole cellular towers: By right in commercial,
industrial, and central area districts with RAR required in commercial and
industrial districts. By right in LO(A), MO(A), GO(A), mixed use, and multiple
commercial districts if the height of the tower does not exceed the maximum
height for structures in that district as provided in the district regulations
(Divisions 51A-4.100 et seq.) with RAR required in the same districts;
otherwise by SUP only. By right in the CR district if the height of the tower
does not exceed 65 feet, with RAR required; otherwise by SUP only. By right in
the RR district if the height of the tower does not exceed 80 feet, with RAR
required; otherwise by SUP only. By SUP only in all residential, NO(A), NS(A)
districts, and in any district where a monopole cellular tower is permitted by
right but exceeds the residential proximity slope height restrictions. The
impact of the monopole cellular tower height on an adjacent residential
district must be considered in the SUP process.
            (iv)   Other cellular communication towers/antennas are permitted
by right in GO(A), CS, industrial, and central area districts. By SUP only in
residential, NO(A), GO(A), MO(A), retail, mixed use, multiple commercial
districts, and in any district where other cellular communication towers/
antennas are permitted by right but exceed the residential proximity slope
height restrictions. RAR required in GO(A), CS, and industrial districts. The
impact of the other cellular communication tower/antenna height on an adjacent
residential district must be considered in the SUP process.
            (v)   Temporary cellular unit is permitted by right in all
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Mounted cellular antennas may not exceed 12 feet above the
structure to which they are attached. Whip antennas are excluded from this
calculation.
            (ii)   The pole portion of a monopole cellular tower may not exceed
42 inches in diameter. Microwave dishes or similar devices up to three feet in
diameter may be mounted on the pole portion of a monopole cellular tower. If
microwave dishes or similar devices on a monopole cellular tower are concealed
within a stealth tower, no maximum; otherwise, no more than two dishes or
similar devices may be placed on a monopole cellular tower.
            (iii)   The platform portion of a monopole cellular tower may not
have a horizontal cross sectional area greater than 196 square feet. The depth
of the platform may not exceed 4 feet, excluding any whip antenna. Only
antennas that are part of a cellular system authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission are permitted on a platform.
            (iv)   The owner of a monopole or other tower for cellular
communication shall notify the building official when the tower is no longer
operating as part of a cellular system authorized by the Federal Communications
Commission. Within 12 months of the date the tower ceases to operate as part of
an authorized cellular system, the tower must either be removed from the site,
or a certificate of occupancy must be obtained to allow another permitted use
of the tower. If within 12 months the owner fails to remove the tower or obtain
proper authorization for use of the tower, the building official shall revoke
the certificate of occupancy for the tower and notify the city attorney to
pursue enforcement remedies.
            (v)   Mounted cellular antennas attached to utility structures are
exempt from the residential proximity slope regulations in certain
circumstances. [See Section
51A-4.408(a)(1)(C).]
            (vi)   Temporary cellular unit:
               (aa)   The building official shall issue a certificate of
occupancy for a period not to exceed one year. The building official may grant
up to two six-month extensions if a complete application for or amendment to a
specific use permit or planned development district has been filed with the
director or a building permit is issued for the replacement of the existing
tower/antenna for cellular communication.
               (bb)   A temporary cellular unit must be removed upon the
expiration of its certificate of occupancy or upon the completion or expiration
of a permit to construct a structure to mount a permanent mounted cellular
antenna, a monopole cellular tower, or other cellular antenna, whichever occurs
first.
               (cc)   Except as provided in this provision, a temporary
cellular unit must comply with the yard, lot, and space regulations of the
district and may not exceed the height of the existing tower/antenna for
cellular communication use to be removed. Lightning rods atop a temporary
cellular unit are not included in height calculations. A temporary cellular
unit is not subject to residential proximity slope. If a temporary cellular
unit collocates with existing operators on a single vertical temporary cellular
unit, the following regulations apply:
                  (I)   If the height of the existing mounted cellular antenna
to be removed is less than the maximum structure height of the district, the
maximum structure height may extend an additional ten feet in height for each
existing operator above one, not to exceed the maximum structure height of the
district.
                  (II)   If the height of the existing mounted cellular
antennas to be removed is equal to or exceeds the maximum structure height of
the district, the maximum height of the temporary cellular unit may not exceed
the height of the existing mounted cellular antennas to be removed.
            (vii)   The specific use permit regulations in Section
51A-4.219 apply to a tower/ antenna for cellular communication except as
modified in this provision. The director shall send written notice of a public
hearing on an application for an SUP for a tower/antenna for cellular
communication use to all owners of real property lying within 500 feet of the
building site as defined in Section
51A-4.601 on which the tower/antenna for cellular communication use will be
located. If the site does not comply with Section
51A-4.601, the director shall send written notice of a public hearing on an
application for an SUP for a tower/antenna for cellular communication use to
all owners of real property lying within 500 feet of the boundaries of a lot on
a preliminary plat that is approved by the city plan commission upon which the
tower/antenna for cellular communication use is to be located.
            (viii)   An application for or an amendment to a specific use
permit or planned development district is not required for a modification to an
existing tower/antenna for cellular communication or its base station unless
the modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of the existing
tower/antenna for cellular communication, or its base station. A modification
substantially changes the physical dimensions of an existing tower/antenna for
cellular communication or its base station if it meets the criteria listed in
47 C.F.R. §1.40001(b)(7), as amended.
      (11)   Utility or government installation other than listed.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A “utility other than listed” is a public or private facility
certificated, franchised, licensed, or operated by the city as a utility, and
that is not specifically covered by the use regulations in this chapter.
            (ii)   A “government installation other than listed” is an
installation owned or leased by a government agency and that is not
specifically covered by the use regulations in this chapter. Typical such
government installations include city hall, a courthouse, or an elevated water
storage reservoir.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in central area and urban corridor
districts, except that an SUP is required for the “government installation
other than listed” use in the CA-1(A) district. By SUP only in residential,
office, retail, industrial, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The SUP requirement for this use does not apply to a
building, other structure, or land under the control, administration, or
jurisdiction of a state or federal agency.
      (12)   Water treatment plant.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for purifying, supplying, and
distributing city water, including a system of reservoirs, channels, mains, and
purifying equipment.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in the IM district. By SUP only in
A(A), central area, and IR districts. RAR required in the IM district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19808; 20037; 20493; 20731; 21000; 21001; 21314;
21663; 22392; 22639; 24543; 24718; 24898; 25440; 26578; 29984; 30808; 30890;
33112)
SEC. 51A-4.213.   WHOLESALE, DISTRIBUTION, AND STORAGE USES.
      (1)   Auto auction.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the auction of automobiles.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in CS and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provision: Vehicles being displayed, sold, serviced,
or repaired must be parked on site.
      (2)   Building mover’s temporary storage yard.
         (A)   Definition: A site where a building or structure which has been
removed from its original construction site is temporarily stored.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in CS and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must be surrounded by a solid visual screen of at
least nine feet in height and constructed of solid masonry, solid concrete,
corrugated sheet metal, or a chain link fence with strips of metal through all
links.
            (ii)   This use must be landscaped with plants meeting the
requirements of the specific use permit.
            (iii)   Buildings temporarily stored under this use may not be
placed upon a foundation.
            (iv)   This use does not include bona fide sales lots on which new
buildings or structures are located displaying examples of workmanship or
appearance of the buildings or structures to be constructed on other sites and
sold.
      (3)   Contractor’s maintenance yard.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the storage and maintenance of
contractor’s supplies and operational equipment.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS and IM districts. RAR
required in CS and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must be surrounded by screening.
      (4)   Freight terminal.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the transfer or storage of freight.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, industrial, and central
area districts. RAR required in CS and industrial districts. DIR required in
central area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (5)   Livestock auction pens or sheds.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the auction of livestock.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in A(A) and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (6)   Manufactured building sales lot.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the display, service, and retail sale
of manufactured housing or preassembled storage buildings.
         (B)   Districts permitted: RAR required in CS and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Outside display and storage of new or used manufactured
housing or preassembled storage buildings for sale is permitted under this use
without a visual screen.
            (ii)   Display or storage of manufactured housing or preassembled
storage buildings is prohibited within the required front yard.
      (7)   Mini-warehouse.
         (A)   Definition: A building or group of buildings containing one or
more individual compartmentalized storage units for the inside storage of
customers’ goods or wares, where no unit exceeds 500 square feet in floor area.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, industrial, and central
area districts. By SUP only in CR, RR, mixed use, and multiple commercial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Caretaker’s quarters are permitted as an accessory use. One
parking space must be provided per 500 square feet of floor area of caretaker’s
quarters; however, no more than two spaces are required for each caretaker’s
quarters.
      (8)   Office showroom/warehouse.
         (A)   Definitions. In this paragraph:
            (i)   OFFICE SHOWROOM/ WAREHOUSE means a facility which has the
combined uses of office and showroom or warehouse for the primary purpose of
wholesale trade, display, and distribution of products.
            (ii)   OFFICE SHOWROOM COMPONENT means the portion of this use
which provides area for the regular transaction of business and for the display
of uncontainerized merchandise in a finished building setting.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, industrial, central area,
MU-3, and MU-3(SAH) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Retail sales of products which are sold at wholesale on the
premises are permitted as a part of this use.
            (ii)   In the MU-3 and MU-3(SAH) districts, the office showroom
component of this use must comprise at least 25 percent of the total floor area
of the use.
      (9)   Outside storage.
         (A)   Definition: A lot used for the outside placement of an item for
a period in excess of 24 hours. Outside placement includes storage in a
structure that is open or not entirely enclosed.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS and industrial districts. By
SUP only in central area districts. RAR required in CS and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Landscaping.
            (i)   A landscape buffer must be provided between any required
screening fence and an adjacent thoroughfare.
            (ii)   The director may approve an alternative irrigation plan for
landscaping if the director determines that it will maintain the required
landscaping.
         (F)   Screening.
            (i)   In CS, LI, and IR districts, outside storage must be
screened.
            (ii)   In the IM district, outside storage must be screened on any
side that is within 200 feet of and visible from a thoroughfare, expressway as
defined in Section
51A-7.102, new expressway as defined in Section
51A-7.102, or an adjacent property that is not zoned an IM district. For
purposes of this provision, adjacent means across the street or sharing a
common lot line.
         (G)   Stacking height.
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, maximum outside
storage stacking height is 30 feet if the open storage is visible from and
within 200 feet of a thoroughfare or adjoining property that is not zoned an IM
district. If outside storage is 200 feet or more from a thoroughfare or
adjoining property, no maximum outside storage stacking height.
            (ii)   Outside storage stacking height within 40 feet of required
screening may not exceed the height of the required screening.
         (H)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A person shall not place, store, or maintain outside for a
period in excess of 24 hours, an item that is not:
               (aa)   customarily used or stored outside; or
               (bb)   made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (ii)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, outside
storage is considered to be a separate main use if it occupies more than five
percent of the lot. Outside storage on less than five percent of the lot may
qualify as an accessory use if it is customarily incidental to a main use. See
Section
51A-4.217.
            (iii)   Outside storage is prohibited in required yards,
landscaping areas, and parking areas.
            (iv)   All nonconforming open storage uses must comply with
Subparagraphs (F) and (G) before September 22, 2018. The owner or operator may
request from the board of adjustment an extension of this time period by filing
an application with the director on a form provided by the city. The
application must be filed before the September 22, 2018 deadline expires. The
application is not considered filed until the fee is paid. The board of
adjustment may grant an extension of this time period if it determines, after a
public hearing, that strict compliance would result in substantial financial
hardship or inequity to the applicant without sufficient corresponding benefit
to the city and its citizens in accomplishing the objectives of this Paragraph
(9), "Outside Storage." The fee to request that the board of adjustment extend
time is the same fee as the fee for a nonresidential special exception set
forth in Article I, "General Provisions," of the Dallas Development Code.
      (10)   Petroleum product storage and wholesale.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the storage and wholesale trade and
distribution of petroleum products.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in the IM district with RAR
required. By SUP only in the CS district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In an IM district, petroleum product storage and wholesale
must be visually screened on any side that is within 200 feet of and visible
from a thoroughfare or an adjacent property that is not zoned an IM district.
For purposes of this paragraph, adjacent means across the street or sharing a
common lot line.
      (11)   Recycling buy-back center.
         (A)   Definitions: In these use regulations:
            (i)   HOUSEHOLD METALS means items that are:
               (aa)   customarily used in a residential dwelling;
               (bb)   comprised of any quantity of ferrous or nonferrous metal,
as defined in
Chapter 40B of the Dallas City Code, as amended; and
               (cc)   not included in the definition of industrial metals.
Examples of household metals include, but are not limited to kitchen pots and
pans, cooking and serving tools, barbeque equipment, window screens, gardening
tools, and aluminum foil.
            (ii)   INDUSTRIAL METALS means pipes, wires, coils, condensors,
guard rails, automotive parts, bulky appliances, and similar industrial or
construction materials which are comprised of any quantity of ferrous or
nonferrous metal, as defined in
Chapter 40B of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
            (iii)   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS means clothing, aluminum cans, steel
cans, glass, paper, plastics, and household and industrial metals.
            (iv)   RECYCLING BUY-BACK CENTER means a facility wholly enclosed
within a building, or an automatic collection machine, used for the collection
and temporary storage of recyclable materials as provided in Subparagraph (B).
            (v)   RECYCLING USE means any use listed in Paragraphs (11) through
(11.3) of this section.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   If this use is located on property controlled, managed, or
maintained by the park and recreation board: By right in all districts.
            (ii)   For the collection of aluminum cans, steel cans, glass,
paper, clothing, and plastics: By right with RAR required in industrial,
central area, MU- 2, MU-2(SAH), MU-3, MU-3(SAH), MC-2, MC-3, and MC-
4 districts. By SUP in CR, RR, CS, MU-1, MU- 1(SAH), and MC-1 districts.
            (iii)   For the collection of household metals: By SUP in CR, RR,
CS, industrial, central area, mixed use and multiple commercial districts.
            (iv)   For the collection of industrial metals: By SUP in
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The floor area of this use may not exceed 10,000 square feet.
            (ii)   Mechanical processing of recyclable materials is limited to
crushing, bailing, and shredding.
            (iii)   Materials stored at this use must be removed at least once
a week or before reaching capacity. The facilities must be maintained in proper
repair and the exterior must have a neat and clean appearance.
            (iv)   In the LI, IR, and IM districts, openings providing vehicle
access to the building may remain open at all times. In all other districts,
vehicle access openings must remain closed except when receiving or removing
recyclable materials.
            (v)   No more than one recycling use is permitted on a building
site.
            (vi)   This use must be located at least 1,000 feet from another
recycling use. Measurements of distance under this paragraph are taken
radially. “Radial” measurement means a measurement taken along the shortest
distance between the nearest point of the building sites where recycling uses
are located.
            (vii)   The collection of industrial metals is prohibited in all
districts except the LI, IR, and IM districts as provided in Subparagraph (B).
            (viii)   If this use is located on property controlled, managed, or
maintained by the park and recreation board, the requirements of Subparagraphs
(C), (D), and (E) do not apply.
            (ix)   The collection of hazardous waste, as defined in Section
51A-4.206(4)(A)(iii), is prohibited.
            (x)   No SUP for this use may be granted for more than a two-year
time period.
      (11.1)   Recycling collection center.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   HOUSEHOLD METALS means items that are:
               (aa)   customarily used in a residential dwelling;
               (bb)   comprised of any quantity of ferrous or nonferrous metal,
as defined in
Chapter 40B of the Dallas City Code, as amended; and
               (cc)   not included in the definition of industrial metals.
Examples of household metals include, but are not limited to kitchen pots and
pans, cooking and serving tools, barbeque equipment, window screens, gardening
tools, and aluminum foil.
            (ii)   INDUSTRIAL METALS means pipes, wires, coils, condensors,
guard rails, automotive parts, bulky appliances, and similar industrial or
construction materials which are comprised of any quantity of ferrous or
nonferrous metal, as defined in
Chapter 40B of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
            (iii)   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS means aluminum cans, steel cans,
glass, paper, plastics, and household and industrial metals.
            (iv)   RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER means a facility for the
collection and temporary storage of recyclable materials as provided in
Subparagraph (B).
            (v)   RECYCLING USE means any use listed in Paragraphs (11) through
(11.3) of this section.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   If this use is located on property controlled, managed, or
maintained by the park and recreation board: By right in all districts.
            (ii)   For the collection of aluminum cans, steel cans, glass,
paper, and plastics: By right with RAR required in industrial, central area,
MU-2, MU- 2(SAH), MU-3, MU-3(SAH), MC-2, MC-3, and MC-4 districts. By SUP in
CR, RR, CS, MU-1, MU-1(SAH), and MC-1 districts.
            (iii)   For the collection of household metals: By SUP in CR, RR,
CS, industrial, central area, mixed use, and multiple commercial districts.
            (iv)   For the collection of industrial metals: By SUP in
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may only be located on an improved surface in an
enclosed container or a trailer that is not more than 45 feet in length.
            (ii)   A trailer may only be placed on an improved surface of a
building site containing a minimum of 30,000 square feet of land area, and a
minimum of 10,000 square feet of building area. The area occupied by this use
may not exceed 2,000 contiguous square feet, excluding area for required
parking and maneuvering.
            (iii)   No more than one recycling use is permitted on a building
site. A collection center is limited to one trailer and two containers of no
more than 40 cubic yards each. An additional 40-cubic-yard container may be
substituted for the permitted trailer.
            (iv)   A collection center located on a parking lot may not occupy
required off-street parking spaces. A collection center must be arranged so as
to not impede free traffic flow. This use may not be located in a required
yard.
            (v)   Mechanical processing of recyclable materials is prohibited
on site.
            (vi)   Materials stored at the collection center must be removed at
least once a week or before reaching capacity.
            (vii)    The collection center must be maintained in proper repair
and the exterior must have a neat and clean appearance. All containers must be
constructed of solid materials.
            (viii)   Collection centers must be attended at all times or
closed.
            (ix)   A sign must be provided for each trailer and container. Each
sign must identify the use, the operator responsible for the use, and the
telephone number of the operator. A trailer may have one sign on each side, not
exceeding 125 square feet. No sign on a container may exceed 30 square feet. No
other sign is permitted for this use.
            (x)   No SUP for this use may be granted for more than a two-year
time period.
            (xi)   Operation of this use between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m. is prohibited.
            (xii)   This use must be located at least 1,000 feet from another
recycling use. Measurements of distance under this paragraph are taken
radially. “Radial” measurement means a measurement taken along the shortest
distance between the nearest point of the building sites where recycling uses
are located.
            (xiii)   If this use is located on property controlled, managed, or
maintained by the park and recreation board, the requirements of Subparagraphs
(C), (D), and (E) do not apply.
            (xiv)   The collection of hazardous waste, as defined in Section
51A-4.206(1.1), is prohibited.
      (11.2)   Recycling drop-off container.
         (A)   Definitions: In these use regulations:
            (i)   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS means aluminum cans, steel cans, glass,
paper, and plastics.
            (ii)   RECYCLING DROP-OFF CONTAINER means a facility for the
collection and temporary storage of recyclable materials that are limited to
aluminum cans, steel cans, glass, paper, and plastics.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   By right in all districts if this use is located on property
controlled, managed, or maintained by the park and recreation board.
            (ii)   By right in all districts except the P(A) district if the
requirements of Subparagraph (E) are satisfied. Except as otherwise provided in
Subparagraph (B)(i) and except for the P(A) district, by SUP in any district if
any requirement of Subparagraph (E) is not satisfied.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A multifamily or non-residential use must be located on the
same building site as this use.
            (ii)   This use may not be located within a visibility triangle as
defined in Section
51A-4.602.
            (iii)   No more than two containers are permitted on a building
site. Containers may have no more than 3.5 cubic yards of storage capacity
except that one container for paper collection may have no more than 20 cubic
yards of storage capacity. No container may exceed six feet in height. All
deposit openings must be designed to prevent dispersion of the container’s
contents, or the container must be staffed at all times when collection may
occur. Containers must be constructed of solid materials and placed on concrete
paving, hot mix asphalt paving that consists of a binder and surface course, or
a material that has equivalent characteristics.
            (iv)   Containers may not occupy required off-street parking
spaces, impede free traffic flow, or be located in a yard that abuts a street.
For purposes of this provision, “yard” means the area extending the length of
the lot between the main structure and a street.
            (v)   Trailers and automatic collection machines are prohibited.
            (vi)   Mechanical processing of the recyclable materials is
prohibited on site.
            (vii)   Materials stored at this use must be removed at least once
a week or before reaching capacity. The facilities must be maintained in proper
repair and the exterior must have a neat and clean appearance.
            (viii)   A sign must be provided for each container on the
container. Each sign must identify the use, the operator responsible for the
use, and the telephone number of the operator. No sign on a container may
exceed 30 square feet. One sign that does not exceed 20 square feet may be
provided on a required screening fence within five feet of a container.
            (ix)   No more than one recycling use is permitted on a building
site.
            (x)   This use must be located at least 1,000 feet from another
recycling use. Measurements of distance under this provision are taken
radially. “Radial” measurement means a measurement taken along the shortest
distance between the nearest point of the building sites where recycling uses
are located.
            (xi)   Recycling drop-off containers must be visually screened on
any side visible from a street or an adjoining residential property by a brick,
stone, concrete masonry, stucco, concrete, or wood wall or fence or by
landscape screening. To allow air circulation and visibility, the screening
from grade to one foot above grade must be open except for support posts.
Screening must be properly maintained so that:
               (aa)   the screening is not out of vertical alignment more than
one foot from the vertical, measured at the top of the screening; and
               (bb)   any rotted, fire damaged, or broken slats or support
posts; any broken or bent metal posts; any torn, cut, bent, or ripped metal
screening; any loose or missing bricks, stones, rocks, mortar, or similar
materials and any dead or damaged landscaping materials are repaired or
replaced.
            (xii)   No SUP for this use may be granted for more than a two-year
time period.
            (xiii)   Nonprofit organizations are exempt from payment of SUP
application fees for this use. For purposes of this provision, “nonprofit
organization” means an organization eligible for an exemption from taxation
pursuant to Sections 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. At the time of
application, a nonprofit applicant must submit an affidavit, acknowledged
before a notary public, stating the organization’s eligibility for a fee
exemption under this paragraph.
            (xiv)   The collection of hazardous waste, as defined in Section
51A-4.206(1.1), is prohibited.
            (xv)   If this use is located on property controlled, managed, or
maintained by the park and recreation board, the requirements of Subparagraphs
(C), (D), and (E) do not apply.
            (xvi)   By December 31, 2008, recycling drop-off containers must be
brought into compliance with amendments to this subparagraph contained in
Ordinance No. 27314, passed by the Dallas City Council on September 10, 2008.
      (11.3)   Recycling drop-off for special occasion collection.
         (A)   Definitions: In these use regulations:
            (i)   HOUSEHOLD METALS means items that are:
               (aa)   customarily used in a residential dwelling;
               (bb)   comprised of any quantity of ferrous or nonferrous metal,
as defined in
Chapter 40B of the Dallas City Code, as amended; and
               (cc)   not included in the definition of industrial metals.
Examples of household metals include, but are not limited to kitchen pots and
pans, cooking and serving tools, barbeque equipment, window screens, gardening
tools, and aluminum foil.
            (ii)   INDUSTRIAL METALS means pipes, wires, coils, condensors,
guard rails, automotive parts, bulky appliances, and similar industrial or
construction materials which are comprised of any quantity of ferrous or
nonferrous metal, as definedin
Chapter 40B of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
            (iii)   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS means aluminum cans, steel cans,
glass, paper, plastics, and household and industrial metals.
            (iv)   RECYCLING DROP-OFF FOR SPECIAL OCCASION COLLECTION means a
facility for the collection and temporary storage of recyclable materials that
are limited to metals, glass, paper, and plastics.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   By right in all districts if this use is located on property
controlled, managed, or maintained by the park and recreation board.
            (ii)   By right in all districts except the P(A) district if the
requirements of Subparagraph (E) are satisfied. Except as otherwise provided in
Subparagraph (B)(i) and except for the P(A) district, by SUP in any district if
any requirement of Subparagraph (E) is not satisfied.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No more than one event each calendar month is permitted, and
no event may exceed three days in duration.
            (ii)   A church, school, or community center use with no less than
two acres of land area must be located on the same building site as this use.
            (iii)   Trailers and containers may not be located within a
required yard.
            (iv)   This use is limited to one trailer and two containers of no
more than 40 cubic yards each. An additional 40-cubic-yard container may be
substituted for the permitted trailer.
            (v)   This use must be attended at all times or closed.
            (vi)   This use may not occupy required off-street parking spaces
or impede free traffic flow.
            (vii)   Mechanical pro-cessing of recyclable materials is
prohibited.
            (viii)   All containers, conveyances, and materials must be removed
from the property after each three-day event. The facilities must be maintained
in proper repair and the exterior must have a neat and clean appearance. All
containers must be constructed of solid materials.
            (ix)   A sign must be provided for each trailer and container. Each
sign must identify the use, the operator responsible for the use, and the
telephone number of the operator. No sign may exceed 30 square feet.
            (x)   Sales transactions are prohibited on site.
            (xi)   No more than one recycling use is permitted on a building
site.
            (xii)   This use must be located at least 1,000 feet from another
recycling use. Measurements of distance under this paragraph are taken
radially. “Radial” measurement means a measurement taken along the shortest
distance between the nearest point of the building sites where recycling uses
are located.
            (xiii)   Nonprofit organizations are exempt from payment of SUP
application fees for this use. For purposes of this paragraph, nonprofit
organization means an organization eligible for an exemption from taxation
pursuant to Sections 501(c)(3) and 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code. At
the time of application, a nonprofit applicant must submit an affidavit,
acknowledged before a notary public, stating the organization’s eligibility for
a fee exemption under this paragraph.
            (xiv)   No SUP for this use may be granted for more than a two-year
time period.
            (xv)   If this use is located on property controlled, managed, or
maintained by the park and recreation board, the requirements of Subparagraphs
(C), (D), and (E) do not apply.
            (xvi) The collection of hazardous waste, as defined in Section
51A-4.206(1.1), is prohibited.
      (12)   Sand, gravel, or earth sales and storage.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for storing and selling sand, gravel, and
earth.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in the IM district with RAR
required. By SUP only in A(A) and CS districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No mining is permitted under this use.
            (ii)   In an IM district, sand, gravel, or earth sales and storage
must be visually screened on any side that is within 200 feet of and visible
from a thoroughfare or an adjoining property that is not zoned an IM district.
      (13)   Trade center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for exhibitions, trade shows, and
conventions.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, industrial, central area,
MU-3, MU-3(SAH), and MC-4 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must have a minimum floor area of 2,000,000 square
feet.
            (ii)   This use must have a site area of at least 100 acres. The
site area may be divided by streets. The area of the dividing streets is not
included in the computation of the site area.
            (iii)   No more than 40 percent of the floor area may be used for
retail sales.
      (14)   Vehicle storage lot.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the storage of vehicles that have
been towed, repossessed, or are otherwise in the care and custody of the
operator of the lot.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in the IM district. By SUP only in
the CS district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No servicing of vehicles or sales of vehicles or parts are
permitted under this use.
            (ii)   A person shall not store outside a legally or mechanically
inoperative or wrecked motor vehicle for a continuous period in excess of 60
days.
            (iii)   This use must have a visual screen of at least six feet in
height which consists of solid masonry, concrete, brick, stucco, stone, or
wood.
            (iv)   Access through required screening may be provided only by a
solid gate equaling the height of the screening. The gate must be located at
least 20 feet from the back of the existing street curb, and must remain closed
except when in actual use.
            (v)   No stacking, crushing, dismantling, or repair of vehicles is
permitted.
            (vi)   A landscape plan must be submitted to the building official
with any application for a building permit in connection with the creation or
expansion of this use. The point values and standards contained in Section
51A-10.107 of this chapter apply to the building official’s review of the
landscape plan required for this use. The landscape plan must show at least 20
points of landscaping located between the required screening and the perimeter
of the lot. The requirements contained in
Article X of this chapter related to acceptable landscape materials, soil
requirements, protection of landscape areas, irrigation requirements,
completion, and maintenance apply to this use.
            (vii)   A minimum distance of 500 feet is required between this use
and a single family, duplex, townhouse, clustered housing, multifamily, or
manufactured home district.
            (viii)   This use must comply with all applicable licensing
requirements.
            (ix)   Paving surface requirements may be provided in an ordinance
granting or amending a specific use permit or a planned development district.
Otherwise, the paving surface requirements contained in Subsection
51A-4.301(d)(3.1) apply.
            (x)   Vehicles being displayed must be parked on site.
      (15)   Warehouse.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the inside storage and distribution
of items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in CS, industrial, and central
area districts. RAR required in CS and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Retail sales are permitted as part of the warehouse use if
the sales are conducted in compliance with the following subparagraphs:
               (aa)   Up to 100 percent of the total warehouse floor area may
be devoted to retail sales activities during an occasional warehouse sale. No
more than six occasional warehouse sales may be conducted during any 12 month
period. Each occasional warehouse sale must be limited in duration to no more
than three consecutive calendar days.
               (bb)   Retail sales are permitted at all times as part of the
warehouse use when the retail sales area does not exceed 10 percent of the
total warehouse floor area. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20363; 20380; 20493;
20806; 20928; 20950; 21001; 21289; 21663; 21697; 24792; 27314; 28803; 29208;
29917; 30890; 33112)
SECS. 51A-4.214 THRU 51A-4.216.   RESERVED.
(Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-4.217.   ACCESSORY USES.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   An accessory use must be a use customarily incidental to a main
use. A use listed in Sections
51A-4.201 through 51A-4.216 may be an accessory use if the building official
determines that the use is customarily incidental to a main use and otherwise
complies with this section. Except as otherwise provided in this article, an
accessory use must comply with all regulations applicable to the main use.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, an accessory use must
be located on the same lot as the main use.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, accessory uses listed
in Subsection (b) or in Sections
51A-4.201 through 51A-5.216 are subject to the following area restrictions: If
the use is conducted outside, it may not occupy more than five percent of the
area of the lot containing the main use. If the use is conducted inside, it may
not occupy more than five percent of the floor area of the main use. Any use
which exceeds these area restrictions is considered to be a separate main use.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (b), an accessory use is
permitted in any district in which the main use is permitted.
      (5)   Except as provided in this paragraph, an alcohol related
establishment that is customarily incidental to a main use, such as an alcohol
related establishment within a hotel, restaurant, or general merchandise store,
is not limited to the five percent area restriction in Section
51A-4.217(a)(3), and will be considered as part of the main use when
determining the gross revenue derived by the establishment from the sale of
alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption. Accessory microbrewery, micro-
distillery, or winery uses and accessory alcoholic beverage manufacturing uses
may not occupy more than 40 percent of the total floor area of the main use.
Any use that exceeds these area restrictions is considered a separate main use.
   (b)   Specific accessory uses. The following accessory uses are subject to
the general provisions in Subsection (a) and the regulations and restrictions
outlined below:
      (1)   Accessory community center (private).
         (A)   Definition: An integral part of a residential project or
community unit development that is under the management and unified control of
the operators of the project or development, and that is used by the residents
of the project or development for a place of meeting, recreation, or social
activity.
         (B)   District restrictions:
            (i)   This accessory use is not permitted in A(A), office, retail,
CS, industrial, multiple commercial, and P(A) districts.
            (ii)   An SUP is required for this accessory use in single family,
duplex, townhouse, CH, and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A private community center may not be operated as a place of
public meetings or as a business.
            (ii)   The operation of a private community center must not create
noise, odor or similar conditions beyond the property line of the project or
development site.
            (iii)   A liquor permit may not be issued for a private community
center.
            (iv)   This accessory use need not be located on the same lot as
the main use.
            (v)   The area restrictions in Subsection (a)(3) do not apply to
this use.
      (1.1)   Accessory electric vehicle charging station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that provides electric vehicle supply
equipment (EVSE) on a site with a main use other than a commercial parking lot
or garage use or commercial motor vehicle parking use.
         (B)   District restrictions: Residential and nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Any amount of parking for a main use on the property may be
electric vehicle charging spaces. The area restrictions in Subsection (a)(3) do
not apply to this use.
            (ii)   If this accessory use is located in a residential district,
it may not have a sign advertising its services.
            (iii)   Charging equipment may not obstruct a required off-street
parking space. A charging cord may not cross over a sidewalk or pedestrian
walkway.
            (iv)   When six feet or less in height, structures and equipment
associated with this use may be located where an off-street parking space is
allowed.
      (2)   Accessory game court (private).
         (A)   Definition: A game court for engaging in tennis, handball,
racquetball, or similar physical activities.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This accessory use may occupy up to 50 percent of the area of
the lot containing the main use.
      (3)   Accessory helistop.
         (A)   Definition: A landing pad for occasional use by rotary wing
aircraft.
         (B)   District restrictions:
            (i)   This accessory use is not permitted in single family, duplex,
townhouse, CH, MH(A), NO(A), LO(A), NS(A), P(A), and urban corridor districts.
            (ii)   An SUP is required for this accessory use in A(A),
multifamily, MO(A), CR, RR, CS, LI, central area, MU-1, MU-1(SAH), MU-2, MU–2
(SAH), and multiple commercial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Regularly scheduled stops are not permitted under this
accessory use.
            (ii)   Fueling or servicing facilities are not permitted under this
accessory use.
            (iii)   This accessory use must be approved by the city aviation
department.
            (iv)   This accessory use is subject to the Federal Aviation
Administration’s rules, regulations, and approval.
      (3.1)   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
         (A)   Definition: A facility used to incinerate plastics, special
waste, and waste containing pathogens or biologically active material which,
because of its type, concentration, and quantity, is capable of transmitting
disease to persons exposed to the waste.
         (B)   District restrictions:
            (i)   This accessory use is not permitted in single family, duplex,
townhouse, CH, MH(A), NO(A), LO(A), NS(A), P(A), and urban corridor districts.
            (ii)   An SUP is required for this facility if it is used to
incinerate more than 225 pounds of waste per hour.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This accessory use is permitted only in conjunction with a
hospital use.
            (ii)   The facility must be located at least 200 feet from all lots
containing residential uses.
            (iii)   If the facility is used to incinerate more than 225 pounds
of waste per hour, it must be located at least 200 feet from all lots
containing public or private school uses.
      (4)   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
         (A)   Definition: The outside placement of merchandise for sale for a
continuous period less than 24 hours.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
residential, NO(A), LO(A), and MO(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Except as otherwise provided in the use regulations, the area
used for accessory outside display of merchandise may not be greater than an
area equal to five percent of the floor area of the main use. This regulation
controls over the area restrictions in Subsection
51A-4.217(a)(3).
         (F)   As with all other uses, an accessory outside display may not
obstruct required parking and may not be placed in the public right-of-way
without a license.
      (5)   Accessory outside sales.
         (A)   Definition: A site for the outside sale of merchandise.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
residential, NO(A), LO(A), MO(A), and P(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (6)   Accessory outside storage.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   ACCESSORY OUTSIDE STORAGE means the outside placement of an
item for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours. Outside placement includes
storage in a structure that is open or not entirely enclosed, or that is
located on an unenclosed porch of a building.
            (ii)   BOOK EXCHANGE STRUCTURE means an enclosed structure that
holds books or other literary materials to be shared or exchanged in a
pedestrian accessible location constructed and maintained by the owner of the
property.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Accessory outside storage is not permitted unless the item
is:
               (aa)   customarily used or stored outside; or
               (bb)   made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (ii)   Accessory outside storage is not permitted in the area
between any street and the main building and extending across the width of the
lot or tract, or on a front porch of a residential building, unless it is:
               (aa)   an operable motor vehicle with valid state registration
parked on a surface that meets the standards for parking surfaces contained in
the off-street parking regulations of this chapter and is not an oversized
motor vehicle;
               (bb)   a boat, trailer that is not an oversized trailer, or
recreational vehicle, that is parked on a surface that meets the standards for
parking surfaces contained in the off-street parking regulations of this
chapter, and the item cannot reasonably be placed in an outside area behind the
street-facing building facade;
               (cc)   landscaping, or an ornamental structure, including, but
not limited to a birdbath, plant container, or statuette, placed outside for
landscaping purposes;
               (dd)   lawn furniture or a book exchange structure made of a
material that is resistant to damage or deterioration from exposure to the
outside environment;
               (ee)   located on a front porch and not visible from the street;
or
               (ff)   a vehicle displaying a registration insignia or
identification card issued by the state to a permanently or temporarily
disabled person for purposes of Section 681.006 of the Texas Transportation
Code.
            (iii)   A person shall not use more than five percent of the lot
area of a premise for accessory outside storage. The area occupied by an
operable motor vehicle with valid state registration is not counted when
calculating the area occupied by accessory outside storage. Except as otherwise
provided in this article, outside storage is considered to be a separate main
use if it occupies more than five percent of the lot.
            (iv)   The board may grant a special exception to the additional
provisions in Romanette (ii) when, in the opinion of the board, the special
exception will not adversely affect neighboring property.
      (6.1)   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (A)   Definition: A facility used to incinerate organic human or
animal waste, including:
            (i)   Human materials removed during surgery, labor and delivery,
autopsy, or biopsy, including body parts, tissues or fetuses, organs, and bulk
blood and body fluids.
            (ii)   Products of spontaneous human abortions, regardless of the
period of gestation, including body parts, tissue, fetuses, organs, and bulk
blood and body fluids.
            (iii)   Anatomical remains.
            (iv)   Bodies for cremation.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
office, NS(A), industrial, P(A), and urban corridor districts. This accessory
use is permitted in residential districts only in conjunction with a public
park containing a zoo and aquarium.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This accessory use is permitted only in conjunction with a
mortuary or funeral home; or a public park containing a zoo and aquarium owned
or operated by a public agency, available to the general public year-round, and
having a collection of at least 5,000 specimens.
            (ii)   This accessory use must be located at least 200 feet from
all lots containing residential uses.
            (iii)   When this accessory use is operated in conjunction with a
public park containing a zoo and aquarium, no more than one incinerator is
permitted, and the incinerator may not burn more than 200 pounds per hour.
      (7)   Amateur communication tower.
         (A)   Definition: A tower with an antenna that transmits amateur
radio, citizen band, or both spectrums, or that receives any portion of a radio
spectrum.
         (B)   District restrictions:
            (i)   This accessory use is not permitted in NO(A), NS(A), and P(A)
districts.
            (ii)   An SUP is required for this accessory use in MF-3(A) and MF-
4(A) districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In all districts where this accessory use is permitted except
MF-3(A) and MF-4(A) districts, a person may erect one amateur communication
tower that exceeds the maximum height specified in Section
51A-4.408 if the amateur communication tower:
               (aa)   does not exceed 60 feet in height;
               (bb)   is setback an additional 12 inches from the required
front, side, and rear yards for each additional eighteen inches of height above
the maximum height specified in Section
51A-4.408;
               (cc)   has a maximum horizontal cross-sectional area of three
square feet;
               (dd)   has no more than two antennae above the maximum height
specified in Section
51A-4.408 with a maximum volume of 900 cubic feet for a single antenna and 1400
cubic feet for two antennae. In this provision, antenna volume is the space
within an imaginary rectangular prism which contains all extremities of the
antenna;
               (ee)   does not encroach into the required front, side, or rear
yard. A guy wire and anchor point for a tower is prohibited in the required
front yard and is also prohibited in the required side and rear yards unless
the guy wire and anchor point is attached to the top of a structural support
that is no less than six feet in height. If a structural support for a guy wire
and anchor point is used, the structural support may project into the required
side and rear yards no more than two feet, measured from the setback line. In
this provision, a structural support for an anchor point is any pole, post,
strut, or other fixture or framework necessary to hold and secure an anchor
point or within three feet of the side or rear property line. If an alley abuts
a rear property line, a guy wire and anchor point may extend to the rear
property line; and
               (ff)   has a minimum space between antennae above the maximum
height specified in Section
51A-4.408 of eight feet or more as measured vertically between the highest
point of the lower antenna and the lowest point of the higher antenna.
            (ii)   The board of adjustment may allow a special exception from
the requirements of Subsection (E)(i) with the exception of Subsection (E)(i)
(aa), if the board finds that the special exception would not adversely affect
neighboring property and would be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this section.
            (iii)   In all residential districts where this accessory use is
permitted except MF-3(A) and MF-4(A) districts, a person may erect an amateur
communication tower over 60 feet and not above 100 feet in height if authorized
by a specific use permit.
            (iv)   This accessory use may occupy up to 25 percent of the area
of the lot containing the main use.
            (v)   This accessory use is prohibited in all residential districts
in the area between the street and the facade of any main or accessory
structure. (This area includes, but may be greater than, the front yard.)
            (vi)   The owner or operator of an amateur communication tower
shall remove the tower within six months of the date that the tower ceased to
operate as an amateur radio, citizen band, or radio spectrum authorized by the
Federal Communications Commission. Upon failure of the owner or operator to
remove the tower within the prescribed period, the building official shall
notify the city attorney to pursue enforcement remedies against that owner or
operator for failure to remove the tower.
      (7.1)   Day home.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that provides care or supervision for
more than three persons of any age not including persons in foster care or
those related to the owner of the residence or the head of the household by
blood, marriage, or adoption. A day home is incidental to the primary use of
the premises as a residence and conducted on the premises by a resident of the
premises who is on the premises during hours of operation.
         (B)   Districts restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in P
(A) and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No more than 12 day home attendees, including persons in
foster care and those related to the owner of the residence or the head of the
household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are permitted at any time in the
operation of this use.
            (ii)   A person who conducts a day home use shall not:
               (aa)   use an advertisement, sign, or display on or off the
premises;
               (bb)    advertise in the yellow pages of the telephone
directory;
               (cc)    employ more than two persons on the premises, other than
the residents of the premises;
               (dd)    conduct outdoor activities between the hours of 10 p.m.
and 7 a.m.;
               (ee)    conduct outdoor activities unless the activities are
screened from the neighboring property by a fence at least four feet in height;
or
               (ff)    generate loud and raucous noise that renders the
enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and
comfort.
            (iii)   The area restrictions in Subsection (a)(3) do not apply to
this use.
      (7.2)   General waste incinerator.
         (A)   Definition: A facility used to incinerate solid waste consisting
of combustible rubbish, refuse, and garbage.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This accessory use must be located at least 200 feet from all
lots containing residential uses.
      (8)   Home occupation.
         (A)   Definition: An occupation that is incidental to the primary use
of the premises as a residence and conducted on the residential premises by a
resident of the premises.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A person who engages in a home occupation shall not:
               (aa)   use any advertisement, sign, or display relating to the
home occupation on the premises;
               (bb)   use the street address of the premises on any
advertisement, sign, or display off the premises;
               (cc)   employ more than one person on the premises, other than
residents of the premises;
               (dd)   have an employee, other than residents of the premises,
who works on the premises more than four hours in any given week;
               (ee)   conduct any activities relating to the home occupation,
including activities on any porch, deck, patio, garage, or unenclosed or
partially enclosed portion of any structure, unless conducted entirely inside
the main structure;
               (ff)   involve more than 3 people on the premises at one time,
other than residents of the premises;
               (gg)   generate loud and raucous noise that renders the
enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and
comfort;
               (hh)   sell or offer products of the home occupation at or on
the premises;
               (ii)   generate vehicular traffic that unreasonably disrupts the
surrounding residents’ peaceful enjoyment of the neighborhood; or
               (jj)   generate parking congestion that unreasonably reduces the
availability of on-street parking spaces on surrounding streets.
            (ii)   A home occupation may not occupy more than 25 percent or 400
square feet of the total floor area of the main structure, whichever is less.
This area restriction controls over the area restriction of Subsection (a)(3).
      (8.1)   Live unit.
         (A)   Definition: A dwelling unit accessory to any nonresidential use
allowed in that district.
         (B)   Districts restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in A
(A), R-1ac(A), R-1/2ac(A), R-16(A), R-13(A), R-10(A), R-7.5(A), R-5(A), D(A),
TH-1(A), TH-2(A), TH-3(A), CH, MF-1(A), MF-2(A), MH(A), CA-1(A), CA-2(A), MU-1,
P(A), CS, and IM districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Floor area: Except as otherwise provided in the use regulations,
the maximum floor area for the dwelling unit shall not exceed the total square
feet of the main use. This floor area restriction controls over the floor area
restrictions in Section 51A-4.217(a)(3).
         (F)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Units cannot be sold separately by metes and bounds.
            (ii)   One live unit allowed per lot.
            (iii)   Live unit can be attached or detached from the
nonresidential use.
            (iv)   Rented live units must be registered with the city's single
family rental program.
      (9)   Occasional sales (garage sales).
         (A)   Definition: The sale of tangible personal property at retail by
a person who is not in the business or does not hold himself or herself out to
be in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A person shall sell tangible personal property only on the
premises of the owner or lessee of the premises where the sale is conducted,
and the owner or lessee must be the legal owner of the tangible personal
property at the time of the sale.
            (ii)   The sale must be inside the building or garage, or on an
approved surface as described in Section
51A-4.301(d)(4).
            (iii)   A person shall not sell, offer, or advertise for sale
merchandise made, produced, or acquired solely for the purpose of resale at an
occasional sale.
            (iv)   A person shall not conduct an occasional sale for a duration
of more than three consecutive calendar days.
            (v)   A person shall not conduct more than two occasional sales at
a premises during any 12 month period.
            (vi)   A person shall not place more than one sign, not to exceed
two square feet in effective area, upon the lot where the sale is taking place.
Up to five signs, not to exceed two square feet in effective area each, are
permitted at locations remote from the sale property with the permission of the
owner of the remote location. Signs advertising an occasional sale are not
permitted in medians or on trees or light poles. All signs advertising an
occasional sale must be removed within 24 hours after expiration of the permit
issued under Section
51A-1.105(x).
            (vii)   The area restrictions in Subsection (a)(3) do not apply to
this use.
            (viii)   Any advertisement of an occasional sale or of an item
being offered for sale at an occasional sale must contain the street address at
which the sale will occur and the date(s) on which the sale will occur.
            (ix)   A person commits an offense if he operates an occasional
sale without a valid permit under Section
51A-1.105(x).
      (10)   Private stable.
         (A)   Definition: An area for the keeping of horses for the private
use of the property owner.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
office, retail, CS, industrial, mixed use, multiple commercial, central area, P
(A), and urban corridor districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A private stable is permitted only on a lot that has at least
15,000 square feet and a person may keep only the number of horses permitted
for the lot area as described in the following chart:
 
LOT AREA                                            NUMBER OF HORSES
At least 15,000 sq. ft. but less than one-half acre 1
At least one-half acre but less than one acre       2
At least one acre but less than two acres           3
At least one-half acre per horse                    4 or more
 
            (ii)   A private stable must include a pen or corral containing at
least 800 square feet for each animal with a stable under a roof containing at
least 100 square feet for each animal.
            (iii)   A stable must have proper drainage so as not to create
offensive odors, fly breeding, or other nuisances.
            (iv)   A pen, corral, fences, or similar enclosures may not be
closer than 20 feet to an adjacent property line. The widths of alleys, street
rights-of-way, or other public rights-of-way may be used in establishing the 20
feet distance to the adjacent property line.
            (v)   Fences for pens, corrals, or similar enclosures must be of a
sufficient height and strength to retain the horses.
            (vi)   The area restrictions in Subsection (a)(3) do not apply to
this use.
      (11)   Swimming pool (private).
         (A)   Definition: A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of
the residents of a residential use.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No private swimming pool may be operated as a business,
except that private swimming lessons may be given under the home occupation
use.
            (ii)   No private swimming pool may be maintained in such a manner
as to be hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners.
            (iii)   No private swimming pool may be constructed in the required
front yard. However, a private swimming pool may be located within the required
side or rear yard if it meets the requirements of Section
51A-4.217(a).
            (iv)   A private swimming pool must be surrounded by a fence.
            (v)   The area restrictions in Subsection (a)(3) do not apply to
this use.
      (11.1)   Temporary inclement weather shelter.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that offers shelter during times of
inclement weather in compliance with Chapter 45.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
the P(A) district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must comply with the regulations in
Chapter 45.
            (ii)   This use may only operate in conjunction with a valid
certificate of occupancy for a permitted main use. This use is not allowed in
conjunction with single family, duplex, townhouse, or handicapped group
dwelling unit.
            (iii)   Except at the Kay Bailey Hutchison Convention Center and
other city-owned and city-leased facilities, this accessory use may not operate
within 0.5 mile of the central business district. The Office of Housing and
Community Empowerment and the Office of Emergency Management and Crisis
Response shall brief a city council committee on this provision by May 24,
2025.
            (iv)   The area restrictions in Subsection (a)(3) do not apply to
this use.
      (12)   Pedestrian skybridges.
         (A)   Definition: Use of a structure constructed above grade primarily
to allow pedestrians to cross a city right-of-way. A pedestrian skybridge use
does not include use of a structure constructed primarily for automobiles.
         (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of persons and property within the city by
providing for the structural integrity of pedestrian skybridges over public
right-of-ways; preventing visual obstruction of public right-of-ways and urban
landscapes; facilitating the flow of traffic; encouraging use of public
skybridges by pedestrians through well designed additions to the existing
pedestrian system; minimizing the negative impact of pedestrian skybridges on
adjoining properties, communication and utility company facilities, and public
street lighting and safety facilities; and establishing standards for
construction and maintenance of pedestrian skybridges.
         (C)   Districts permitted. A pedestrian skybridge is permitted in any
district by SUP. An SUP is required for pedestrian skybridges in planned
development (PD) districts. A license or abandonment from the city of Dallas is
also required to cross a city right-of-way. Provisions concerning licenses for
use of the public right-of-way are contained in
Chapter 43, “Streets and Sidewalks,” of the Dallas City Code. Provisions
concerning abandonment of the public right-of-way are contained in
Chapter 2, “Administration,” of the Dallas City Code.
         (D)   Application. An application for an SUP for a pedestrian
skybridge must contain a statement outlining the need for the pedestrian
skybridge and how the pedestrian skybridge will enhance the welfare of the area
of request and adjacent properties.
         (E)   Specific use permit procedure. The provisions concerning
specific use permits contained in Section
51A-4.219 apply except as modified by this subsection.
            (i)   Notification. The director shall send written notice of a
public hearing on an application for an SUP for a pedestrian skybridge to all
owners of real property lying within 750 feet of the properties on which the
skybridge will be located.
            (ii)   Protest. For purposes of the protest provisions, the area of
request is the properties on which the skybridge will be located.
            (iii)   Residential adjacency. An SUP for a pedestrian skybridge
must be approved by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all members of the
city council if the pedestrian skybridge is within 750 feet of a residential
zoning district or planned development district that allows residential uses or
is sited within a planned development district that is adjacent to residential
districts.
            (iv)   Term. The term of an SUP for a pedestrian skybridge must
coincide with the term of any related license.
         (F)   Mandatory pedestrian skybridge standards. Additional provisions
concerning construction of pedestrian walkways are contained in Chapter 53,
"Dallas Building Code," of the Dallas City Code. Pedestrian skybridges must be
constructed and maintained in accordance with the following regulations:
            (i)   Pedestrian skybridges must be properly maintained at all
times. If a pedestrian skybridge connects two buildings which are separately
owned, an operating agreement assigning maintenance and liability
responsibilities is required.
            (ii)   No more than one pedestrian skybridge may be located within
any blockface or 700 feet of frontage, whichever is less.
            (iii)   Pedestrian skybridges must have clearance above the public
right-of-way of at least 18 feet above grade.
            (iv)   If the pedestrian skybridge has a length of less than 150
feet, the interior passageway must be no less than 10 feet and no greater than
20 feet in width. If the pedestrian skybridge has a length equal to or greater
than 150 feet, the interior passageway must be no less than 12 feet and no
greater than 20 feet in width.
            (v)   The interior height of the passageway must be at least 7 1/
2 feet. The interior height at the springline of vaulted ceilings must be at
least 7 1/2 feet.
            (vi)   Supports may be located within the public right-of-way if
the placement of the support structure does not impede pedestrian traffic and
maintains minimum sidewalk clearance widths required in the zoning district and
in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. Chapter 126.
            (vii)   A sign must be posted within the adjoining structures
indicating whether the skybridge is open to the public, the location of the
pedestrian skybridge, and where the pedestrian skybridge leads.
            (viii)   Pedestrian skybridges must meet state and federal
standards for accessibility to and usability by individuals with disabilities.
            (ix)   Pedestrian skybridges connected to structures with air
conditioning must be enclosed and air conditioned.
            (x)   Any change in slope of the pedestrian skybridge greater than
one percent must be over private property or concealed within the pedestrian
skybridge.
            (xi)   Pedestrian skybridges must not diverge from a perpendicular
angle to the right-of-way by more than 30 degrees.
            (xii)   Reserved.
            (xiii)   Minimum artificial lighting of 15 foot candles must be
provided. Lighting must not produce glare of an intensity that creates a
nuisance for motor vehicles or pedestrians.
            (xiv)   No exterior signs, other than government signs, may be
applied to or suspended from any pedestrian skybridge.
            (xv)   Pedestrian skybridges must not be located within 300 feet of
an historic overlay district.
            (xvi)   Pedestrian skybridges must be designed to prevent people
from jumping or throwing objects from the pedestrian skybridge.
            (xvii)   Structural materials must be durable and easily
maintained. Construction must comply with the City of Dallas Building and Fire
Codes.
            (xviii)   Pedestrian skybridges must not interfere with or impair
use of the right-of-way by existing or proposed communication and utility
facilities.
            (xix)   The applicant must post bond for the estimated cost to the
city to remove the pedestrian skybridge if it becomes a public nuisance.
            (xx)   Skybridges may be placed in the required front, side, or
rear yard.
         (G)   Recommended pedestrian skybridge standards. Pedestrian
skybridges are recommended to be constructed and maintained in accordance with
the following guidelines:
            (i)   Pedestrian skybridges which are open to the public should
penetrate the second story of the adjoining structures, or, if not possible, as
close as possible to the street level.
            (ii)   Pedestrian skybridges should penetrate the adjoining
structures as closely as possible to escalators or elevators having access to
the entire structure and the street.
            (iii)    Free-standing pedestrian skybridges and pedestrian
skybridges connected to structures without air conditioning should have a roof,
wind breaks, and adequate ventilation that maximize the comfort and safety of
pedestrians. A pedestrian skybridge should be open only when the adjoining
structures are open.
            (iv)   If the length of the pedestrian skybridge exceeds 250 feet,
the passageway should be interrupted by interior visual breaks, such as turns,
courts, or plazas.
            (v)   Primary lighting sources should be recessed and indirect.
Accent lighting is encouraged. Natural lighting should be used in addition to
artificial lighting.
            (vi)   The pedestrian skybridge should be designed so as to
coordinate with the adjoining structures to the extent possible. Where
coordination is not possible, the pedestrian skybridge should be of a neutral
color, such as brown or grey.
            (vii)   At least 70 percent of the side walls should be open, or
glass or transparent material with a light transmission of not less than 36
percent and a luminous reflectance of not more than six percent. "Light
transmission" means the ratio of the amount of total light to pass through the
material to the amount of total light falling on the material and any glazing.
"Luminous reflectance" means the ratio of the amount of total light that is
reflected outward by a material to the amount of total light falling on the
material.
         (H)   Waiver. The city council may, by a three-fourths vote, grant a
waiver to the pedestrian skybridge standards contained in this paragraph if the
council finds that:
            (i)   strict compliance with the requirements will unreasonably
burden the use of either of the properties;
            (ii)   the waiver will not adversely affect neighboring property;
            (iii)   the waiver will not be contrary to the public interest; and
            (iv)   the waiver will not be contrary to the public health,
safety, or welfare.
         (I)   Compliance regulations. Pedestrian skybridge uses are not
subject to the compliance regulations contained in Section
51A-4.704 . (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20411; 20478; 20845; 21001; 21002; 21289;
21454; 21663; 21735; 22004; 22204; 22392; 23012; 23031; 23258; 24205; 24718;
24843; 24899; 24915; 26334; 26746; 28021; 28700; 28737; 28803; 29024; 30257;
30894; 31041; 31607; 31705; 32441; 32465; 32659; 32864; 32907; 33112; 33233)
SEC. 51A-4.218.   LIMITED USES.
   (a)   A limited use must be contained entirely within a building and be
primarily for the service of the occupants of the building.
   (b)   A limited use may not have a floor area that in combination with the
floor areas of other limited uses in the building exceeds 10 percent of the
floor area of the building.
   (c)   A limited use must:
      (1)   have no exterior public entrance except through the general
building entrances; and
      (2)   have no exterior advertising signs on the same lot. (Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-4.219.   SPECIFIC USE PERMIT (SUP).
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   The SUP provides a means for developing certain uses in a manner in
which the specific use will be compatible with adjacent property and consistent
with the character of the neighborhood.
      (2)   The use regulations for each use in Division
51A-4.200 state whether an SUP is required for a use to be permitted in a
zoning district. The SUP requirement for a use in a district does not
constitute an authorization or an assurance that the use will be permitted.
Each SUP application must be evaluated as to its probable effect on the
adjacent property and the community welfare and may be approved or denied as
the findings indicate appropriate. Each SUP must be granted by the city council
by separate ordinance.
      (3)   The city council shall not grant an SUP for a use except upon a
finding that the use will:
         (A)   complement or be compatible with the surrounding uses and
community facilities;
         (B)   contribute to, enhance, or promote the welfare of the area of
request and adjacent properties;
         (C)   not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general
welfare; and
         (D)   conform in all other respects to all zoning regulations and
standards.
      (4)   The granting of an SUP has no effect on the uses permitted as of
right and does not waive the regulations of the underlying zoning district.
      (5)   The city council may impose reasonable conditions upon the granting
of an SUP consistent with the purposes stated in this chapter.
      (6)   The applicant shall post the SUP ordinance in a conspicuous place
on the property, except where a use has no interior building space (for
example, a private street or alley use). The applicant shall post the SUP
ordinance by June 1, 2006.
      (7)   An ordinance granting a specific use permit may increase the number
of required parking spaces if needed to make the use more compatible with the
surrounding area.
   (b)   Specific use permit procedure.
      (1)   An applicant for an SUP shall comply with the zoning amendment
procedure for a change in zoning district classification. Each SUP ordinance is
incorporated by reference into this chapter.
      (2)   At the time of applying for an SUP, the applicant shall submit:
         (A)   a site plan that includes:
            (i)   the dimensions, bearings, and street frontage of the
property;
            (ii)   the location of buildings, structures, and uses;
            (iii)   the method of ingress and egress;
            (iv)   off-street parking and loading arrangements;
            (v)   screening, lighting, and landscaping, if appropriate;
            (vi)   the locations, calipers, and names (both common and
scientific) of all trees near proposed construction activity (trees in close
proximity that all have a caliper of less than eight inches may be designated
as a “group of trees” with only the number noted); and
            (vii)   any other information the director determines necessary for
a complete review of the proposed development; and
         (B)   a traffic impact analysis if the director determines that the
analysis is necessary for a complete review of the impacts of the proposed
development.
      (3)   If the director determines that one or more of the items listed in
Paragraph (2) is not necessary to allow for a complete review of the proposed
development, he shall waive the requirement that the item(s) be provided.
      (4)   The minor amendment process allows flexibility as necessary to meet
the contingencies of development. Amendments that do not qualify as minor
amendments must be processed as a zoning amendment. The city plan commission
shall, after a public hearing, authorize minor changes in the site plan that
otherwise comply with the SUP ordinance and the underlying zoning and do not:
         (A)   alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to
adjacent property;
         (B)   increase the number of dwelling units shown on the original site
plan by more than 10 percent;
         (C)   increase the floor area shown on the original site plan by more
than five percent or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less;
         (D)   increase the height shown on the original site plan;
         (E)   decrease the number of off-street parking spaces shown on the
original site plan so as to create a traffic hazard or traffic congestion or
fail to provide adequate parking; or
         (F)   reduce setbacks at the boundary of the site as specified by a
building or setback line shown on the original site plan.
For purposes of this paragraph, “original site plan” means the earliest
approved site plan that is still in effect, and does not mean a later amended
site plan. For example, if a site plan was approved with the specific use
permit and then amended through the minor amendment process, the original site
plan would be the site plan approved with the specific use permit, not the site
plan as amended through the minor amendment process. If, however, the site plan
approved with the specific use permit was replaced through the zoning amendment
process, then the replacement site plan becomes the original site plan. The
purpose of this definition is to prevent the use of several sequential minor
amendments to circumvent the zoning amendment process.
An applicant or owner of real property within the notification area may appeal
the decision of the city plan commission to the city council. An appeal must be
requested in writing within 10 days after the decision of the city plan
commission. City council shall decide whether the city plan commission erred,
using the same standards that city plan commission used. Appeal to the city
council is the final administrative remedy available.
      (5)   Reserved.
      (6)   A time limit may be imposed as a condition upon the granting of an
SUP. If a time limit has been imposed, the SUP automatically terminates when
the time limit expires. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (c), the
applicant shall go through the procedures outlined above in Paragraphs (1) and
(2) to renew an SUP.
      (7)   As a further condition to the granting of an SUP, the city council
may require the property owner to participate in cost-sharing for
infrastructure improvements that are in part necessitated by the proposed
development. In no case, however, shall the property owner be required to pay
for more than 50 percent of the cost of improvements located more than 250 feet
from the lot.
      (8)   The minor amendment process allows flexibility as necessary to meet
the contingencies of development. Amendments that do not qualify as minor
amendments must be processed as a zoning amendment. The city plan commission
shall, after a public hearing, authorize minor changes in the landscape plan
that otherwise comply with the SUP ordinance and the underlying zoning and do
not:
         (A)   reduce the perimeter landscape buffer strip shown on the
original landscape plan;
         (B)   detrimentally affect the original landscape plan’s aesthetic
function relative to adjacent right-of-way or surrounding property; or
         (C)   detrimentally affect the original landscape plan’s screening or
buffering function.
For purposes of this paragraph, “original landscape plan” means the earliest
approved landscape plan that is still in effect, and does not mean a later
amended landscape plan. For example, if a landscape plan was approved with the
specific use permit and then amended through the minor amendment process, the
original landscape plan would be the landscape plan approved with the specific
use permit, not the landscape plan as amended through the minor amendment
process. If, however, the landscape plan approved with the specific use permit
was replaced through the zoning amendment process, then the replacement
landscape plan becomes the original landscape plan. The purpose of this
definition is to prevent the use of several sequential minor amendments to
circumvent the zoning amendment process.
An applicant or owner of real property within the notification area may appeal
the decision of the city plan commission to the city council. An appeal must be
requested in writing within 10 days after the decision of the city plan
commission. City council shall decide whether the city plan commission erred,
using the same standards that city plan commission used. Appeal to the city
council is the final administrative remedy available.
   (c)   Automatic renewals.
      (1)   As part of an SUP ordinance or ordinance amendment, the city
council may declare that an SUP is eligible for automatic renewal pursuant to
this subsection. Automatic renewal is an alternative to the standard method of
renewing an SUP by amending the SUP ordinance. In order for automatic renewal
to occur, the property owner or his representative must file a complete
application for automatic renewal with the director after the 180th day but
before the 120th day before the expiration of the current SUP time period. If a
fee is required, the application is not considered “filed” until the fee is
paid. For more information regarding fees, see Section
51A-1.105.
      (2)   Automatic renewal does not result in an amendment to the SUP
ordinance. An applicant seeking to change the SUP conditions or to otherwise
amend the SUP ordinance must go through the procedures outlined in Subsection
(b).
      (3)   An application for automatic renewal must be filed with the
director on a form furnished by the city for that purpose. As part of the
application, the property owner or his representative shall state that all
existing SUP conditions have been complied with, and that no changes to the
conditions or other SUP ordinance provisions are being requested.
      (4)   Failure to timely file a complete application required under
Paragraph (1) renders the SUP ineligible for automatic renewal. The city
council may, however, reinstate an SUP’s eligibility for future automatic
renewals as part of a new SUP ordinance or ordinance amendment.
      (5)   Upon the filing of a complete application for automatic renewal,
the director shall send written notice to all owners of real property lying
within 200 feet of the area governed by the SUP. The notice must state that the
SUP is eligible for automatic renewal and may be automatically renewed without
further notice.
      (6)   If the owners of 20 percent or more of the land within 200 feet of
the area governed by the SUP file a written protest against the automatic
renewal in accordance with this paragraph, the director shall forward the
application to the city plan commission and city council for further action.
Written protests against an automatic renewal must be filed with the director
before 5:00 p.m. of the 21st calendar day after the date the notice is mailed.
A protest sent through the mail must be received by the director before the
deadline. If the deadline falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or official city
holiday, then the protests must be filed before noon of the following working
day. To the extent that they do not conflict with this subsection, the
provisions of Section
51A-4.701 governing written protests in zoning cases apply to protests filed
under this subsection.
      (7)   After the deadline for filing written protests has passed, the
director shall review the conditions of the SUP and determine whether the
conditions have been met. If the director determines that the conditions have
not been met, he shall forward the application to the city plan commission and
city council for further action.
      (8)   “Further action” as that term is used in Paragraphs (6) and (7)
means that the director shall schedule the application for public hearings
before both the city plan commission and the city council. Notice of the public
hearings must be given as would be required by law for a change in zoning
district classification. The city plan commission shall make a recommendation
to the city council regarding the proposed renewal based on staff reports,
field inspections, and the evidence presented at its public hearing.
      (9)   In connection with an application that has been forwarded to it by
the director pursuant to Paragraph (6) or (7), the city council may:
         (A)   pass an amending ordinance to repeal the SUP’s eligibility for
automatic renewal, or to supplement, remove, or amend any of the conditions or
other provisions in the SUP ordinance; or
         (B)   take no action and thereby allow the SUP to automatically renew
as a matter of law.
      (10)   No renewal or expiration of an SUP may occur while the application
is pending before the city plan commission or city council. If the application
is pending at the end of the current time period stated in the SUP ordinance,
the time period shall be extended as a matter of law until:
         (A)   the day following the next succeeding official agenda meeting of
the city council after the council makes its final decision on the application;
or
         (B)   if the council votes to pass an amending ordinance, until the
effective date of the amending ordinance.
      (11)   The renewal of an SUP eligible for automatic renewal occurs as a
matter of law at the end of the current time period as stated in the SUP
ordinance, or as extended pursuant to Paragraph (10). Unless otherwise
specified in the SUP ordinance, an automatic renewal is for the same time
period as the immediately preceding time period [excluding, if applicable,
extensions pursuant to Paragraph (10)].
      (12)   An SUP that is automatically renewed pursuant to this subsection
may continue to be automatically renewed in perpetuity so long as the owner or
his representative continues to timely file the applications for automatic
renewal required under Paragraph (1). Failure to timely file this application
during any renewal period renders the SUP ineligible for further automatic
renewal. The city council may, however, reinstate the SUP’s eligibility for
future automatic renewals as part of a new SUP ordinance or ordinance
amendment.
      (13)   This subsection does not impair the ability of the city plan
commission or city council to call a public hearing on its own motion for the
purpose of passing an amending ordinance to repeal an SUP’s eligibility for
automatic renewal, or to supplement, remove, or amend any of the conditions or
other provisions in an SUP ordinance. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20132; 20496; 22053;
23997; 26270; 26730; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.220.   CLASSIFICATION OF NEW USES.
   (a)   Initiation.
      (1)   A person, the commission, or the city council may propose zoning
amendments to regulate new and previously unlisted uses.
      (2)   A person requesting the addition of a new use shall submit to the
director all information necessary for the classification of the use,
including, but not limited to:
         (A)   the nature of the use and whether the use involves dwelling
activity, sales, or processing;
         (B)   the type of product sold or produced under the use;
         (C)   whether the use has enclosed or open storage and the amount and
nature of the storage;
         (D)   anticipated employment;
         (E)   transportation requirements;
         (F)   the nature and time of occupancy and operation of the premises;
         (G)   the off-street parking and loading demands;
         (H)   the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and
vibration likely to be generated; and
         (I)   the requirements for public utilities such as sanitary sewer and
water.
   (b)   Use regulations. New use regulations must contain the following
information:
      (1)   The definition of the use.
      (2)   The zoning districts within which the use is permitted.
      (3)   The required off-street parking.
      (4)   The required off-street loading.
      (5)   Any additional provisions reasonably necessary to regulate the use.
(Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-4.221.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (a)   Purpose. All uses operated as sexually oriented businesses are subject
to the licensing and locational restrictions in
Chapter 41A. This section expressly classifies the sexually oriented businesses
defined in
Chapter 41A for zoning purposes. These classifications codify the existing
practices of the building official and should not be construed as changing the
locational restrictions in
Chapter 41A.
   (b)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   ADULT ARCADE means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically,
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE means a commercial
establishment that as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or
rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
         (A)   books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, DVD’s, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
         (B)   instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
      (3)   ADULT CABARET means a commercial establishment that regularly
features the offering to customers of adult cabaret entertainment.
      (4)   ADULT CABARET ENTERTAIN-MENT means live entertainment that:
         (A)   is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification; and
         (B)   is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, simulating, describing, or relating to “specified anatomical areas”
or “specified sexual activities.”
      (5)   ADULT MOTEL means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial
establishment that:
         (A)   offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; and has a sign
(as defined in this section) visible from the public right-of-way that
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
or
         (B)   offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than 10 hours; or
         (C)   allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the
room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
      (6)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER means a commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas.”
      (7)   ESCORT means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to
act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers
to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
      (8)   ESCORT AGENCY means a person or business association that
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
      (9)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO means any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
      (10)   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY means:
         (A)   the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals,
female genitals, or female breast; or
         (B)   a state of dress that fails to completely and opaquely cover a
human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or any part of the female
breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      (11)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS means an adult arcade, adult bookstore
or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater,
escort agency, or nude model studio, or other commercial enterprise the primary
business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or
exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation
or sexual gratification to the customer.
      (12)   SIGN means any display, design, pictorial, or other representation
that is:
         (A)   constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened, or
manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that it is visible from the outside of
a sexually oriented business; and
         (B)   used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods,
services, or merchandise available at the sexually oriented business. The term
“sign” also includes any representation painted on or otherwise affixed to any
exterior portion of a sexually oriented business establishment or to any part
of the tract upon which the establishment is situated.
      (13)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS means:
         (A)   any of the following, or any combination of the following, when
less than completely and opaquely covered:
            (i)   any human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;
            (ii)   any buttock; or
            (iii)   any portion of the female breast or breasts that is
situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
         (B)   human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      (14)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES means and includes any of the
following:
         (A)   the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
         (B)   sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
         (C)   masturbation, actual or simulated; or
         (D)   excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subparagraphs (A) through (C) of this paragraph.
   (c)   Zoning classification of sexually oriented businesses. The different
types of sexually oriented businesses defined above are classified as follows
for zoning purposes:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED CHAPTER 51, ARTICLE CHAPTER 51A, ARTICLE CHAPTER 51A, ARTICLE
BUSINESS          IV, ZONING          IV, ZONING           XIII, ZONING
                  CLASSIFICATION      CLASSIFICATION       CLASSIFICATION
                    CHAPTER 51, ARTICLE CHAPTER 51A,        CHAPTER 51A,
SEXUALLY ORIENTED   IV, ZONING          ARTICLE IV, ZONING  ARTICLE XIII,
BUSINESS            CLASSIFICATION      CLASSIFICATION      ZONING
                                                            CLASSIFICATION
                    Inside commercial   Commercial          Commercial
                    amusement           amusement (inside)  amusement (inside)
Adult arcade        See Section 51-     See Section         See Section
                    4.208.              51A-4.210.          51A-13.306(d)(6)
                                                            (A).
                    Retail stores other General merchandise Retail sales
Adult bookstores or than listed         or food store       See Section
adult video stores  See Section 51-     See Section         51A-13.306(d)(5)
                    4.211.              51A-4.210.          (C).
                    Inside commercial   Commercial          Commercial
                    amusement           amusement (inside)  amusement (inside)
Adult cabaret       See Section 51-     See Section         See Section
                    4.208.              51A-4.210.          51A-13.306(d)(6)
                                                            (A).
                    Hotel and motel     Hotel or motel      Overnight lodging
Adult motel         See Section 51-     See Section         See Section
                    4.216.1.            51A-4.205.          51A-13.306(d)(7)
                                                            (B).
                    Theatre             Theater             Indoor recreation
Adult motion        See Section 51-     See Section         See Section
picture theater     4.208.              51A-4.210.          51A-13.306(d)(6)
                                                            (B).
                    Office              Office              Office
Escort agency       See Section 51-     See Section         See Section
                    4.210.              51A-4.207.          51A-13.306(d)(4)
                                                            (B).
                    Photography studio  Personal service    Personal service
Nude model studio   See Section 51-     See Section         See Section
                    4.211.              51A-4.210.          51A-13.306(d)(6)
                                                            (D).
 
   (d)   Always a main use. A use being operated as a sexually oriented
business shall at all times be considered a separate main use, and cannot be an
accessory use within the meaning of Section
51A-4.217. (Ord. Nos. 24438; 24696; 26513; 27404; 27495; 27790)
Division 51A-4.300. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
SEC. 51A-4.301.   OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Parking as an accessory use. Off-street parking is an accessory use
and is subject to Section
51A-4.217 (a).
      (2)   Minimum parking requirements.
         (A)   Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the parking requirements
in Division
51A-4.200 are summarized in the following table. If there is a conflict between
the table and a parking requirement in Division
51A-4.200, the parking requirement listed in Division
51A-4.200 controls.
Table 1.0.1 General Parking Requirements
Table 1.0.1 General Parking Requirements
51A-4.201          None for any use.
Agricultural uses
51A-4.202
Commercial and     See Table 1.1
business service
uses
51A-4.203           
Industrial uses
51A-4.204          When not listed, no parking is required.
Institutional uses
                   When in MD-1, see Table 1.2; otherwise, ≤ 20,000 SF: none.
4  Church          > 20,000 SF: 1 space per four fixed seats (18" is one seat).
                   > 20,000 SF: 1 space per 28 SF of seating area in the
                   sanctuary or auditorium.
17 Public or       9-12th grades: 9.5 spaces per classroom; Otherwise: none.
   private school
51A-4.205 Lodging  None for any use.
uses
51A-4.206          None for any use.
Miscellaneous uses
51A-4.207 Office   When in MD-1, see Table 1.2; Otherwise, none.
uses
51A-4.208          None for any use.
Recreation uses
51A-4.209(b)       When not listed, no parking is required.
Residential uses
2  Duplex          D and TH districts: 1 space per unit; Otherwise: None
                   ≤ 20 units: None
                   21 to 199 units: 0.5 space per dwelling unit
                   ≥ 200 units: 1 space per dwelling unit
5  Multifamily     Guest parking:
                   20-99 units: 10 % of required parking spaces
                   ≥ 100 units: 15 % of required parking spaces
                   All guest parking must be marked for use by guests and
                   clearly marked at the driveway entrance or walking gate.
6  Single-family   R, D, and TH districts: 1; Otherwise: None
 
Table 1.0.2 General Parking Requirements
51A-4.210(b) Retail and personal service  When not listed, no parking is
uses                                      required.
3  Auto service center                    When in MD-1, see Table 1.2.2;
                                          otherwise, none.
                                          When in MD-1, see Table 1.2.2;
                                          otherwise,
4  Alcoholic beverage establishments      1 space per 200 SF used for retail
                                          sales and seating.
                                          No parking is required for a building
                                          2,500 SF.
                                          When in MD-1, see Table 1.2.2;
                                          otherwise,
7  Commercial amusement (inside)          Bowling alley: 1 space per 200 SF of
                                          lane area.
                                          Motor track: 1 space per 200 SF
                                          Other types: 1 space per 200 SF
8  Commercial amusement (outside)         When in MD-1, see Table 1.2.2;
                                          otherwise, 1 space per 200 SF.
9  Convenience store with drive-through
11 Dry cleaning or laundry store
12 Furniture store.
13 Gen. merch. or food store 3,500 SF
14 Gen. merch. or food store >3,500 SF
17 Liquor store
18 Mortuary, funeral home, or commercial  When in MD-1, see Table 1.2.2;
   wedding chapel                         otherwise, none.
19 Motor vehicle fueling station
20 Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales
21 Outside sales
21 Paraphernalia shop
22 Pawn shop
23 Personal service use
24 Restaurant without drive-through or
   drive-in service                       When in MD-1, see Table 1.2.2;
                                          otherwise,
                                          No parking is required for the first
25 Restaurant with drive-through or       2,500 SF;
   drive-in service                       1 space per 200 SF for floor area
                                          >2,500 SF.

27 Swap or buy shop
29 Temporary retail use                   When in MD-1, see Table 1.2.2;
30 Theater                                otherwise, none.
31 Vehicle display, sales, and service.
51A-4.211 Transportation uses
51A-4.212 Utility and Public Service uses No minimum off-street parking
51A-4.213 Wholesale, Distribution, and    requirements for any use in these
Storage uses                              categories.
51A-4.217(b) Accessory uses
 
Table 1.1 Certain Uses Contiguous to R Districts with a Single Family Use
Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when the use is contiguous to a single family district
with a single family or handicapped group dwelling unit use, the minimum off-
street parking requirements below may apply. Otherwise, no minimum off-street
parking requirement.
If there is a conflict between this table and a parking requirement in
Division
51A-4.200, the parking requirement listed in Division
51A-4.200 controls.
51A-4.202 Commercial and business service  Min. Off-Street Parking Req.
uses
1   Building repair and maintenance shop
2   Bus or rail transit vehicle
    maintenance or storage facility
3   Catering service
4   Commercial cleaning or laundry plant   1 space per 500 SF
5   Custom business service
6   Custom woodworking, furniture
    construction, or repair
7   Electronics service center
8   Job or lithographic printing           1 space per 600 SF
8.1 Labor hall                             1 space per 500 SF
9   Machine or welding shop
10  Machinery, heavy equipment, or truck   1 space per 1,000 SF
    sales and service
11  Medical or scientific laboratory
12  Technical school
13  Tool or equipment rental               1 space per 500 SF
14  Vehicle or engine repair or
    maintenance
51A-4.203(b) Industrial uses               Min. Off-Street Parking Req.
                                           Retail sales & seating: 1 space per
0   Alcoholic beverage manufacturing       200 SF, regardless if contiguous to
                                           single family
1   Industrial (inside)
1.1 Industrial (inside) for light          1 space per 600 SF
    manufacturing
2   Industrial (outside)
2.1 Medical/infection waste incinerator    1 space per 1,000 SF
3   Metal salvage facility                 5 spaces minimum
3.1 Mining                                 None.
3.2 Gas drilling and production
3.3 Gas pipeline compressor station        5 spaces minimum
4   Municipal waste incinerator            1 space per 1,000 SF
4.1 Organic compost recycling facility     1 space per 500 SF
5   Outside salvage or reclamation         5 spaces minimum
5.1 Pathological waste incinerator         1 space per 1,000 SF
6   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching 2 spaces minimum
    plant
 
Table 1.2.1 MD-1 Overlay Requirements
The minimum off-street parking requirements summarized in the table below apply
to the following uses when located within the MD-1 Overlay in existence since
May 14, 2025.
If there is a conflict between this table and a parking requirement in Division
51A-4.200, the parking requirement listed in Division
51A-4.200 controls.
Use                                      Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirement
51A-4.204 Institutional uses              
                                         <5,000 SF and is located in a shopping
                                         center
                                         > 20,000 SF in floor area, 1 space per
                                         333 SF.
4 Church                                 Otherwise, 1 space per four fixed
                                         seats (18 inches of linear fixed seat
                                         equals one seat) or
                                         1 space per 28 SF of seating area in
                                         the sanctuary or auditorium.
51A-4.205 Lodging uses                    
                                         ≤ 250 rooms: 1 space for each room
                                         251 to 500 rooms: 3/4 space for each
1 Hotel or motel                         room
                                         >500 rooms: 1/2 space for each rooms;
                                         Meeting rooms: 1 space per 200 SF
51A-4.207 Office uses                     
2 Financial institution without drive-in 1 space per 333 SF
  window
3 Financial institution with drive-in    1 space per 333 SF
  window
4 Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical  1 space per 200 SF
  center
5 Office                                 1 space per 333 SF
51A-4.210(b) Retail and personal service See next pages.
uses
 
Table 1.2.2 MD-1 Overlay Requirements
The minimum off-street parking requirements summarized in the table below apply
to the following uses when located within the MD-1 Overlay in existence since
May 14, 2025.
If there is a conflict between this table and a parking requirement in Division
51A-4.201, the parking requirement listed in Division
51A-4.201 controls.
51A-4.210(b) Retail and personal service   Minimum Off-Street Parking
uses                                       Requirement 
                                           1 space per 500 SF; a minimum of 4
                                           spaces is required. Parking spaces
3     Auto service center                  that are used to repair motor
                                           vehicles and located in a structure
                                           are not counted in determining the
                                           required parking.
                                           Bar, lounge, or tavern and private
                                           club-bar:
                                           Areas used for the manufacture of
                                           alcoholic beverages as an accessory
                                           use: 1 space per 500 SF
                                           Other: 1 space per 100 SF
4     Alcoholic beverage establishments    Microbrewery, micro-distillery, or
                                           winery:
                                           Storage: 1 space per 1,000 SF used
                                           for storage
                                           Retail sales and seating: 1 space
                                           per 100 SF
                                           Other: 1 space per 600 SF
                                           Bingo parlor: 1 space per 50 SF.
                                           Bowling alley: 6 spaces per lane.
                                           Children s amusement center: 1 space
                                           per 200 SF.
                                           Dance hall: 1 space per 25 SF of
                                           dance floor and 1 space per 100 SF
                                           for the remainder of the use. Delta
                                           credits, as defined in Section 51A-
                                           4.704(b)(4)(A), may not be used to
                                           meet this off-street parking
7     Commercial amusement (inside)        requirement. No special exception
                                           may be granted to the parking
                                           requirements.
                                           Motor track: 1 space per 1,000 SF of
                                           restricted track area and 1 space
                                           per additional 200 SF.
                                           Skating rink: 1 space per 200 SF.
                                           Other uses: If an SUP is required
                                           for this use, the off-street parking
                                           requirements may be established in
                                           the ordinance granting the SUP,
                                           otherwise 1 space per 100 SF.
                                           If an SUP is required for this use,
                                           the off-street parking requirement
                                           may be established by the ordinance
8     Commercial amusement (outside)       granting the SUP, otherwise 1 space
                                           per 200 SF, plus 1 space per 400 SF
                                           of site area exclusive of parking
                                           area.
9.1   Convenience store with drive-through 1 space per 200 SF
11    Dry cleaning or laundry store        1 space per 200 SF
                                           Floor area open to the public: 1
12    Furniture store.                     space per 500 SF
                                           Storage or warehouse areas not open
                                           to the public: 1 space per 1,000 SF
13    Gen. merch.or food store 3,500 SF    1 space per 200 SF
                                           < 10,000 SF: 1 space per 200 SF
                                           10,000 to 40,000 SF: 1 space per 220
14    Gen. merch. or food store > 3,500 SF SF
                                           40,000 SF to 100,000 SF: 1 space per
                                           250 SF
17    Liquor store                         1 space per 200 SF
                                           If any tandem spaces are provided, 1
                                           space per 300 feet of floor area
                                           other than the chapel, plus one
                                           space for each two seats in the
                                           chapel. Maximum 50 percent of the
18    Mortuary, funeral home, or           required off-street parking for this
      commercial wedding chapel            use may be tandem spaces.
                                           If no tandem spaces are provided, 1
                                           space per 500 feet of floor area
                                           other than the chapel, plus one
                                           space for each two seats in the
                                           chapel.
19    Motor vehicle fueling station        2 spaces
                                           1 space per 500 square feet of floor
20    Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales area, plus one space per 2,000
                                           square feet of outside sales and
                                           display area
21. 1 Paraphernalia shop                   1 space per 200 SF
22    Pawn shop                            1 space per 200 SF
23    Personal service use                 1 space per 200 SF
                                           As a main use: except as otherwise
                                           provided, 1 space per 100 SF.
                                           As a limited or accessory use:
                                           except as otherwise provided, 1
24    Restaurant without drive-through or  space per 200 SF.
      drive-in service                     Area used for the manufacture of
                                           alcoholic beverages as an accessory
                                           use to the restaurant without drive-
                                           in or drive-through service use: 1
                                           space per 500 SF.
                                           Except as otherwise provided, 1
      Restaurant with drive-through or     space per 100 SF
25    drive-in service                     Areas used for the manufacture of
                                           alcoholic beverages as an accessory
                                           use: 1 space per 500 SF
27    Swap or buy shop                     1 space per 200 SF
29    Temporary retail use                 1 space per 500 SF
30    Theater                              1 space per 28 SF of seating area
31    Vehicle display, sales, and service. 1 space per 500 SF of floor and site
                                           area exclusive of parking area.
 
         (B)   Except when located within the MD-1 Overlay in existence since
May 14, 2025, no parking is required for any use if any portion of the lot or
established building site containing the use is:
            (i)   within 2,640 feet of a light rail or streetcar station;
            (ii)   in a central area district; or
            (iii)   located on a property designated as a recorded Texas
historic landmark, state antiquities landmark, national historic landmark,
national register district, or in a local historic district or landmark.
         (C)   New nonresidential developments that do not provide on-site
parking must meet one of the following requirements:
            (i)   A minimum of one accessible parking space must be provided
either on site or within 200 feet of the closest accessible-compliant entrance
of the structure. If accessible parking is provided off-site, the property
owner must submit a parking agreement that complies with the requirements of
Division
51A-4.320 and identifies a corresponding accessible route to the structure’s
nearest compliant accessible entrance.
            (ii)   An accessible arrival/drop off point with an accessible
route to the structure’s nearest compliant accessible entrance may be approved
by the building official if no accessible parking spaces are available within
200 feet of the structure.
      (3)   Calculating required parking. In any district except a central area
district, the off-street parking requirements for each use are listed by use in
Sections
51A-4.201  through
51A-4.217 . For the purposes of determining required parking:
         (A)   When a lot is used for a combination of uses, the off-street
parking requirements are the sum of the requirements for each use, and no off-
street parking space for one use is included in the calculation of off-street
parking requirements for any other use, except as otherwise provided in this
division or in Division
51A-4.320;
         (B)   Site area, as defined in Section 51A-2.102, does not include
that area occupied by off-street parking, landscaped areas, and open space not
used for storage or sales;
         (C)   Floor area does not include the area of a building used
exclusively to provide bicycle parking spaces;
            (D)   Fractional spaces are counted to the nearest whole number,
with one-half counted as an additional space.
      (4)   Location of parking on a lot or established building site.
         (A)    Except as specifically permitted in this article, all off-
street parking must be provided on the lot occupied by the main use or in a
parking P(A) district in accordance with Section
51A-4.302.
         (B)   A parking space must be at least 20 feet from the right-of-way
line adjacent to a street if the space is located in an enclosed structure and
if the space faces upon or can be entered directly from the street. This
provision controls over any building line platted to a lesser setback and any
other provision of this article.
         (C)   Off-street parking is not permitted in a visibility triangle as
defined in Section
51A-4.602.
         (D)   The board of adjustment may not authorize the placement of
special parking, as defined in Division
51A-4.320, in a residential district.
         (E)   In nonresidential districts, any off-street parking may extend
to the front property line.
         (F)   Off-street parking provisions for residential districts.
            (i)   In residential districts, any off-street parking for
nonresidential uses must comply with the minimum front yard requirements of
Section
51A-4.401.
            (ii)   In residential districts, except an MF-3(A) or MF-4(A)
district, required off-street parking for residential uses must be located
behind a required front building line.
            (iii)   In an MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2(A), or MF-2(SAH) district,
no required or excess parking may be placed in the required front yard.
            (iv)   In an MF-3(A) or MF-4(A) district, any off-street parking
for residential uses may extend to the front property line.
            (v)   Except for mechanized parking approved under Division
51A-4.340, in single family, duplex, townhouse, and CH districts, off-street
parking must be provided at or below ground level.
      (5)   Design of parking.
         (A)   In general. Parking lots and structures must be designed to
prioritize pedestrian safety, convenience, and connection to the existing
public pedestrian network and pedestrian generators, including transit stops
and nearby residential properties and neighborhoods.
         (B)   Pedestrian pathways in surface parking lots.
            (i)   A parking lot with 50 parking spaces or more must provide at
least one pedestrian walkway that connects the primary entrance of the building
to the nearest public right-of-way.
            (ii)   When crossing a drive aisle, the pathway must be a
contrasting color, material, or texture, and raised to the level of the
sidewalk.
         (C)   Tree protection. All trees within four feet of a parking space
or drive aisle must be protected from vehicular contact with concrete curbs,
wheel stops, or other permanent barriers.
         (D)   Drainage. Water from parking areas may not drain onto or across
the surface of a public sidewalk.
      (6)   Waiver and relief from parking location and design regulations.
         (A)   The director shall grant an administrative waiver to deviate
from Paragraph (5) if the requirements cannot be met due to:
            (i)   the presence of street easements;
            (ii)   interference with service provided by a public utility or
state regulated entity for the transmission of power, fuel, water, or
communication services; and
            (iii)   an increase in danger to pedestrians, cyclists, or
motorists resulting from strict adherence to the regulations.
         (B)   The board may grant a special exception to the provisions in
Paragraph (5) if strict compliance is impractical due to site constraints that
would result in a substantial hardship, provided that the hardship is not self-
created and is not only financial.
         (C)   In determining whether to grant a deviation to Subparagraphs (4)
or (5), the director or board shall consider whether the resulting development
is consistent with the purpose of the development code and with the
comprehensive plan.
      (7)   Bi-annual briefing. The director must present a briefing to the
appropriate city council committee on the off-street parking and loading
regulations in Chapters 51 and
51A  every two years in odd-numbered years beginning in January 2027.
      (8)   Visibility triangle. Off-street parking is not permitted in a
visibility triangle as defined in Section
51A-4.602 .
   (b)   Reserved.
   (c)   Reserved.
   (d)   Construction and maintenance provisions for off-street parking.
      (1)   Each off-street parking space must be provided in accordance with
the following dimensional standards:
         (A)   A parking space parallel with the access lane must be 22 feet
long and 8 feet wide. A one-way access lane must be at least 10 feet wide; a
two-way access lane must be at least 20 feet wide.
         (B)   All other parking spaces must be provided in accordance with
this section and the chart entitled “Parking Bay Widths” on page 271.
         (C)   The following restrictions apply to the use of 7.5 foot stalls
to satisfy off-street parking requirements:
            (i)   7.5-foot wide stalls must be double-striped and identified by
pavement markings which indicate that the stalls are for small car parking.
            (ii)   7.5-foot wide stalls may constitute no more than 35 percent
of the required parking spaces for any use.
      (2)   For a use other than a single family, duplex, or vehicle storage
lot use, each off-street parking space must be clearly and permanently
identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or another method
approved by the building official.
      (3)   For a single family or duplex use, the surface of a parking space,
maneuvering area for parking, or driveway must consist of an all-weather and
drainable material which is approved by the building official, or a material
specified in Subsection (d)(4).
      (3.1)   For a vehicle storage lot use, the surface of a parking space,
maneuvering area for parking, or driveway must consist of an all weather
material which allows delivery and release of vehicles in all weather
conditions as approved by the director, unless paving surface requirements
reasonably consistent with this paragraph and Subsection (d)(4) are provided in
an ordinance granting or amending a specific use permit or a planned
development district.
      (4)   For a use other than a single family, duplex, or vehicle storage
lot use, the surface of an enclosed or unenclosed parking space, maneuvering
area for parking, or a driveway which connects to a street or alley must be on
a compacted sub-grade, and must consist of:
         (A)   concrete paving;
         (B)   hot mix asphalt paving which consists of a binder and surface
course; or
         (C)   a material which has equivalent characteristics of Subsections
(d)(4)(A) or (d)(4)(B) and has the approval of the building official.
      (5)   A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, parks, or
maneuvers a motor vehicle on a lot, unless the vehicle is on a surface as
required in Subsections (d)(3) and (d)(4). The registered owner of an
unattended or unoccupied vehicle is presumed to be the person who illegally
parked the motor vehicle. The records of the State Highway Department or the
County Highway License Department showing the name of the person to whom the
state highway license was issued is prima facie evidence of ownership by the
named individual.
      (5.1) A person commits an offense if he owns, occupies, or is in control
of property on which a motor vehicle is maneuvered, stopped, stood, or parked,
unless the vehicle is maneuvered, stopped, stood, or parked on a surface as
required in Subsections (d)(3) and (d)(4).
      (6)   The owner of off-street parking for a use other than single family
or duplex use shall:
         (A)   keep the maneuvering area and parking surface free of potholes;
         (B)   maintain wheelguards and barriers; and
         (C)   maintain non-permanent parking space markings such as paint, so
that clear identification of each parking space is apparent.
      (7)   Except for single family, handicapped group dwelling unit, and
duplex uses, when off-street parking spaces or maneuvering areas abut a public
sidewalk, pedestrian path, required landscaping, required screening or an
adjoining property, wheel guards not less than six inches in height or other
barriers approved by the building official are required. The wheel guard or
barrier must be installed at least three feet from the above elements and must
be placed so that no part of an automobile extends into or damages the required
elements.
      (8)   All off-street parking spaces and areas must comply with the
guidelines established in the Off-Street Parking Handbook. The director shall
keep a true and correct copy of the Off-Street Parking Handbook on file in his
office for public inspection and/or copying upon request.
   PARKING WAY WIDTHS
        7.5' STALL              8.5' STALL              9.0' STALL              10.0' STALL
PARKING AISLE   ONE ROW TWO     AISLE   ONE ROW TWO     AISLE   ONE ROW TWO     AISLE   ONE ROW TWO
ANGLE                   ROWS                    ROWS                    ROWS                    ROWS
        ONE TWO ONE TWO ONE TWO ONE TWO ONE TWO ONE TWO ONE TWO ONE TWO ONE TWO ONE TWO ONE TWO ONE TWO
        WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY WAY
        7.5' STALL                          8.5' STALL                         9.0' STALL                          10.0' STALL
PARKING AISLE       ONE ROW     TWO ROWS    AISLE       ONE ROW    TWO ROWS    AISLE       ONE ROW     TWO ROWS    AISLE       ONE ROW     TWO ROWS
ANGLE   ONE   TWO   ONE   TWO   ONE   TWO   ONE   TWO   ONE   TWO  ONE   TWO   ONE   TWO   ONE   TWO   ONE   TWO   ONE   TWO   ONE   TWO   ONE   TWO
        WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY  WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY   WAY
30      12.0' 18.0' 26.5' 32.5' 41.0' 47.0' 11.1' 20.0' 27.5' 36.4 43.9' 52.8' 10.7' 20.0' 27.5' 36.8' 53.6' 53.6' 9.3'  20.0' 27.0' 37.7' 44.7' 55.4'
40      12.0' 18.0' 28.0' 34.0' 44.0' 50.0' 11.4' 20.0' 29.5' 38.1 47.6' 56.2' 11.0' 20.0' 29.5' 38.1' 56.9' 56.9' 9.3'  20.0' 28.5' 39.2' 47.7' 58.4'
50      12.0' 18.0' 29.1' 35.1' 46.2' 52.2' 12.7' 20.0' 32.0' 39.3 51.3' 58.6' 11.4' 20.0' 31.0' 39.6' 59.2' 59.2' 9.9'  20.0' 30.1' 40.2' 50.3' 60.4'
60      14.0' 18.0' 31.6' 35.6' 49.2' 53.2' 15.2' 20.0' 35.0' 39.8 54.8' 59.6' 14.0' 20.0' 34.0' 40.0' 60.0' 60.0' 10.4' 20.0' 31.0' 40.6' 51.6' 61.2'
70      15.0' 18.0' 32.6' 35.6' 50.2' 53.2' 18.2' 20.0' 38.0' 39.8 57.8' 59.6' 17.0' 20.0' 37.0' 40.0' 60.0' 60.0' 13.7' 20.0' 34.0' 40.3' 54.3' 60.6'
80      18.0' 18.0' 35.1' 35.1' 52.2' 52.2' 21.8' 21.8' 41.0' 41.0 60.2' 60.2' 19.7' 20.0' 39.0' 39.3' 58.6' 58.6' 17.5' 20.0' 37.0' 39.5' 56.5' 59.0'
90      18.0' 18.0' 34.0' 34.0' 50.0' 50.0' 24.0' 24.0' 42.0' 42.0 60.0' 60.0' 22.0' 22.0�40.0' 40.0' 58.0' 58.0' 20.0' 20.0' 38.0' 38.0' 56.0' 56.0'
 
   (e)   Lighting provisions for off-street parking.
      (1)   Commercial parking lot. A commercial parking lot which offers
service and collects revenue for use after dark (including attended, self-park,
coin-actuated gated lots, and rentals on any basis) must be lighted beginning
one-half hour after sunset and continuing throughout the hours of use or until
midnight, whichever is earlier. If only a portion of the parking lot is offered
for use after dark, only that part must be lighted. However, the portion
offered for use must be clearly designated. The lighting of a commercial
parking lot must meet the following minimum requirements:
         (A)   The intensity of lighting on the parking surface must be:
            (i)   an average of at least two footcandles, initial measurement,
and at least one footcandle on a maintained basis; and
            (ii)   a minimum at any point of at least 0.6 footcandle initial,
and at least 0.3 footcandle maintained or one-third of the average for the
lighted area, whichever is greater.
         (B)   The light sources must be:
            (i)   indirect, diffused, or covered by shielded type fixtures; and
            (ii)   installed to reduce glare and the consequent interference
with boundary streets.
         (C)   Fixtures must be attached to buildings or mounted on metal poles
at a height of no less than 20 feet above the parking surface.
         (D)   Strings of lamps or bare bulbs are prohibited.
         (E)   A commercial parking lot contiguous to or directly across the
street or alley from an A, A(A), R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, MF(A),
MH, or MH(A) district must comply with Subsection (e)(2) instead of this
subsection.
      (2)   Other off-street parking. Off-street parking for a use other than
single family, duplex, or the commercial parking lot use that offers service
after dark must be lighted beginning one-half hour after sunset and continuing
throughout the hours of use or until 10 o’clock p.m., whichever is earlier. If
only a portion of a parking area is offered for use after dark, only that part
must be lighted. However, the portion offered for use must be clearly
designated. The lighting of the off-street parking area must meet the following
minimum requirements:
         (A)   The intensity of light on the parking surface must be:
            (i)   an average of at least one footcandle, initial measurement,
and at least one-half footcandle on a maintained basis; and
            (ii)   a minimum at any point of at least 0.3 footcandle initial,
and at least 0.2 footcandle maintained or one-third of the average for the
lighted area, whichever is greater.
         (B)   The intensity of spillover light on neighboring residential
lots, measured at a point five feet inside the residential lot line and five
feet above the ground surface, may not exceed 0.1 footcandle.
         (C)   The light sources must:
            (i)   be indirect, diffused, or covered by shielded type fixtures;
            (ii)   be installed to reduce glare and the consequent interference
with boundary streets; and
            (iii)   not be visible from property that is:
               (aa)   occupied by a residential use; and
               (bb)   located within 600 feet of the light source.
         (D)   Fixtures must be attached to buildings or mounted on metal
poles. If any portion of a fixture is over 20 feet in height, that portion may
not be located above a residential proximity slope. (See Section
51A-4.412.)
         (E)   Strings of lamps or bare bulbs are prohibited.
      (3)   Special exception. The board of adjustment may grant a special
exception to the height restrictions in this subsection if the board
determines, after a public hearing, that the special exception will not
adversely affect neighboring property. In determining whether to grant a
special exception, the board shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   Hours of use for the parking area.
         (B)   Size and configuration of the lot on which the parking area is
located.
         (C)   Distances between the parking area and surrounding uses.
   (f)   Screening provisions for off-street parking.
      (1)   The owner of off-street parking must provide screening to separate
the parking area from:
         (A)   a contiguous residential use or vacant lot if either is in an A,
A(A), R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A) district and the
parking area serves a nonresidential use; or
         (B)   a contiguous single family or duplex use or a vacant lot if any
of these are in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district and the parking
area serves a multifamily use.
      (2)   If an alley separates a parking area from another use, the use is
considered contiguous to the parking area. If a street separates a parking area
from another use, the use is not considered contiguous to the parking area.
      (3)   Screening for off-street parking required under Subsection (f)(1)
must be a brick, stone, or concrete masonry, stucco, concrete, or wood wall or
fence that is not less than six feet in height. The wall or fence may not have
more than ten square inches of open area for each square foot of surface area,
and may not contain any openings or gates for vehicular access. The owner of
off-street parking must maintain the screening in compliance with these
standards.
      (4)   The board may not grant a special exception to the height
requirements for screening around off-street parking.
      (5)   In an office district, all off-street surface parking lots,
excluding driveways used for ingress or egress, must be screened from the
street by using one or more of the following three methods to separately or
collectively attain a minimum height of three feet above the parking surface:
            (i)   Brick, stone, or concrete masonry, stucco, concrete, or wood
wall or fence.
            (ii)   Earthen berm planted with turf grass or ground cover
recommended for local area use by the director of parks and recreation. The
berm may not have a slope that exceeds one foot of height for each two feet of
width.
            (iii)   Evergreen plant materials recommended for local area use by
the building official. The plant materials must be located in a bed that is at
least three feet wide with a minimum soil depth of 24 inches. Initial plantings
must be capable of obtaining a solid appearance within three years. Plant
materials must be placed a maximum of 24 inches on center over the entire
length of the bed unless the building official approves an alternative planting
density that a landscape authority certifies as being capable of providing a
solid appearance within three years.
      (6)   For purposes of Subsection (f)(5):
         (A)   the height of screening is measured from the horizontal plane
passing through the nearest point of the surface of the parking lot; and
         (B)   screening may be placed in a visibility triangle as defined in
the visual obstruction regulations in Section
51A-4.602(c) of this chapter. Any screening placed in a visibility triangle
must be two and one-half feet in height measured from the top of the adjacent
street curb. If there is no adjacent street curb, the measurement is taken from
the grade of the portion of the street adjacent to the visibility triangle.
   (g)   Reserved.
   (h)   Residential alley access restrictions for nonresidential uses.
      (1)   The following residential alley access restrictions are established
in order to promote safety and protect the public from disturbances that
interfere with the quiet enjoyment of residential properties. Between the hours
of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m., no person may use a public alley or access easement that
abuts or is in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district for the purpose
of delivering or receiving any goods or services to or from a nonresidential
use in a nonresidential district. It is a defense to prosecution under this
paragraph that the person is:
         (A)   a governmental entity;
         (B)   a communications or utility company, whether publicly or
privately owned; or
         (C)   the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle as defined in
Section 541.201 of the Texas Transportation Code.
      (2)   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to the alley
access restriction in Paragraph (1) if the board finds, based on evidence
presented at a public hearing, that strict compliance with the restriction
would result in the material and substantial impairment of access to the
property as a whole. In determining whether access would be materially and
substantially impaired, the board shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   The extent to which access to the restricted alley between the
hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. is essential to the normal operation of the use or
uses to which the special exception would apply.
         (B)   The extent to which the property as a whole has reasonable
access to other public streets, alleys, or access easements in addition to the
restricted alley.
         (C)   The extent to which strict compliance with the alley access
restriction will necessarily have the effect of substantially reducing the
market value of the property.
      (3)   In granting a special exception under this subsection, the board
shall:
         (A)   specify the use or uses to which the special exception applies;
and
         (B)   establish a termination date for the special exception, which
may not be later than five years after the date of the board’s decision.
      (4)   In granting a special exception under this subsection, the board
may:
         (A)   authorize alley access only during certain hours; or
         (B)   impose any other reasonable condition that would further the
purpose and intent of the alley access restriction.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any of the above, a special exception granted by
the board under this subsection for a particular use automatically and
immediately terminates if and when that use is changed or discontinued. (Ord.
Nos. 19455; 19786; 20361; 20383; 20884; 21200; 21209; 21210; 21290; 21658;
21663; 22053; 22026; 23013; 24843; 25047; 28073; 29128; 30893; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.302.   PARKING [P(A)] DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   The parking district must be either contiguous to or
perpendicularly across an adjoining street or alley from a main use.
      (2)   The owner of a lot in a parking district contiguous to an A, A(A),
R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A) district shall provide
and maintain a minimum front yard of ten feet.
   (b)   Procedures for establishing a parking district.
      (1)   The applicant for a parking district shall comply with the zoning
amendment procedure for a change in a zoning district classification.
      (2)   At the time of applying for a change in zoning district
classification, the applicant shall submit a site plan that includes:
         (A)   the dimensions, bearings, and street frontage of the property;
         (B)   the location of the parking spaces and the use the parking
district serves;
         (C)   the method of ingress and egress;
         (D)   screening, lighting, and landscaping; and
         (E)   any other information the director determines necessary for a
complete review of the proposed development. (Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-4.303.   OFF-STREET LOADING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Required off-street loading standards.
      (1)   The off-street loading requirements for each use are listed by use
in Sections
51A-4.201 through
51A-4.217.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   A structure containing more than one use must meet the loading
requirements for the sum of the requirements for each use, except if one use
occupies 90 percent or more of the floor area of the structure, the off-street
loading requirement is calculated as if the use occupied the entire structure.
   (b)   Location and design standards.
      (1)   Except as specifically provided in this section, required off-
street loading spaces must be provided on the same lot as the use served.
      (2)   Remote or shared off-street loading may be approved with a special
loading agreement described in Section
51A-4.320.
      (3)   In all districts except CS and industrial districts in
Chapter 51A, or HC or industrial districts in Chapter 51, off-street loading
and unloading activity is prohibited in one required front yard.
      (4)   The first required off-street loading space for any use except
multifamily, hotel or motel, or extended stay hotel or motel must have a width
of not less than 11 feet, a length of not less than 35 feet, and a height of
not less than 14 feet.
      (5)   Ingress to and egress from required off-street loading spaces must
have at least the same vertical height clearance as the off-street loading
space.
      (6)   Each required off-street loading space must be designed with a
reasonable means of vehicular access from the street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Each off-
street loading space must be independently accessible so that no loading space
blocks another loading space. Trash removal facilities and other structures
must not block a required loading space. The design of the ingress, egress, and
maneuvering area must be approved by the director of development services.
      (7)   If a publicly owned off-street truck terminal presently exists, is
under construction, or is funded for construction, the required off-street
loading for a use that is located on a lot contiguous to or perpendicular
across the street from the terminal must be provided in the publicly owned off-
street truck terminal if the truck terminal is designed to accommodate the
loading needs of the use, as determined by the director of building services.
      (8)   If a use is served by a publicly owned off-street truck terminal,
the owner of that use shall provide an off-street connection to the truck
terminal, and shall pay a rental fee, as determined by city council.
      (9)   Main uses under 10,000 square feet in size may share a common off-
street loading space provided that the space is located within a walking
distance of 150 feet from an exit of each use that it serves. For purposes of
this paragraph, “walking distance” is measured along the most convenient
pedestrian walkway between the nearest point of the loading space and the exit
of the use.
   (c) and (d) Reserved. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19807; 25047; 27404; 32789;
33112)
SEC. 51A-4.304.   OFF-STREET STACKING SPACE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Site plan submission. All required off-street stacking spaces must be
shown on a site plan that is approved by the building official and made part of
the certificate of occupancy record for the use.
   (b)   Site plan requisites. A site plan submitted for review under this
section must:
      (1)   show all existing and proposed points of ingress and egress,
circulation and maneuvering areas, and off-street parking and loading areas;
and
      (2)   separately tabulate the number of required off-street parking,
loading, and stacking spaces in a conspicuous place on the plan for quick and
easy reference.
   (c)   General provisions.
      (1)   The purpose of stacking space requirements is to promote public
safety by reducing on-site and off-site traffic congestion. A stacking space
may be located anywhere on the building site provided that it can effectively
function in a manner consistent with its purpose.
      (2)   At a minimum, a stacking space must be 8 feet wide and 18 feet
long.
      (3)   A space at a drive-in or drive-through window, menu board, order
station, or service bay may qualify as a stacking space.
      (4)   An area reserved for stacking spaces may not double as a
circulation driveway or maneuvering area.
   (d)   Off-street stacking special exception.
      (1)   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize
a reduction in the number of off-street stacking spaces required under this
article if the board finds, after a public hearing, that the stacking demand
generated by the use does not warrant the number of off-street stacking spaces
required, and the special exception would not create a traffic hazard or
increase traffic congestion on adjacent and nearby streets. The maximum
reduction authorized by this subsection is two spaces for each of the first two
drive-through windows, if any, or 25 percent of the total number of required
spaces, whichever is greater, minus the number of spaces currently not provided
due to already existing nonconforming rights.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant a special exception under Paragraph
(1), the board shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   The stacking demand and trip generation characteristics of all
uses for which the special exception is requested.
         (B)   The current and probable future capacities of adjacent and
nearby streets based on the city’s thoroughfare plan.
         (C)   The availability of public transit and the likelihood of its
use.
      (3)   In granting a special exception under Paragraph (1), the board
shall specify the use or uses to which the special exception applies. A special
exception granted by the board for a particular use automatically and
immediately terminates if and when that use is changed or discontinued.
      (4)   In granting a special exception under Paragraph (1), the board may:
         (A)   establish a termination date for the special exception or
otherwise provide for the reassessment of conditions after a specified period
of time;
         (B)   impose restrictions on access to or from the subject property;
or
         (C)   impose any other reasonable condition that would have the effect
of improving traffic safety or lessening congestion on the streets.
      (5)   The board shall not grant a special exception under Paragraph (1)
to reduce the number of off-street stacking spaces required in:
         (A)   a planned development district; or
         (B)   an ordinance granting or amending a special use permit. (Ord.
Nos. 19786; 20272)
SEC. 51A-4.305.   HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Handicapped parking must be provided and maintained in compliance with all
Federal and State laws and regulations. (Ord. Nos. 20493; 27864)
SEC. 51A-4.306.   OFF-STREET PARKING IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to all off-street parking,
including commercial parking lots and garages, located in the central business
district (“CBD”); however, Subsections (b), (c), and (d) do not apply to
commercial parking lots and garages in the CBD. In the event of a conflict
between this section and other provisions in this chapter, this section
controls. Consult Section
51A-4.124(a) for additional regulations concerning commercial parking lots and
garages in the CA-1(A) district.
   (b)   Lighting.
      (1)   A lighting district is hereby created for purposes of this
subsection. The boundaries of the lighting district are as follows:
         BEGINNING at a point being the intersection of the southeast line of
Woodall Rodgers Freeway with the west line of North Central Expressway;
         THENCE southerly along the west line of North Central Expressway to
the centerline of Live Oak Street;
         THENCE southwesterly along the centerline of Live Oak Street to the
centerline of Pearl Street;
         THENCE southeasterly along the centerline of Pearl Street to the
centerline of Pearl Expressway;
         THENCE southerly along the centerline of Pearl Expressway to the
centerline of Pacific Avenue;
         THENCE westerly along the centerline of Pacific Avenue to the
centerline of Harwood Street;
         THENCE southerly along the centerline of Harwood street to the
centerline of Jackson Street;
         THENCE westerly along the centerline of Jackson Street to the
centerline of Akard Street;
         THENCE southeasterly along the centerline of Akard Street to the
centerline of Canton Street;
         THENCE southwesterly along the centerline of Canton Street to the
northwest line of East R.L. Thornton Freeway;
         THENCE southwesterly along the northwest line of East R.L. Thornton
Freeway to the northeast line of Stemmons Freeway;
         THENCE northwesterly along the northeast line of Stemmons Freeway to
the southeast line of Woodall Rodgers Freeway;
         THENCE northeasterly along the southeast line of Woodall Rodgers
Freeway to the point of beginning.
      (2)   A surface parking lot in the lighting district that collects
revenue on the premises for after-dark use (including attended, self-park, and
coin-activated gated lots) must be lighted after dark until 2 a.m., or until no
customer vehicles remain on the parking lot, whichever is earlier. If revenue
is collected for after-dark use of only a portion of the parking lot and that
portion is clearly designated, only that portion must be lighted. For purposes
of this subsection, “dark” means one-half hour after sunset.
      (3)   No lighting is required for a surface parking lot outside of the
lighting district.
      (4)   No portion of a surface parking lot may be open for use by customer
vehicles after dark without lighting unless a sign is prominently displayed at
or near the entrance to the facility stating: “THIS FACILITY IS NOT ILLUMINATED
DURING HOURS OF DARKNESS.” The sign must be posted adjacent to the public
street and be easily visible from the street.
      (5)   A multi-level or underground parking garage must be lighted 24
hours a day except when vehicular ingress and egress is prohibited.
      (6)   The intensity of required lighting on the parking surface must be:
         (A)   an average of at least two footcandles, initial measurement, and
at least one footcandle on a maintained basis; and
         (B)   a minimum at any point of at least 0.6 footcandle initial, and
at least 0.3 footcandle maintained or one-third of the average for the lighted
area, whichever is greater.
      (7)   Light sources must be indirect, diffused, or shielded-type
fixtures, installed to reduce glare and the consequent interference with
boundary streets. Bare bulbs or strings of lamps are prohibited.
      (8)   Fixtures must be attached to buildings or mounted on permanent
poles.
      (9)   Fixtures on surface parking lots must be at least 20 feet above the
lot surface. This requirement does not apply to parking garages.
      (10)   The board may grant a special exception to the lighting
requirements of this subsection if the board finds, after a public hearing,
that the special exception will not compromise the safety of persons using the
parking. In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board
shall consider:
         (A)   the extent to which the parking will be used after dark;
         (B)   the crime statistics for the area; and
         (C)   the extent to which adequate lighting may be provided by light
sources located on adjacent property.
      (11)   The board shall not grant a special exception eliminating lighting
requirements for all or a portion of a parking lot or garage without requiring
that a sign be posted advising the public of the extent to which there will be
no illumination during hours of darkness. The sign must be posted in a
conspicuous place and be reasonably calculated to adequately inform those
persons who might park in the area that is the subject of the special
exception.
   (c)   Stall width. There is no minimum stall width requirement for non-
required off-street parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces must
comply with the dimensional standards contained in Section
51A-4.301.
   (d)   Parking space identification. Non-required parking spaces need not be
identified. Required off-street parking spaces must be clearly and permanently
identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or another method
approved by the building official.
   (e)   Wheel guards and barriers. Parking spaces along the perimeter of the
parking lot or garage must have wheel guards not less than six inches in
height, or other permanent barriers approved by the building official. Examples
of acceptable permanent barriers include guardrails and fences or walls capable
of containing an automobile within the parking area. Wheel guards or barriers
must be placed so that no part of the automobile extends into the public
sidewalk or adjoining property.
   (f)   Passenger unloading zone required in certain cases.
      (1)   If customer vehicles are parked by an attendant or employee of the
facility, a passenger unloading zone must be provided as part of the ingress
lane to the facility. The passenger unloading zone must be:
         (A)   a minimum of 15 feet wide and 36 feet long;
         (B)   clearly and permanently identified and labeled as a “no parking”
area; and
         (C)   located so that it can effectively function to reduce on-site
and off-site traffic congestion that would otherwise result from operation of
the parking lot or garage.
      (2)   The following are acceptable means of identifying and labeling a
passenger unloading zone:
         (A)   Painting one of the following on the pavement within the zone:
            (i)   The words “NO PARKING” consisting of 12-inch high black
letters on a red background.
            (ii)   A No Parking symbol sign consisting of the symbol “P” in
black, circumscribed in a red circle at least 36 inches in diameter with a red
slash. The sign must be painted on a white background with a black border.
Illustrations of acceptable No Parking symbol signs may be found in the 1980
Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways
published by the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation.
         (B)   Painting on the pavement along each of the four sides of the
outside perimeter of the zone the words “NO PARKING” consisting of four-inch
high black letters on a red background.
   (g)   Stacking space required in certain cases. No stacking spaces are
required when a passenger unloading zone is provided in accordance with
Subsection (f). However, if no passenger unloading zone is provided, one
stacking space must be provided in accordance with Section
51A-4.304.
   (h)   Conformance. All nonconforming parking lots and garages within the
central business district must fully comply with the provisions of this section
before April 1, 1991, or within two years of the date the parking lot or garage
became nonconforming as to this section, whichever is later. The board may
grant an extension of this time period if it determines, after a public
hearing, that strict compliance would result in substantial financial hardship
or inequity to the applicant without sufficient corresponding benefit to the
city and its citizens in accomplishing the objectives of this section. (Ord.
Nos. 20272; 21960; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.307.   NONCONFORMITY AS TO PARKING OR LOADING REGULATIONS.
   Consult Section
51A-4.704 for regulations concerning nonconformity as to parking and loading.
(Ord. 21553)
SECS. 51A-4.308 THRU 51A-4.309.   RESERVED.
Division 51A-4.310. Off-street parking reductions.
SEC. 51A-4.311.   SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Special exception: parking demand.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to authorize a reduction in
the number of off-street parking spaces required under this article if the
board finds, after a public hearing, that the parking demand generated by the
use does not warrant the number of off-street parking spaces required, and the
special exception would not create a traffic hazard or increase traffic
congestion on adjacent or nearby streets. Except as otherwise provided in this
paragraph, the maximum reduction authorized by this section is 25 percent or
one space, whichever is greater, minus the number of parking spaces currently
not provided due to delta credits, as defined in Section
51A-4.704(b)(4)(A). For the commercial amusement (inside) use and the
industrial (inside) use, the maximum reduction authorized by this section is 75
percent or one space, whichever is greater, minus the number of parking spaces
currently not provided due to delta credits, as defined in Section
51A-4.704(b)(4)(A). For the office use, the maximum reduction is 35 percent or
one space, whichever is greater, minus the number of parking spaces currently
not provided due to delta credits, as defined in Section
51A-4.704(b)(4)(A). Applicants may seek a special exception to parking
requirements under this section and an administrative parking reduction under
Section
51A-4.313. The greater reduction will apply, but the reductions may not be
combined.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant a special exception under Paragraph
(1), the board shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   The extent to which the parking spaces provided will be remote,
shared, or packed parking.
         (B)   The parking demand and trip generation characteristics of all
uses for which the special exception is requested.
         (C)   Whether or not the subject property or any property in the
general area is part of a modified delta overlay district.
         (D)   The current and probable future capacities of adjacent and
nearby streets based on the city’s thoroughfare plan.
         (E)   The availability of public transit and the likelihood of its
use.
         (F)   The feasibility of parking mitigation measures and the
likelihood of their effectiveness.
      (3)   In granting a special exception under Paragraph (1), the board
shall specify the use or uses to which the special exception applies. A special
exception granted by the board for a particular use automatically and
immediately terminates if and when that use is changed or discontinued.
      (4)   In granting a special exception under Paragraph (1), the board may:
         (A)   establish a termination date for the special exception or
otherwise provide for the reassessment of conditions after a specified period
of time;
         (B)   impose restrictions on access to or from the subject property;
or
         (C)   impose any other reasonable condition that would have the effect
of improving traffic safety or lessening congestion on the streets.
      (5)   The board shall not grant a special exception under Paragraph (1)
to reduce the number of off-street parking spaces required in an ordinance
granting or amending a specific use permit.
      (6)   The board shall not grant a special exception under Paragraph (1)
to reduce the number of off-street parking spaces expressly required in the
text or development plan of an ordinance establishing or amending regulations
governing a specific planned development district. This prohibition does not
apply when:
         (A)   the ordinance does not expressly specify a minimum number of
spaces, but instead simply makes reference to the existing off-street parking
regulations in Chapter 51 or this chapter; or
         (B)   the regulations governing that specific district expressly
authorize the board to grant the special exception.
      (7)   The board shall not grant a special exception under Paragraph (1)
to reduce the number of off-street parking spaces required for a commercial
amusement (inside) used as a dance hall.
   (b)   Special exception: tree preservation. The board may grant a special
exception to authorize a reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces
required under this article if the board finds, after a public hearing, that
the reduction will result in the preservation of an existing tree. The
preserved tree must be protected from vehicular traffic through the use of
concrete curbs, wheel stops, or other permanent barriers. The maximum reduction
authorized by this subsection is 10 percent or one space, whichever is greater,
minus the number of parking spaces currently not provided due to already
existing nonconforming rights. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 23614; 25268; 28803)
SEC. 51A-4.312.   TREE PRESERVATION PARKING REDUCTION.
   The number of required off-street parking spaces is reduced by one for each
protected tree (as defined in Article X) retained that would otherwise have to
be removed. The preserved tree must be protected from vehicular traffic through
the use of concrete curbs, wheel stops, or other permanent barriers. The
maximum reduction authorized by this section is 10 percent. (Ord. Nos. 22053;
33112)
SEC. 51A-4.313.   ADMINISTRATIVE PARKING REDUCTION.
   (a)   The director may grant a maximum reduction of 50 percent of the number
of off-street parking spaces required for uses if the director finds that the
parking demand generated by the use does not warrant the number of off-street
parking spaces required, and the reduction would not create a traffic hazard or
increase traffic congestion on adjacent or nearby streets. Applicants may seek
a special exception to parking requirements under Section
51A-4.311 and an administrative parking reduction under this section. The
greater reduction will apply, but the reductions may not be combined.
   (b)   In determining whether to grant a reduction under Subsection (a), the
director shall consider the following factors:
      (1)   The extent to which the parking spaces provided will be assigned,
compact, remote, shared, or packed parking.
      (2)   The parking demand and trip generation characteristics for the
occupancy for which the reduction is requested.
      (3)   The number of individuals employed on the site of the occupancy for
which the reduction is requested.
      (4)   The number of company vehicles parked on the site of the occupancy
for which the reduction is requested.
      (5)   Whether or not the subject property or the surrounding properties
are part of a modified delta overlay district.
      (6)   The current and probable future capacities of adjacent and nearby
streets based on the city’s thoroughfare plan.
      (7)   The availability of alternative transportation modes and
availability, access, and distance to public transit and the likelihood of
their use.
      (8)   The feasibility of parking mitigation measures and the likelihood
of their effectiveness.
      (9)   The impact on adjacent residential uses.
   (c)   In granting a reduction under Subsection (a), the director shall
specify the occupancy to which the reduction applies. A reduction granted by
the director for a particular occupancy automatically and immediately
terminates if and when the certificate of occupancy for the use is revoked or
terminated or the existing business stops operating.
   (d)   In granting a reduction under Subsection (a), the director may:
      (1)   establish a termination date for the reduction or otherwise provide
for the reassessment of conditions after a specified period of time;
      (2)   impose restrictions on access to or from the subject property;
      (3)   require that adequate lot area be available to comply with standard
parking requirements; or
      (4)   impose any other reasonable condition that would have the effect of
improving traffic safety or lessening congestion on the streets.
   (e)   The director may not grant a reduction under Subsection (a) to reduce
the number of off-street parking spaces required in an ordinance granting or
amending a specific use permit.
   (f)   The director may not grant a reduction under Subsection (a) to reduce
the number of off-street parking spaces required in the text or development
plan of an ordinance establishing or amending a planned development district.
This prohibition does not apply when:
      (1)   the ordinance does not expressly specify a minimum number of
spaces, but instead simply makes reference to the existing off- street parking
regulations in Chapter 51 or this chapter; and
      (2)   the regulations governing that planned development district
expressly authorize the director to grant the reduction. (Ord. Nos. 28803;
33112)
SEC. 51A-4.314.   REDUCTIONS FOR PROVIDING BICYCLE PARKING.
   (a)    Required off-street parking may be reduced by one space for every six
short-term bicycle parking spaces, as described in Section
51A-4.334, provided on a building site. Bicycle parking spaces required by
Section
51A-4.333 count toward this parking reduction.
   (b)   Required off-street parking may be reduced by one space for every four
long-term bicycle parking spaces, as described in Section
51A-4.334, provided on a building site. Bicycle parking spaces required by
Section
51A-4.333 count toward this parking reduction.
   (c)   A parking reduction under this subsection may not be granted for
fractional parking spaces and fractional parking spaces may not be rounded up
to the next nearest whole parking space.
   (d)   A parking reduction granted under Subsections (a) or (b) cannot exceed
five percent of the total required off-street parking spaces for a building
site.
   (e)   In addition to a parking reduction granted under Subsections (a) or
(b), required off- street parking spaces may be reduced by an additional five
percent by providing showers, lockers, and changing facilities for bicycle
riders. This parking reduction is not available for residential and retail and
personal service uses. (Ord. Nos. 29128; 33112)
Division 51A-4.320. Special Parking and Loading Regulations.
SEC. 51A-4.321.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   LICENSEE means a person in whose name a license has been issued
under this division, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the
application for a license. The term includes any employee, agent, or
independent contractor of the person in whose name the license is issued.
      (2)   PACKED PARKING means off-street parking that is governed by special
dimensional standards for parking spaces, allowing maximal parking on the lot
when an attendant is used.
      (3)   PERSON means an individual, assumed name entity, partnership,
joint-venture, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
      (4)   REMOTE LOADING means off-street loading provided on a lot not
occupied by the main use.
      (5)   REMOTE PARKING means off-street parking provided on a lot not
occupied by the main use.
      (6)   SHARED LOADING means the use of the same off-street loading space
to satisfy the off-street loading requirements for two or more uses.
      (7)   SHARED PARKING means the use of the same off-street parking stall
to satisfy the off-street parking requirements for two or more uses.
      (8)   SHUTTLE means a vehicle used to transport patrons between the drop-
off point at the main use and the remote parking lot serving the use.
      (9)   SPECIAL PARKING means packed parking, remote parking, and shared
parking as those terms are defined in this section.
      (10)   WALKING DISTANCE means the distance from the nearest point of the
special parking lot to the nearest public entrance of the main use, measured
along the most convenient pedestrian walkway. (Ord. Nos. 19786; 21660; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.322.   PURPOSE.
   This division provides alternatives to the standard parking and loading
regulations in Division
51A-4.300. Packed parking provides alternative dimensional requirements for
parking spaces to allow maximal parking on a lot when an attendant is used to
park vehicles. Remote parking and remote loading allow an exception to the
requirement that all off-street parking and loading be provided on the lot
occupied by the main use. Shared parking and shared loading allow an exception
to the requirement that no off-street parking or loading space for one use be
included in the calculation of the parking required for any other use. (Ord.
Nos. 19786; 21660; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.323.   PROCEDURES FOR SPECIAL PARKING OR LOADING APPROVAL.
   (a)   In general. All special parking or loading must be approved by the
building official in accordance with this division. A person seeking approval
of special parking or loading shall submit an application to the building
official pursuant to Subsection (b).
   (b)   Application. An application for special parking or loading approval
must be filed with the building official. An application form may be obtained
from the building official. The application must include the following:
      (1)   The application fee.
      (2)   A site plan illustrating the applicable items listed in Subsection
(c).
      (3)   For packed parking, a statement describing the operational plan,
including:
         (A)   the days and hours of operation of the main use;
         (B)   staffing required to park the vehicles; and
         (C)   the location of any parking service stand.
      (4)   For remote parking or loading:
         (A)   a map illustrating the walking distance from the special parking
or loading to the use providing the parking or loading; and
         (B)   if applicable, a statement pointing out the factors justifying
an extension of walking distance including discussion of the following factors:
            (i)   The type of use involved.
            (ii)   The parking demand or loading and unloading activity
generated by the use involved.
            (iii)   The percentage of required off-street parking or loading
that will be provided as remote parking or loading.
            (iv)   For remote parking, the availability and condition of
sidewalks.
            (v)   For remote parking, the availability and frequency of a local
shuttle or transit service.
            (vi)   For remote parking, the availability of or proposal for
shelters for users of any local shuttle or transit service.
            (vii)   For remote parking, any other factors that may have the
effect of encouraging patrons of the use to use or discouraging patrons of the
use from using the remote parking.
            (viii)   For remote loading, the path between the loading area and
main use.
      (5)   For shared parking, a study of parking demand and accumulation
during all days and hours of operation for all uses sharing parking.
      (6)   Any other reasonable and pertinent information that the building
official determines to be necessary for special parking review.
   (c)   Site plan requisites.
      (1)   The following information must be illustrated on the site plan:
         (A)   The number of parking and loading spaces required for each use.
         (B)   The location and dimensions of the special parking lot or
loading area.
         (C)   The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed off-
street parking and loading areas, parking bays, aisles, and driveways.
         (D)   The location and dimensions of any dumpster on the special
parking lot.
         (E)   The number of cars to be accommodated in each row of parking
spaces.
         (F)   The location and dimensions of all existing streets and alleys
adjacent to the special parking lot and between the special parking lot and the
main use.
         (G)   The location of all existing easements for street purposes on
the special parking lot.
         (H)   Existing and proposed provisions for pedestrian circulation in
the area of request, including sidewalks, walkways, crosswalks, and pedestrian
plazas.
         (I)   Existing and proposed median cuts and driveways located within
250 feet of the special parking lot.
         (J)   The location and the type of any special traffic regulation
facilities proposed or required.
         (K)   A proposed landscape plan, if required elsewhere in this
chapter.
      (2)   For special parking consisting of more than 50 parking spaces, the
following additional information must be illustrated on the site plan:
         (A)   Existing and proposed points of ingress and egress and estimated
peak hour turning movements to and from existing and proposed public and
private streets and alleys adjacent to the special parking lot.
         (B)   Average daily traffic counts on streets adjacent to the special
parking lot.
         (C)   Estimated peak hour turning movements at intersections located
within 250 feet of the special parking lot. (Ord. Nos. 19786; 21660; 30892;
33112)
SEC. 51A-4.324.   REVIEW BY THE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   Conformity with standards required. The building official shall deny
an application for special parking or loading unless it meets all of the
applicable standards in this section.
   (b)   General standards.
      (1)   Special parking and loading may not be located in a residential
district, except that Chapter 51 community service, religious, and educational
uses, and
Chapter 51A institutional and community service uses may share parking in
residential districts on the same lot where both uses are located.
Nonresidental uses in residential districts may also use special parking or
loading if the special parking or loading is not located in a residential
district.
      (2)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this subsection, special
parking may not account for more than 50 percent of the off-street parking
required for any use. Special loading may account for up to 100 percent of the
off- street loading required for any use.
      (3)   The 50 percent limitation in Paragraph (2) does not apply to:
         (A)   remote parking within a walking distance of 900 feet of the main
use; and
         (B)   shared parking on the same lot as the main use if all uses
sharing the parking have mutually exclusive hours of operation.
      (4)   Special parking and loading must comply with all codes, ordinances,
rules, and regulations of the city.
      (5)   Special parking and loading may not create safety hazards.
   (c)   Packed parking standards. Packed parking may not be used unless a
license is obtained pursuant to Section
51A-4.329 .
   (d)   Remote parking and loading standards.
      (1)   Walking distance. Remote parking and loading must be located within
a walking distance of 300 feet from the use served by the remote parking or
loading unless an extension of walking distance for remote parking is approved
by the building official.
      (2)   Extension of walking distance for remote parking.
         (A)   The building official may extend the walking distance for remote
parking to no more than 600 feet unless the extension would:
            (i)   significantly discourage patrons of the use from using the
remote parking;
            (ii)    unreasonably endanger the safety of persons or property; or
            (iii)   not otherwise be in the public interest.
         (B)   A license is required to authorize an extension of walking
distance beyond 600 feet. (See Section
51A-4.329.)
      (3)   Signs required at main use and at parking lot. A sign must be
prominently displayed at all entrances of a remote parking lot and at all
entrances of a parking lot providing on-site parking for the main use. Each
sign must:
         (A)   illustrate or describe the location of the remote parking in
relation to the main use;
         (B)   be constructed of weather resistant material;
         (C)   be no less than 30 inches wide and 24 inches long; and
         (D)   contain clearly legible letters in a color that contrasts with
the background material of the sign.
   (e)   Shared parking and loading standards. Uses sharing parking or loading
must have either mutually exclusive or compatibly overlapping normal hours of
operation. The building official shall determine whether hours of operation are
compatibly overlapping on a case by case basis. (Ord. Nos. 19786; 21660; 25290;
27404; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.325.   DECISION OF THE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   Form of decision. The decision of the building official must take one
of three forms:
      (1)   Approval, no conditions.
      (2)   Approval, subject to conditions noted.
      (3)   Denial.
   (b)   Statement of reasons. If the building official denies an application
for special parking or loading, he shall state in writing the specific reasons
for denial.
   (c)   Approval subject to conditions noted. As an alternative to denial of
an application for special parking or loading under Section
51A-4.324 (a), the building official may approve the special parking or loading
subject to conditions noted if compliance with all conditions will eliminate
what would otherwise constitute grounds for denial. If the building official
approves the special parking or loading subject to conditions noted, he shall
state in writing the specific requirements to be met before the special parking
or loading shall be considered approved.
   (d)   Approval with no conditions. If there are no grounds for denial under
Section
51A-4.324 (a), the building official shall approve the application for special
parking or loading with no conditions. (Ord. Nos. 19786; 21660; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.326.   NOTICE.
   The building official shall give written notice to the applicant of the
decision regarding the application for special parking or loading. Notice is
given by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid in the
United States mail. The notice must be sent to the address shown on the
application. (Ord. Nos. 19786; 21660; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.327.   APPEALS.
   (a)   An appeal from a decision of the building official under Section
51A-4.325 may be made to the board of adjustment.
   (b)   In considering the appeal, the sole issue before the board of
adjustment shall be whether or not the building official erred in making the
decision and, in this connection, the board shall consider the same standards
that were required to be considered by the building official in making the
decision. (Ord. Nos. 19786; 21660)
SEC. 51A-4.328.   AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Requisites of agreement. If the application for special parking or
loading is approved, a special parking or loading agreement must be executed
and filed in accordance with this section. A standard agreement form may be
obtained from the building official. The agreement must:
      (1)   be in writing;
      (2)   contain legal descriptions of the properties affected;
      (3)   set forth adequate consideration between the parties;
      (4)   specify the special parking or loading being provided and the hours
of operation of any use involved;
      (5)   be a covenant running with the land;
      (6)   state that all parties agree to defend, indemnify, and hold
harmless the city of Dallas from and against all claims or liabilities arising
out of or in connection with the agreement;
      (7)   be governed by the laws of the state of Texas;
      (8)   be approved by the building official and be approved as to form by
the city attorney;
      (9)   be signed by all owners of the properties affected;
      (10)   be signed by all lienholders, other than taxing entities, that
have an interest in or an improvement on the properties; and
      (11)   state that it may only be amended or terminated by a subsequent
written instrument that is:
         (A)   except as otherwise provided in Subsection (b), signed by all
owners of the properties affected and by all lienholders, other than taxing
entities, that have an interest in or an improvement on the properties;
         (B)   approved by the building official;
         (C)   approved as to form by the city attorney; and
         (D)   filed and made a part of the deed records of the county or
counties in which the properties are located.
   (b)   Approval. The building official shall approve an agreement if all
properties governed by the agreement fully comply with the regulations in this
division. If all affected owners and lienholders do not sign the instrument
amending or terminating an agreement, and if all uses for which parking or
loading is provided under the agreement demonstrate that the agreement is no
longer needed to fully comply with the off-street parking or loading
requirements in this chapter, the building official shall approve the amending
or terminating instrument without those signatures.
   (c)   Agreement must be filed. An agreement shall not be considered
effective until a true and correct copy of the approved agreement is filed in
the deed records of the county or counties in which the properties are located
and two file-marked copies of the agreement are filed with the building
official.
   (d)   Amendment or termination of agreement. An agreement may only be
amended or terminated by a written instrument that is executed in accordance
with this subsection on a form provided by the city.
      (1)   The instrument must be:
         (A)   signed by all owners of properties affected and by all
lienholders, other than taxing entities, that have an interest in or an
improvement on the properties;
         (B)   approved by the building official;
         (C)   approved as to form by the city attorney; and
         (D)   filed and made a part of the deed records of the county or
counties in which the properties are located.
      (2)   The building official shall approve an instrument amending or
terminating a special parking or loading agreement if:
         (A)   all uses providing parking or loading under the agreement and
all uses on the property for which parking or loading is provided under the
agreement fully comply with the off-street parking or loading regulations in
this chapter; or
         (B)   all uses on the property for which parking or loading is
provided under the agreement cease to operate and terminate their certificates
of occupancy.
      (3)   The amending or terminating instrument shall not be considered
effective until a true and correct copy of the approved instrument is filed in
the deed records of the county or counties in which the properties are located
and two file-marked copies of the instrument are filed with the building
official. (Ord. Nos. 19786; 21660; 22783; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.329.   SPECIAL PARKING LICENSE.
   (a)   When a special parking license is required.
      (1)   A special parking license is required to authorize:
         (A)   packed parking; or
         (B)   an extension of the walking distance for remote parking beyond
600 feet [See Section
51A-4.324(d)].
      (2)   Special parking licenses are issued by the building official. An
application for special parking under Section
51A-4.323 serves as an application for a license under this section.
   (b)   Conformity with standards required. The building official shall deny a
special parking license unless it meets all of the applicable standards in
Section
51A-4.324 and this section.
   (c)   Packed parking standards.
      (1)   The passenger loading and unloading area for packed parking must
have adequate means of ingress to and egress from a street or an alley. The
building official shall only consider alley access in satisfaction of this
requirement when alley access is permitted by this chapter.
      (2)   All maneuvering, parking, and loading for packed parking must be
accomplished on private property.
      (3)   The area of each packed parking space must be no less than 145
square feet.
      (4)   An access lane that is no less than 24 feet wide must be provided
through the packed parking area.
      (5)   An attendant must be provided to park vehicles during all business
hours of the main use.
      (6)   A sign must be prominently displayed at all entrances of a packed
parking lot. Each sign must:
         (A)   state:
            (i)   that all or a portion of the lot is restricted to packed
parking serving the main use;
            (ii)   that an attendant must be provided during all business hours
of the main use;
            (iii)   the business hours of the main use;
            (iv)   a phone number specified by the building official to be used
for reporting violations of this division, including the requirement of an
attendant during all business hours of the main use;
            (v)   the phone number of the licensee; and
            (vi)   the issuance number of the licensee;
         (B)   be constructed of weather resistant material;
         (C)   be no less than 30 inches wide and 24 inches long; and
         (D)   contain clearly legible letters in a color that contrasts with
the background material of the sign.
   (d)   Standards for extension of walking distance beyond 600 feet.
      (1)   The building official shall require that either a shuttle or an
attendant be provided by the applicant as a condition to approval of an
extension of the walking distance for remote parking beyond 600 feet.
      (2)   If a shuttle is required, it must:
         (A)   transport patrons between the main use and the remote parking
lot;
         (B)   be adequately staffed during all hours of operation of the main
use; and
         (C)   have adequate seating capacity to accommodate patrons expected
to use the remote parking.
      (3)   If an attendant is required, the attendant shall drive vehicles of
patrons between the main use and the remote parking lot.
      (4)   In no event may the building official authorize remote parking to
be located beyond a walking distance of one-half mile from the main use.
   (e)   Revocation of license by building official. The building official
shall revoke a license under this division if:
      (1)   the licensee fails to comply with the requirements of the license,
this division, or other applicable law;
      (2)   the licensee made a false statement of material fact on an
application for a license under this section; or
      (3)   the building official determines that the special parking
unreasonably endangers the safety of persons or property and is not otherwise
in the public interest.
   (f)   Suspension of license by building official. If the building official
determines that a licensee has failed to comply with any regulation established
under this division, the building official may suspend the special parking
license for a definite period of time not to exceed 60 days. A licensee whose
special parking license is suspended shall not use the special parking involved
during the period of suspension. If the licensee fails to comply within the
suspension period, the building official shall revoke the license.
   (g)   Expiration of license. A special parking license expires three years
from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked by the building official or by
the city council.
   (h)   Renewal. A special parking license may be renewed by making an
application for renewal at least 30 days before expiration of the license. If
the license renewal involves changes to the original application, a new
application for special parking approval must be submitted under Section
51A-4.323. If the license renewal does not involve changes, the request for
renewal must be filed with the building official on a form furnished by the
city for that purpose.
   (i)   Appeal of denial, suspension, or revocation of license. If the
building official refuses to issue a license to an applicant or suspends or
revokes the license of a licensee, the action of the building official is final
unless the licensee files an appeal with a permit and license appeal board in
accordance with Section
2-96 of this code. (Ord. Nos. 19786; 21660)
SEC. 51A-4.329.1.   OFFENSES.
   A person commits an offense if he operates a use:
      (1)   in violation of a special parking or loading agreement executed and
filed pursuant to Section
51A-4.328; or
      (2)   without a valid license required under Section
51A-4.329. (Ord. Nos. 19786; 21660; 29128; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.329.2.   REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   The building official shall revoke the certificate of occupancy for any use
being operated:
      (1)   in violation of a special parking or loading agreement executed and
filed pursuant to Section
51A-4.328; or
      (2)   without a valid license required under Section
51A-4.329. (Ord. Nos. 19786; 21660; 29128; 33112)
Division 51A-4.330. Bicycle Parking Regulations.
SEC. 51A-4.331.   APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b), this section becomes applicable
to a building site when:
      (1)   an application is made for a building permit:
         (A)   for new construction; or
         (B)   to increase the floor area on a building site by 10 percent or
more or by 2,000 square feet or more, whichever is less; or
      (2)   there is a change in land use that requires an increase in off-
street parking.
   (b)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   residential uses that provide four or fewer off-street parking
spaces;
      (2)   agricultural uses;
      (3)   utility and public service uses;
      (4)   wholesale, distribution, and storage uses;
      (5)   a mobile home park, mobile home subdivision, or campground; or
      (6)   a drive-in theater. (Ord. Nos. 29128; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.332.   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Bicycle parking spaces are not permitted in a visibility triangle as
defined in Section
51A-4.602.
   (b)   Bicycle parking spaces must not impede access to a fire hydrant or
pedestrian circulation.
   (c)   Bicycle parking spaces must not reduce the unobstructed space for the
passage of pedestrians to less than the minimum required sidewalk width for
that building site.
   (d)   Bicycle parking spaces must be protected from motor vehicles to
prevent damage to parked bicycles.
   (e)   Bicycle parking spaces must be maintained in a clean, neat, and
orderly manner.
   (f)   All bicycle racks must be securely anchored. (Ord. 29128)
SEC. 51A-4.333.   SPACES REQUIRED.
   (a)   The greater of two bicycle parking spaces per building site or one
bicycle parking space per 20 provided off-street parking spaces is required.
Required bicycle parking may include short-term and long-term bicycle parking.
   (b)   No more than 30 bicycle parking spaces are required on any building
site.
   (c)   For every 10 bicycle parking spaces, or portion of 10 bicycle parking
spaces, provided on a building site, a minimum of two bicycle parking spaces
must be available for use by guests or visitors.
   (d)   In determining the required number of bicycle parking spaces,
fractional spaces are counted to the nearest whole number, with one half
counted as an additional space. (Ord. Nos. 29128; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.334.   LOCATION AND DESIGN.
   (a)   Location. All required bicycle parking spaces must be provided on the
lot occupied by the main use within 150 feet of a primary entrance. The
director may approve an alternate method of compliance, such as shared bicycle
parking in the public right-of-way after considering the characteristics of the
use, the site, and the surrounding area.
   (b)   Accessibility. Bicycle parking spaces exterior to a building must be a
part of or connected to a pedestrian pathway that connects to a building
entrance open to the public. Bicycle parking must be accessible without lifting
or carrying the bicycle at any point and without the use of stairs.
   (c)   Signs. Bicycle parking spaces exterior to a building must be clearly
visible from a primary building entrance or signs must be posted at the
entrances to the automobile parking area that indicate the location of bicycle
parking. For bicycle parking interior to a building, signs must be posted at
the entrance to the automobile parking area that indicate the location of the
bicycle parking. If signs are required to be posted at the entrances to the
automobile parking area, the signs must:
      (1)   be prominently displayed;
      (2)   illustrate or describe the location of bicycle parking spaces;
      (3)   be constructed of weather resistant material;
      (4)   be a minimum of 10 inches in width by 15 inches in height; and
      (5)   have clearly legible letters and graphics that contrast with the
background material.
   (d)   Size and constitution. Each space must be at least two-and-a-half feet
wide by six feet long and must provide the ability to attach to a bicycle rack
so that a wheel and frame can both be locked to a rack with a single U-lock and
the bicycle is supported at two locations. Spaces designed for large bicycles
such as cargo, recumbent, tandem, and trailer-attachments must be at least
three feet (36 inches) wide by nine feet (108 inches) long.
   (e)   Short-term bicycle parking standards.
      (1)   Location. Spaces may be placed in the required front, side, or rear
yard.
      (2)   Spacing. Bicycle racks must be spaced at least three feet (36
inches) from parallel structures or racks, at least seven feet (84 inches) from
other racks placed linearly, and at least two feet (24 inches) from structures
located linear to the rack. All racks must be at least two feet (24 inches)
from any structure or the curb. (See Figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10383.jpg]
      (3)   Design of bicycle racks. Bicycle racks must be designed so that the
wheel and frame can both be locked to the rack with a single U-lock and so that
the bicycle is supported at two locations. “Grid”-style racks and “Wave”-style
racks are not permitted. (See Figure below.)
A single U-lock securing both a wheel and the bicycle frame.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10385.jpg]
“Grid”-style and “Wave”-style racks are not permitted.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10387.jpg]      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/IMAGES/0-0-0-10389.jpg]
Examples of permitted racks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10391.jpg]
   (f)   Long-term bicycle parking standards.
      (1)   Location. Spaces must be in a secure and weather-protected
enclosure such as a room in the primary building, a covered and locked space
within a parking facility, or bike lockers. Parking located exterior to the
main building must be within a 250-foot walked path of a primary entrance.
      (2)   Security. Permitted security types include key, smart card, fob,
and code access. The parking area must be accessible to designated users at all
times.
      (3)   Lighting. Outdoor long- term bicycle parking must be lighted
according to Section
51A-4.301 (e)(2)(A) and (C).
      (4)   Parking spaces and apparatus. Parking areas must include at least
one space designed for large bicycles as defined in subsection (b). At least 50
percent of provided spaces must be at ground level or accessible without
lifting the bicycle. Use of parking spaces or apparatus must not be hindered by
the use or placement of any other apparatus or by the design of doors or walls.
      (5)   Electrical connection. Electrical outlets for electric bicycle
charging must be provided. (Ord. Nos. 29128; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.335.   WAIVERS.
   (a)   An applicant for a bicycle parking waiver shall submit an application
to the director on a form provided by the city.
   (b)   The director may waive the bicycle parking requirements only upon a
determination that:
      (1)   due to existing site constraints, meeting the requirements of this
division would:
         (A)   interfere with the minimum requirements for pedestrian or
vehicular maneuvring; or
         (B)   would otherwise be contrary to public safety; or
      (2)   the building site only has access from a roadway where riding a
bicycle is prohibited under Sections
9-6 or
28-159 of the Dallas City Code. (Ord. 29128)
Division 51A-4.340. Mechanized Parking.
SEC. 51A-4.341.   PURPOSE.
   This division provides alternatives to the standard parking and loading
regulations in Division
51A-4.300 to allow parking within a structure when an approved mechanical
system is used to park and retrieve vehicles. (Ord. 29128)
SEC. 51A-4.342.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   APERTURE AREA means the total area of window, door, and facade
openings on the exterior of any portion of a mechanized parking facility,
expressed as a percentage of the total facade area.
      (2)   ARTICULATION means any portion of the exterior of a mechanized
parking facility that includes a material change, facade openings, columns,
pilasters, or other architectural element.
      (3)   COMPATIBLE means similar in application, color, materials, pattern,
shape, size, slope, and other characteristics but does not mean identical.
      (4)   MECHANIZED PARKING means parking spaces located underground or
within a structure where a mechanical system is used to park and retrieve
vehicles.
      (5)   TRANSLUCENT means not completely clear or transparent but clear
enough to allow light to pass through while diffusing it so that persons,
objects, etc. on the inside of the structure are not visible from the exterior
of the structure. (Ord. 29128)
SEC. 51A-4.343.   PROCEDURES FOR MECHANIZED PARKING APPROVAL.
   (a)   In general. All mechanized parking must be approved by the building
official. The building official shall deny an application for mechanized
parking unless it meets all of the standards of this division.
   (b)   Application. An applicant for mechanized parking approval shall submit
an application to the building official on a form provided by the city. The
applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the mechanized
parking. The application must contain the following:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address, and
telephone number of the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent.
      (2)   The street address and main telephone number, if any, of the
property where the mechanized parking will be located.
      (3)   The application fee.
      (4)   The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address, and
telephone number of a person or persons to contact in an emergency or in case
of a malfunction.
      (5)   Building plans for the mechanized parking structure.
      (6)   An operational plan for the mechanized parking that includes the
following:
         (A)   A statement describing the staffing required to operate the
mechanized parking, if any.
         (B)   A trip generation table with a description of the main uses to
be served by the mechanized parking.
         (C)   A stacking analysis.
         (D)   A peak use analysis.
         (E)   A statement detailing how long it takes to park and retrieve a
vehicle.
         (F)   A noise generation analysis and a noise mitigation plan.
      (7)   Any other reasonable and pertinent information that the building
official determines to be necessary for mechanized parking review. (Ord. 29128)
SEC. 51A-4.344.   MECHANIZED PARKING LICENSE.
   (a)   License required.
      (1)   Mechanized parking may not be used unless a license is obtained
under this section.
      (2)   Mechanized parking licenses are issued by the building official. An
application for mechanized parking under Section
51A-4.343 serves as an application for a license under this section.
   (b)   Denial of license. The building official shall deny a mechanized
parking license unless the mechanized parking meets all of the standards in
this division.
   (c)   Suspension of license by building official.
      (1)   If the building official determines that a licensee has failed to
comply with any regulation established under this division, the building
official may suspend the mechanized parking license for a definite period not
to exceed 60 days.
      (2)   A licensee whose mechanized parking license is suspended shall not
use the mechanized parking involved during the period of suspension except to
release parked cars to drivers or owners.
      (3)   If the licensee fails to comply within the suspension period, the
building official shall revoke the license.
   (d)   Revocation of license by building official. The building official
shall revoke a mechanized parking license if:
      (1)   the licensee fails to comply with the requirements of the license,
this division, or other applicable law;
      (2)   the applicant made a false statement of material fact on an
application for a license; or
      (3)   the building official determines that the mechanized parking
unreasonably endangers the safety of persons or property or is not otherwise in
the public interest.
   (e)   Expiration of license. A mechanized parking license expires three
years from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked by the building
official.
   (f)   Renewal. A mechanized parking license may be renewed by making an
application for renewal at least 30 days before the expiration of the license.
If the building official determines that the license renewal involves
substantive changes to the original application, a new application for
mechanized parking approval must be submitted under Section
51A-4.343. If the license renewal does not involve substantive changes, the
application for renewal must be filed with the building official on a form
furnished by the city.
   (g)   Appeal of denial, suspension, or revocation of license. If the
building official denies, suspends, or revokes a license, the action of the
building official is final unless the applicant or licensee files an appeal
with the permit license and appeal board in accordance with Section
2-96 of the Dallas City Code. (Ord. 29128)
SEC. 51A-4.345.   GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (a)   In general. Mechanized parking spaces may be counted as required
parking if the mechanized parking otherwise complies with the requirements of
this article.
   (b)   Location. Mechanized parking must be located underground or in an
enclosed above-ground parking structure.
   (c)   Compliance with approved plans required. Mechanized parking must
comply with the building plans and operational plan approved by the building
official.
   (d)   Maintenance. Mechanized parking must be maintained in a state of good
repair and operation.
   (e)   Exemption from construction and maintenance provisions. Mechanized
parking is exempt from the construction and maintenance provisions for off-
street parking in Sections
51A-4.301(d) and
51A-4.306(c), (d), and (e). The lighting requirements in Sections
51A-4.301(e) and
51A-4.306(b) apply only to the first floor of a mechanized parking facility.
   (f)   Passenger loading and unloading.
      (1)   A passenger loading and unloading area is required if the
mechanized parking facility is served by an attendant or valet.
      (2)   Passenger loading and unloading areas must comply with the
requirements of Section
51A-4.306(f) regardless of zoning district.
      (3)   The passenger loading and unloading area must have adequate means
of ingress from and egress to a street or an alley. The building official shall
only consider alley access in satisfaction of this requirement when alley
access is permitted by this chapter.
   (g)   Required stacking.
      (1)   One stacking space per every 10 mechanized parking bays is required
for a mechanized parking facility not served by an attendant or valet.
      (2)   A mechanized loading bay counts as a stacking space.
      (3)   Required stacking must comply with Section
51A-4.304.
      (4)   The building official may reduce the stacking space requirement if
the building official determines that all of the stacking spaces are not
necessary based on an analysis of the operational plan. An applicant seeking a
stacking space reduction from the building official shall provide the building
official with a report by an independent professional engineer to justify the
requested reduction.
   (h)   No use of public right-of-way. All stacking, maneuvering, parking, and
loading for mechanized parking must be accomplished on private property.
   (i)   Access lane.
      (1)   An access lane no less than 20 feet in width must be provided
outside each mechanized loading bay if the mechanized parking facility is not
fully automated.
      (2)   An applicant seeking a reduction in the required width of an access
lane from the building official shall provide the building official with a
report by an independent professional engineer to justify the requested
reduction.
      (3)   The building official may waive this requirement or reduce the
width of an access lane required under this subsection if the building official
determines that doing so will not create a traffic hazard or increase traffic
congestion on adjacent or nearby streets.
   (j)   Required signs. A sign must be prominently displayed at all entrances
of a mechanized parking facility. Each sign must:
      (1)   state the business hours of operation of the mechanized parking
facility;
      (2)   have a phone number provided by the building official to be used
for reporting violations of this division and any malfunctions of the
mechanized parking facility;
      (3)   have the phone number of the licensee;
      (4)   have the issuance number of the license;
      (5)   have a phone number for 24-hour assistance;
      (6)   be constructed of weather resistant material;
      (7)   be no less than 30 inches wide and 24 inches long; and
      (8)   have clearly legible letters in a color that contrasts with the
background material.
   (k)   Facade.
      (1)   These facade requirements apply to any portion of a building
containing mechanized parking except when accessory to a single family or
duplex use. If there is a conflict between the regulations within a zoning
district that require concealment of parking structure facades, this subsection
controls.
      (2)    An aboveground mechanized parking facility must be concealed by a
facade. It is recommended that the facade be:
         (A)   compatible in appearance with the facade of the main building it
serves, or
         (B)   compatible in appearance with other buildings within a one block
radius.
      (3)   Aperture area or articulation must be provided at a minimum of 20
percent and a maximum of 80 percent for any street facing facade.
      (4)   Articulation must be provided at least every 30 feet, measured
horizontally and vertically.
      (5)   Except for pedestrian and vehicular entrances, the aperture area
must be screened. It is recommended that the required screening be constructed
with an opaque or translucent material that may be permeable or impermeable and
that the aperture area have no more than 36 square inches of transparent
material in any given square foot of surface and have no more than 25 percent
transparency.
      (6)   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to the
standards in this subsection when, in the opinion of the board, the special
exception will not adversely affect neighboring property. The alternative
facade must provide adequate screening of equipment and structures and mitigate
noise. (Ord. Nos. 29128; 31607)
Division 51A-4.400. Yard, Lot, and Space Regulations.
SEC. 51A-4.401.   MINIMUM FRONT YARD.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Required front yards must be open and unobstructed except for
fences and light poles 20 feet or less in height. Except as otherwise provided
in this section, ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices,
and other architectural features may not project more than 12 inches into the
required front yard. A fireplace chimney may project up to two feet into the
required front yard if its area of projection does not exceed 12 square feet.
Cantilevered roof eaves and balconies may project up to five feet into the
required front yard.
      (2)   The front yard setback is measured from the front lot line of the
building site or the required right-of-way as determined by the thoroughfare
plan for all thoroughfares, whichever creates the greater setback. On minor
streets, the front yard setback is measured from the front lot line of the
building site or the existing right-of-way, whichever creates the greater
setback. When the city council by ordinance establishes a specific right-of-way
line for a street, the front yard setback is measured from that right-of-way
line.
      (3)   If a building line that is established by ordinance requires a
greater or lesser front yard than prescribed by this section, the building line
established by ordinance determines the minimum required front yard.
      (4)   The building official may approve a ramp that projects into the
required front yard to allow a handicapped person access to an existing single
family, duplex, or handicapped group dwelling unit use. The ramp must be
constructed with minimal encroachment and must be constructed to the applicable
accessibility standard as determined by the building official. Initial review
of a complete permit application for a ramp must be completed in 10 days.
      (5)   If a lot runs from one street to another and has double frontage, a
required front yard must be provided on both streets. If access is prohibited
on one frontage by plat or by the city, the following structures or portions of
structures in the yard along that frontage are governed by the rear yard
regulations in Section
51A-4.403:
         (A)   Swimming pools.
         (B)   Game courts.
         (C)   Fences.
         (D)   Garages.
         (E)   Accessory storage buildings.
      (6)   Except as provided in this paragraph, if a blockface is divided by
two or more zoning districts, the front yard for the entire blockface must
comply with the requirements of the district with the greatest front yard
requirement.
         (A)   If the greatest front yard is in a district with only one or
more of the following uses being conducted as a main use and having a minimum
of 80 feet of frontage, the blockface terminates at the boundary of that use:
            (i)   Utility and public service uses listed in Section
51A-4.212.
            (ii)   A railroad right-of-way.
            (iii)   A cemetery or mausoleum.
            (iv)   Recreation uses listed in Section
51A-4.208.
         (B)   In this section BLOCKFACE means:
            (i)    the distance along one side of a street between the two
nearest intersecting streets;
            (ii)   where a street deadends, the distance along one side of a
street between the nearest intersecting street and the end of the deadend
street; or
            (iii)   where a street centerline contains a change of direction
greater than 45 degrees, the distance along one side of a street between either
the nearest intersecting street or the deadend and the point determining the
angle of the change of direction.
      (7)   Reserved.
      (8)   The minimum front yard requirements in a planned development
district are controlled by the planned development district regulations.
      (9)   In an A(A), multifamily, MH(A), office, retail, CS, LI, IR, IM,
central area, mixed use, or multiple commercial district, the board of
adjustment may allow a special exception from the front yard requirements of
this section to permit the erection of a permanently constructed porte-cochere,
covered walkway, or canopy if the structure is rectilinear in shape and does
not exceed 25 feet in width at the building line, and if the board finds that
the structure will not adversely affect neighboring property.
   (b)   Front yard provisions for residential districts.
      (1)   If a corner lot in a single family, duplex, or agricultural
district has two street frontages of equal distance, one frontage is governed
by the front yard regulations of this section, and the other frontage is
governed by the side yard regulations in Section
51A-4.402. If the corner lot has two street frontages of unequal distance, the
shorter frontage is governed by this section, and the longer frontage is
governed by side yard regulations in Section
51A-4.402. Notwithstanding this provision, the continuity of the established
setback along street frontage must be maintained.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   If a TH or TH(A) district abuts another residential district in the
same blockface and fronts on the same side of the street, the residential
district with the greater front yard requirement determines the minimum front
yard. The minimum front yard for the residential district with the greater
front yard requirement must extend at least 150 feet into the TH or TH(A)
district.
      (4)   through (7) Reserved.
   (c)   Special exception for carports.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to the minimum front yard
requirements in this section for a carport for a single family or duplex use
when, in the opinion of the board:
         (A)   there is no adequate vehicular access to an area behind the
required front building line that would accommodate a parking space; and
         (B)   the carport will not have a detrimental impact on surrounding
properties.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board
shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   Whether the requested special exception is compatible with the
character of the neighborhood.
         (B)   Whether the value of surrounding properties will be adversely
affected.
         (C)   The suitability of the size and location of the carport.
         (D)   The materials to be used in construction of the carport.
      (3)   Storage of items other than motor vehicles is prohibited in a
carport for which a special exception has been granted under this subsection.
   (d)   Special exception for tree preservation.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to the minimum front yard
requirements in this section to preserve an existing tree.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board
shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   Whether the requested special exception is compatible with the
character of the neighborhood.
         (B)   Whether the value of surrounding properties will be adversely
affected.
         (C)   Whether the tree is worthy of preservation.
   (e)   Schedule of minimum front yards.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, a person shall not erect,
alter, convert, or maintain a structure or part of a structure in violation of
the minimum front yard requirements in the district regulations (Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.). A schedule of minimum front yards is provided in Section
51A-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20236; 21186; 21290; 22053; 26531; 30895;
30932)
SEC. 51A-4.402.   MINIMUM SIDE YARD.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Required side yards must be open and unobstructed except for fences
and light poles 20 feet or less in height. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices, and
other architectural features may not project more than 12 inches into the
required side yard. A fireplace chimney may project up to two feet into the
required side yard if its area of projection does not exceed 12 square feet.
Roof eaves may project up to three feet into the required side yard. Balconies
may not project into the required side yard.
      (2)   The side yard setback is measured from the side lot line of the
building site, except when a front yard is treated as a side yard, the setback
is measured from the lot line or the required right-of-way as determined by the
thoroughfare plan for all thoroughfares, whichever creates the greater setback.
On minor streets, the setback is measured from the lot line or the existing
right-of-way, whichever creates the greater setback.
         (A)   When city council by ordinance establishes a specific right-of-
way line for a street, the required setback is measured from that right-of-way
line.
      (3)   Reserved.
      (4)   A unitary air conditioning unit may be located in the required side
yard, but not nearer than three feet to the property line.
      (5)   The building official may approve a ramp that projects into the
required side yard to allow a handicapped person access to an existing single
family, duplex, or handicapped group dwelling unit use. The ramp must be
constructed with minimal encroachment and must be constructed to the applicable
accessibility standard as determined by the building official. Initial review
of a complete permit application for a ramp must be completed in 10 days.
   (b)   Side yard provisions for residential districts.
      (1)   In a single family district, one required side yard may be reduced
below the setback required in this section, if the other side yard is increased
to at least double the side yard required in this section, subject to the
following conditions:
         (A)   The minimum side yard between structures on contiguous lots must
not be less than the minimum side yard required in this section.
         (B)   To reduce the required side yard, a subdivision plat must be
approved by the commission and filed with the county clerk showing the location
of all building lines, and showing the proposed distances between the building
lines and property lines, streets lines and alley lines.
         (C)   A person may not erect an accessory structure except for a
swimming pool and its appurtenances in the double side yard.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   In a residential district, a person need not provide a side yard
setback for a structure accessory to a residential use, including a generator,
if the structure:
         (A)   does not exceed 15 feet in height; and
         (B)   is located in the rear 30 percent of the lot.
Note: This paragraph does not apply to a front yard governed by the side yard
regulations in Section 51A-4.402 (such as a front yard treated as a side yard
on a corner lot).
   (c)   Special exception for carports.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to the minimum side yard
requirements in this section for a carport for a single family or duplex use
when, in the opinion of the board, the carport will not have a detrimental
impact on surrounding properties.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board
shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   Whether the requested special exception is compatible with the
character of the neighborhood.
         (B)   Whether the value of surrounding properties will be adversely
affected.
         (C)   The suitability of the size and location of the carport.
         (D)   The materials to be used in construction of the carport.
      (3)   Storage of items other than motor vehicles is prohibited in a
carport for which a special exception has been granted under this subsection.
   (d)   Special exception for child or adult care facilities. The board may
grant a special exception to the minimum side yard requirements in this section
for an accessory structure used for outdoor recreation, when in the opinion of
the board, the special exception will not adversely affect neighboring
properties.
   (e)   Special exception for tree preservation.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to the minimum side yard
requirements in this section to preserve an existing tree.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board
shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   Whether the requested special exception is compatible with the
character of the neighborhood.
         (B)   Whether the value of surrounding properties will be adversely
affected.
         (C)   Whether the tree is worthy of preservation.
   (f)   Schedule of minimum side yards. Except as provided in this section, a
person shall not erect, alter, convert, or maintain a structure or part of a
structure in violation of the minimum side yard requirements in the district
regulations (Divisions 51A-4.100 et seq.). A schedule of minimum side yards is
provided in Section 51A-4.410.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 20236; 21186; 21290; 22053; 30895; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.403.   MINIMUM REAR YARD.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Required rear yards must be open and unobstructed except for
fences. Except as otherwise provided in this section, ordinary projections of
window sills, belt courses, cornices, and other architectural features may not
project more than 12 inches into the required rear yard. A fireplace chimney
may project up to two feet into the required rear yard if its area of
projection does not exceed 12 square feet. Roof eaves may project up to three
feet into the required rear yard. Balconies may not project into the required
rear yard.
      (2)   The rear yard setback is measured from the rear lot line of the
building site.
      (3)   Reserved.
      (4)   The building official may approve a ramp that projects into the
required rear yard to allow a handicapped person access to an existing single
family, duplex, or handicapped group dwelling unit use. The ramp must be
constructed with minimal encroachment and must be constructed to the applicable
accessibility standard as determined by the building official. Initial review
of a complete permit application for a ramp must be completed in 10 days.
   (b)   Rear yard provisions for residential districts.
      (1)   Reserved.
      (2)   In a residential district, a person need not provide a full rear
yard setback for a structure accessory to a residential use, including a
generator, if the structure does not exceed 15 feet in height. Where the rear
yard is adjacent to an alley, a three-foot setback must be provided. Where the
rear yard is not adjacent to an alley, no setback is required.
   (c)   Special exception for child or adult care facilities. The board may
grant a special exception to the minimum rear yard requirements in this section
for an accessory structure used for outdoor recreation, when in the opinion of
the board, the special exception will not adversely affect neighboring
properties.
   (d)   Special exception for tree preservation.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to the minimum rear yard
requirements in this section to preserve an existing tree.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board
shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   Whether the requested special exception is compatible with the
character of the neighborhood.
         (B)   Whether the value of surrounding properties will be adversely
affected.
         (C)   Whether the tree is worthy of preservation.
   (e)   Schedule of minimum rear yards.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, a person shall not erect,
alter, convert, or maintain a structure or part of a structure in violation of
the minimum rear yard requirements in the district regulations (Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.). A schedule of minimum rear yards is provided in Section
51A-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20236; 20440; 22053; 30895; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.404.   MINIMUM LOT AREA FOR RESIDENTIAL USE.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   A person shall not reduce a lot below the minimum area requirements
of this section, unless:
         (A)   the lot is replatted for a community unit development; or
         (B)   the city or other governmental agency reduces the lot size by
widening an abutting street. In this situation the minimum lot area is computed
on the basis of the original lot size before the street widening.
      (2)   The area requirements in a planned development district are
controlled by the planned development district regulations.
   (b)   Reserved.
   (c)   Schedule of minimum lot area for residential use.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not
erect, alter, or convert any residential structure or part of a structure to
have a smaller lot area than is allowed in the district regulations (Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.). A schedule of minimum lot area for residential use is
contained in Section
51A-4.410. (Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-4.405.   MINIMUM LOT WIDTH FOR RESIDENTIAL USE.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   A person may not reduce a lot below the minimum width requirements
of this section, unless:
         (A)   the lot is platted for a community unit development; or
         (B)   the city or other governmental agency reduces the lot size by
widening an abutting street. In this situation the minimum lot width is
computed on the basis of the original lot size before widening.
      (2)   The lot width requirements in a planned development district are
controlled by the planned development district regulations.
   (b)   The minimum lot width for residential use is 10 feet. (Ord. Nos.
19455; 24731)
SEC. 51A-4.406.   MINIMUM LOT DEPTH FOR RESIDENTIAL USE.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   A person may not reduce a lot below the minimum depth requirements
of this section, unless:
         (A)   the lot is platted for a community unit development; or
         (B)   the city or other governmental agency reduces the lot size by
widening an abutting street. In this situation the minimum lot depth is
computed by the original lot size before the street widening.
      (2)   The depth requirements in a planned development district are
controlled by the planned development district regulations.
   (b)   The minimum lot depth for residential use is 10 feet. (Ord. Nos.
19455; 24731)
SEC. 51A-4.407.   MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Except as provided in Paragraph (2), in single family, duplex,
townhouse, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2(A), MF-2(SAH), MF-3(A), MH(A), NO(A), and
NS(A) districts, institutional buildings may cover a maximum of 60 percent of
the lot.
      (2)   In single family and MH(A) districts, structures used solely for
child or adult care facility uses are limited to the maximum lot coverage
applicable to residential structures in each district.
      (3)   The maximum lot coverage requirements in a planned development
district are controlled by the planned development district regulations.
   (b)   Reserved.
   (c)   Schedule of maximum lot coverage.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not
erect, alter, or convert any structure or part of a structure to cover a
greater percentage of a lot than is allowed in the district regulations
(Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.). A schedule of maximum lot coverage is contained in Section
51A-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.408.   MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT.
   (a)   Special height provisions.
      (1)   Structures for utility and public service uses and institutional
uses may be erected to any height consistent with the Federal Aviation
Administration air space limitations, residential proximity slope height
restrictions, and the building code. Exceptions:
         (A)   No portion of a structure that exceeds the maximum structure
height specified in the district regulations (Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.) may be located above a residential proximity slope. See
Section
51A-4.412.
         (B)   Local utility transmission and distribution lines and supporting
structures are exempt from residential proximity slope height restrictions.
         (C)   A mounted cellular antenna, as defined in Paragraph
51A-4.212(10.1), attached to a utility structure is exempt from residential
proximity slope height restrictions if the utility structure is greater than 65
feet in height. For purposes of this subparagraph, a utility structure means an
electrical transmission distribution tower, an elevated water storage tank, and
any other structure operated by a municipality, a transit authority, or a
certificated, franchised, or licensed utility company in connection with
provision of the utility.
         (D)   A tower/antenna for cellular communication, as defined in
Paragraph
51A-4.212(10.1), is exempt from residential proximity slope height restrictions
if a specific use permit is required, or if a modification to an existing
tower/antenna for cellular communication use is modified in a manner that does
not substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing tower/antenna
for cellular communication or its auxiliary building. A modification
substantially changes the physical dimensions of an existing tower/antenna for
cellular communication or its auxiliary building if it meets any of the
criteria listed in 47 C.F.R. §1.40001(b)(7), as amended.
         (E)   In single family, duplex, townhouse, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2
(A), and MF-2(SAH) districts, structures used solely for child or adult care
facility uses are limited to the maximum structure height applicable in each
district.
      (2)   In a district in which building height is limited to 36 feet or
less, the following structures may project a maximum of 12 feet above the
maximum structure height specified in the district regulations (Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.):
         (A)   Structures on top of a building:
            (i)   Elevator penthouse or bulkhead.
            (ii)   Mechanical equipment room.
            (iii)   Cooling tower.
            (iv)   Tank designed to hold liquids.
            (v)   Ornamental cupola or dome.
            (vi)   Skylights.
            (vii)   Clerestory.
            (viii)   Visual screens which surround roof mounted mechanical
equipment.
            (ix)   Chimney and vent stacks.
            (x)   Amateur communications tower.
            (xi)   Parapet wall, limited to a height of four feet.
         (B)   Structures at grade level:
            (i)   Amateur communications tower.
Note: The heights allowed in Subsection (a)(2) are subject to any residential
proximity slope height restrictions that may be contained in the district
regulations for a particular district. (See Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.).
      (3)   The maximum building height requirements in a planned development
district are controlled by the planned development district regulations.
      (4)   In single family, duplex, townhouse, MF- 1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2(A),
and MF-2(SAH) districts:
         (A)   no dormer eaves may project above the maximum structure height
specified in the district regulations (Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.); and
         (B)   the highest point of a structure with a gable, hip, gambrel, or
dome roof may not project more than 12 feet above the maximum height specified
in the district regulations (Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.).
   (b)   Schedule of maximum building heights. Except as otherwise provided in
this section, a person shall not erect, alter, or convert any structure or part
of a structure to exceed the maximum height standards in the district
regulations (Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.). A schedule of maximum building heights is contained in
Section
51A-4.410.
   (c)   FAA Height Restrictions. To protect navigable airspace, no structure
shall be erected, altered, or maintained at a height in excess of limits
established by Federal Aviation Administration regulations. (Ord. Nos. 19455;
20037; 21663; 22639; 24543; 26578; 28072; 29984; 32659)
SEC. 51A-4.409.   MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. 20361)
      (2)   A basement is not counted in the computation of floor area ratio.
      (3)   The maximum floor area ratio requirements in a planned development
district are controlled by the planned development district regulations.
      (4) through (7) Reserved.
   (b)   Schedule of maximum floor area ratio.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not
erect or alter any structure or part of a structure to exceed the maximum floor
area ratio in the district regulations (Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.). A schedule of maximum floor area is contained in Section
51A-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20361)
SEC. 51A-4.410.   SCHEDULE OF YARD, LOT, AND SPACE REGULATIONS.
   The following charts comprise the schedule of yard, lot, and space
regulations for purposes of this division. In the event of a conflict between
this schedule and the text of the district regulations (Divisions
51A-4.100 et seq.), the text of the district regulations controls. (Ord. 19455)
NOTE: The yard, lot, and space charts on the following pages have not been
formally adopted by the city council; they are prepared by the city staff and
are intended for use as a guide only. It is necessary to see the text of this
chapter for specific regulations. In the event of a conflict between the yard,
lot, and space charts and the text of this chapter, the text of this chapter
controls.
To view a PDF of the schedules found below, please click HERE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-89.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-91.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-93.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-95.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-97.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-99.png]
SEC. 51A-4.411.   SHARED ACCESS DEVELOPMENT.
   (a)   Purpose. Traditional single family lots front on a street and have a
rectangular shape. New developments have been platted with a minimal frontage
on a street, and have access to the street from a shared driveway. This section
is designed to address the issues specific to these non-traditional lots.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   SHARED ACCESS AREA means that portion of a shared access
development that fronts on a public or private street and provides access to
individual lots within the shared access development.
      (2)   SHARED ACCESS DEVELOPMENT means a development where one or more of
the lots within the development do not front on a public or private street,
where access to the lots within the development is provided via a shared access
area and that meets all of the requirements of this section.
      (3)   SHARED ACCESS POINT means that portion of a shared access
development where the shared access area provides vehicular access to a public
or private street.
   (c)   Shared access development requirements.
      (1)   A shared access development is created by platting no less than
three and no more than 36 individual lots. Adjacent shared access developments
may not be connected or combined to exceed the 36 lot maximum.
      (2)   A shared access development must be restricted by plat to single
family use.
      (3)   No building permit may be issued to authorize work in a shared
access development until the plat and the shared access area agreement have
been recorded in the real property records of the appropriate county, all
requirements of the shared access area have been met, and the director has
corrected the appropriate zoning map in the offices of the city secretary, the
building official, and the department to reflect the restriction to single
family use.
      (4)   A shared access development may not be platted as a community unit
development (CUD).
   (d)   Shared access area requirements.
      (1)   Design and lighting of the shared access area must be approved by
the director.
      (2)   Water and wastewater mains must be installed in accordance with
applicable ordinances.
      (3)   Design and location of interior traffic control devices must be
approved by the traffic engineer.
      (4)   The fire protection standards in the Dallas Fire Code must be
followed.
      (5)   The geometrics of the shared access area must be designed to
provide appropriate access for passenger, delivery, emergency, and maintenance
vehicles and with a minimum height clearance of 18 feet above the surface of
the shared access area.
      (6)   The shared access area must be shown on the plat of the shared
access development.
      (7)   The shared access area must front on a public or private street
(not an alley), have a minimum width of 20 feet, and have a minimum pavement
width of 16 feet.
      (8)   If a guard house is provided, it must be at least 30 feet from the
shared access point.
      (9)   If a shared access area entrance is closed at any time, it must be
constructed to permit opening of the entrance in emergencies by boltcutters or
breakaway panels.
      (10)   A shared access area may serve no more than 18 dwelling units per
shared access point. No more than two shared access points may serve a shared
access development.
   (e)   Written agreement requirements. A shared access development must be
regulated by a written shared access agreement that:
      (1)   reflects adequate consideration;
      (2)   contains legal descriptions of the individual lots within the
shared access development, and of the shared access area;
      (3)   is signed by all owners and lienholders of property in the shared
access development and is binding on lienholders by a subordination clause;
      (4)   is approved by the building official;
      (5)   is approved as to form by the city attorney;
      (6)   creates a covenant running with the land (the document may be in
any of several forms, including but not limited to, an access easement; a unity
agreement; deed restrictions; or homeowners’ association’s covenants,
conditions, and restrictions);
      (7)   provides that the owners of property in the shared access
development are responsible for lighting, maintenance, and cleaning of the
shared access area, and where appropriate, the installation and maintenance of
interior traffic control devices;
      (8)   provides necessary easements in the shared access area for the
benefit of the individual lots in the shared access development for utilities,
storm water drainage, fire protection, lighting, traffic control, government
and emergency vehicle access, mail service, meter-reading access, vehicular and
pedestrian access, parking, and deliveries;
      (9)   gives the city the right, but not the obligation, to take any
action needed to make necessary repairs or improvements within the shared
access area, and to place a lien on all lots within the shared access
development until the city has received full compensation for that action;
      (10)   provides that the owners of property in the shared access
development agree to defend and indemnify the city, and to hold the city
harmless from and against all claims or liabilities arising out of or in
connection with the shared access development, shared access area, or shared
access agreement;
      (11)   provides that it is governed by the laws of the State of Texas;
      (12)   provides that it may only be amended or terminated:
         (A)   with the consent of all the owners and lienholders of property
in the shared access development; and
         (B)   after approval as to form by the city attorney, and approval by
the director; and
      (13)   provides for the installation, maintenance, and repair of
utilities, including electric, water, sewage, and communications located within
the shared access area.
   (f)   Code compliance requirements.
      (1)   All code requirements must be met individually by each lot in the
shared access development, unless otherwise specified in this subsection.
      (2)   The shared access development is treated as one lot for purposes of
compliance with the front, side, and rear yard regulations, applicable
landscape regulations, and any prohibition against parking in a front yard. For
example, the front yard of the shared access development as a whole determines
whether the front yard setback is in compliance with the zoning district
regulations, and the individual lots within the shared access development are
not individually required to meet front yard setback requirements.
      (3)   Each lot within the shared access development must meet the minimum
lot area requirement for the zoning district in which it is located. In
multifamily districts, the lot area of individual lots may be up to 20 percent
less than the minimum lot area requirement if the average lot area of all lots
within the shared access development equals or exceeds the minimum lot area
requirement.
      (4)   In all districts other than multifamily districts, the shared
access area may not be used to satisfy minimum lot area requirements or
determine lot coverage.
      (5)   See Section
51A-10.125(a)(2) for landscape regulations applicable to shared access
developments.
   (g)   Guest parking requirements. In addition to any parking spaces required
for each dwelling unit, shared access developments must provide 0.25 unassigned
spaces available for use by visitors and residents for each dwelling unit.
Guest parking spaces must be located where they will not impede access from any
other guest parking space or dwelling unit to the shared access point. (Ord.
Nos. 24731; 25047; 26333; 28073)
SEC. 51A-4.412.   RESIDENTIAL PROXIMITY SLOPE.
   (a)   Definitions of general terms. In this section:
      (1)   PRIVATE PROPERTY means any property not dedicated to public use,
except that “private property” does not include the following:
         (A)   A private street or alley.
         (B)   Property on which a utility and public service use listed in
Section
51A-4.212 is being conducted as a main use.
         (C)   A railroad right-of-way.
         (D)   A cemetery or mausoleum.
      (2)   RESTRICTED BUILDING OR STRUCTURE means the building or structure
whose height is restricted by a residential proximity slope.
      (3)   SITE OF ORIGINATION means any private property in:
         (A)   an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH),
MF-2, MF-2(A), or MF- 2(SAH) district; or
         (B)   an identifiable portion of a planned development or conservation
district, which portion is restricted to residential uses not exceeding 36 feet
in height. See the sections in this chapter governing planned development and
conservation districts for specific guidance as to how to treat identifiable
portions of those districts.
   (b)   Residential proximity slope defined. The residential proximity slope
is a plane projected upward and outward from every site of origination as
defined in Subsection (a). Specifically, the slope is projected from the line
formed by the intersection of:
      (1)   the vertical plane extending through the boundary line of the site
of origination; and
      (2)   the grade of the restricted building or structure.
   (c)   Angle and extent of projection. The angle and extent of projection of
the residential proximity slope depends on the zoning category of the site of
origination as follows:
 
ZONING CATEGORY              ANGLE OF PROJECTION  EXTENT
R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, and TH 18.4° (1 to 3 slope)Infinite.
(A)
CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-2, and                      Terminates at a horizontal
MF-2(A)                      45° (1 to 1 slope)  distance of 50 feet from the
                                                  site of origination.
 
   (d)   Calculation of height restrictions. The horizontal distances used to
calculate the height restrictions imposed by the residential proximity slope
may be determined by using the lot, block, and right-of-way dimensions as shown
on the official plat or zoning maps of the city, or by scale measurement of the
distances on such official maps. All dimensions and methodology used in
determining the distance measurement are subject to the approval of the
building official.
   (e)   Exemption. Certain structures are exempt from the residential
proximity slope. See Section
51A-4.408. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20308; 21663; 26578)
Division 51A-4.500. Overlay and Conservation District Regulations.
SEC. 51A-4.501.   HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare, and:
      (1)   to protect, enhance and perpetuate places and areas which represent
distinctive and important elements of the city’s historical, cultural, social,
economic, archeological, paleontological, ethnic, political and architectural
history;
      (2)   to strengthen the economy of the city;
      (3)   to increase public knowledge and appreciation of the city’s
historic past and unique sense of place;
      (4)   to foster civic and neighborhood pride and a sense of identity;
      (5)   to promote the enjoyment and use of historic resources by the
people of the city;
      (6)   to preserve diverse architectural styles, patterns of development,
and design preferences reflecting phases of the city’s history;
      (7)   to create a more livable urban environment;
      (8)   to enhance property values;
      (9)   to provide financial incentives for preservation;
      (10)   to protect and enhance the city’s attraction to tourists and
visitors;
      (11)   to resolve conflicts between the preservation of historic
resources and alternative land uses;
      (12)   to integrate historic preservation into public and private land
use planning;
      (13)   to conserve valuable resources through use of the existing
building environment;
      (14)   to stabilize neighborhoods;
      (15)   to increase public awareness of the benefits of historic
preservation;
      (16)   to maintain a harmony between new and historic structures so that
they will be compatible in scale, form, color, proportion, texture and
material; and
      (17)   to encourage public participation in identifying and preserving
historic resources.
   (b)   Establishment of historic overlay districts. A historic overlay
district may be established to preserve places and areas of historical,
cultural, or architectural importance and significance if the place or area has
three or more of the following characteristics:
      (1)   History, heritage and culture: Represents the historical
development, ethnic heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, state, or
country.
      (2)   Historic event: Location as or association with the site of a
significant historic event.
      (3)   Significant persons: Identification with a person or persons who
significantly contributed to the culture and development of the city, state, or
country.
      (4)   Architecture: Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural style, landscape design, method of construction, exceptional
craftsmanship, architectural innovation, or contains details which represent
folk or ethnic art.
      (5)   Architect or master builder: Represents the work of an architect,
designer or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development
of the city, state, or country.
      (6)   Historic context: Relationship to other distinctive buildings,
sites, or areas which are eligible for preservation based on historic,
cultural, or architectural characteristics.
      (7)   Unique visual feature: Unique location of singular physical
characteristics representing an established and familiar visual feature of a
neighborhood, community or the city that is a source of pride or cultural
significance.
      (8)   Archaeological: Archaeological or paleontological value in that it
has produced or can be expected to produce data affecting theories of historic
or prehistoric interest.
      (9)   National and state recognition: Eligible for or designated as a
National Historic Landmark, Recorded Texas Historic Landmark, State
Archeological Landmark, American Civil Engineering Landmark, or eligible for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
      (10)   Historic education: Represents an era of architectural, social, or
economic history that allows an understanding of how the place or area was used
by past generations.
   (c)   Historic designation procedure and predesignation moratorium.
      (1)   Purpose. Temporary preservation of the status quo upon initiation
of the historic designation procedure is necessary to allow time to evaluate
each proposed historic overlay district, to consider appropriate preservation
criteria, and to prevent circumvention of the purposes of this section. Relief
from the predesignation moratorium may be obtained by applying for a
predesignation certificate of appropriateness or certificate for demolition or
removal.
      (2)   Initiation of historic designation procedure.
         (A)   The procedure for adopting an ordinance to establish or amend a
historic overlay district may be initiated by five members of the city council,
three members of the city plan commission, one member of the landmark
commission for an individual property and three members of the landmark
commission for an expansion of an existing district or creation of a new
district, or by the owner(s) of the property.
            (i)   Statement of intent for historic designation. The five city
council members, three city plan commissioners, or one landmark commissioner if
it is an individual property, or three landmark commissioners if it is an
expansion of an existing district or creation of a new district, must prepare
and present a statement of intent for historic designation at the public
hearing to initiate the historic designation procedure. The purpose of the
statement of intent for historic designation is to provide justification of the
action under consideration. The statement of intent must be provided to the
property owner(s) at the time the agenda for the meeting is posted. The
statement of intent of historic designation must contain the following:
               (aa)   List of characteristics on which the initiation is based;
               (bb)   A brief description of the historical significance of the
potential building, site, district or expansion;
               (cc)   Purpose of the proposed designation; and
               (dd)   For district expansions, a statement including the
history and timeline of the existing district designation process and
information on why the expansion area was not originally included with the
initial district designation, if available.
            (ii)   Procedure for individual properties. The procedure to
designate an individual property requires a minimum of one public hearing of
the initiating body. The purpose of the hearing is to determine whether
sufficient information is presented to initiate the historic designation
procedure.
         (iii)   Procedures for expansions and new districts.
            (aa)   The procedure to expand an existing district or create a new
district involves a minimum of two public hearings and a community meeting. The
purpose of the first public hearing is to determine whether enough information
is presented to consider a historic designation. This first public hearing does
not initiate the historic designation procedure. If the city council, the city
plan commission, or the landmark commission determines that sufficient
information has been presented in the statement of intent for historic
designation for consideration, the department shall conduct a community
meeting. The purpose of the community meeting is for the proposing
commissioners or city council members to present the statement of intent for
historic designation to the property owners, neighbors, and interested parties
to the proposed initiation, and to provide an opportunity for public comment.
The meeting must be held at a facility open to the public within the
neighborhood of the proposed historic district. The information presented must
include the following:
               (I)   Statement of intent for historic designation;
               (II)   List of potential impacts of historic preservation;
               (III)   List of neighborhood planning concerns and goals; and
               (IV)   Any other information that may be relevant.
            (bb)   Prior to the second public hearing to initiate the historic
designation procedure, the proposing commissioners or city council members must
revise the statement of the intent for historic designation. The revised
statement of intent must include the following, as applicable:
               (I)   original statement of intent;
               (II)   transcription of the community meeting;
               (III)   benefits and incentives of preservation;
               (IV)   additional neighborhood planning goals;
               (V)   concepts for additional development incentives paired with
historic preservation;
               (VI)   summary of concerns; and
               (VII)   summary of economic incentives available to the property
owners such as city of Dallas historic tax exemption, tax increment financial
districts, and federal or state opportunities.
               (VIII)   statement reflecting the property owner(s) position, if
available.
               The purpose of the second public hearing is to review the
revised statement of intent and determine whether sufficient information is
presented to initiate the historic designation procedure.
         (B)   The director shall provide property owners with notice of a
public hearing to initiate the historic designation procedure, a statement that
describes the impact that a historic designation of the owner's property may
have on the owner and the owner's property, and information about the process
at least 15 days before the date set for the initial hearing using the
procedure outlined in Section
51A-4.701(a)(1). The historic designation impact statement must include the
following:
            (i)   regulations that may be applied to any structure on the
property after the designation;
            (ii)   procedures for the designation;
            (iii)   tax benefits that may be applied to the property after the
designation; and
            (iv)   rehabilitation or repair programs that the city offers for a
property designated as historic.
         (C)   No permits to alter or demolish the property may be issued after
provision of this notice until action is taken at that initial hearing by the
city council, city plan commission, or landmark commission.
         (D)   The historic designation procedure is considered to be initiated
immediately when the city council, the city plan commission, or the landmark
commission votes to initiate it or, in the case of initiation by the property
owner(s), when the zoning change application is filed with the director.
      (3)   Appeal. If the historic designation procedure is initiated by the
landmark commission or the city plan commission, the property owner may appeal
the initiation to the city council by filing a written notice with the director
within 15 days after the action of the landmark commission or city plan
commission. The written notice must include why the property owner thinks the
criteria used to justify the initiation does not apply. Within 90 days after
the filing of the appeal or 180 days after filing the appeal, if a 90 day
extension is requested by the property owner within 45 days of filing the
initial written notice of appeal with the director, the director and the chair
of the landmark commission shall present the statement of intent for historic
designation if it is an individual property, or the revised statement of intent
for historic designation if it is an expansion or new district to the city
council. After submission of the statement of intent for historic designation
if it is an individual property, or revised statement of intent for historic
designation if it is an expansion or new district, the city council shall hold
a public hearing on the appeal. The sole issue on appeal is whether the
landmark commission or city plan commission erred in evaluating the
significance of the property based on the characteristics listed in Section
51A-4.501(b). Appeal to the city council constitutes the final administrative
remedy.
      (4)   Enforcement. Upon initiation of the historic designation procedure,
the historic preservation officer shall immediately notify the building
official. The building official shall not accept any application for a permit
to alter, demolish, or remove the structure or site subject to the
predesignation moratorium, unless a predesignation certificate of
appropriateness or certificate for demolition or removal has been issued.
      (5)   Designation report. Upon initiation of the historic designation
procedure, the historic preservation officer shall coordinate research to
compile a written report regarding the historical, cultural, and architectural
significance of the place or area proposed for historic designation. This
report must include a statement on each of the following to the extent that
they apply:
         (A)   A listing of the architectural, archaeological, paleontological,
cultural, economic, social, ethnic, political, or historical characteristics
upon which the nomination is based;
         (B)   A description of the historical, cultural, and architectural
significance of the structures and site;
         (C)   A description of the boundaries of the proposed historic overlay
district, including subareas and areas where new construction will be
prohibited; and
         (D)   Proposed preservation criteria for the proposed historic overlay
district.
      (6)   Designation procedure. For purposes of Section
51A-4.701, "Zoning Amendments," once the designation report has been voted on
by the landmark commission, the designation shall be treated as a city plan
commission authorized public hearing and may not be appealed to city council if
the city plan commission recommends denial. The notice of authorization in
Section
51A-4.701(a)(1) is not required.
      (7)   Historic designation. The city may not designate a property a
historic district unless:
         (A)   the owner of the property consents to the designation; or
         (B)   the designation is approved by a three-fourths vote of:
            (i)   the landmark commission;
            (ii)   the city plan commission; and
            (iii)   the city council.
         (C)   The owner of the property may withdraw consent at any time
during the designation process by filing a written notice with the director.
         (D)   If the property is owned by an organization that qualifies as a
religious organization under Section 11.20 of the Texas Tax Code, the city may
designate the property as a historic district only if the organization consents
to the designation.
      (8)   Computation of time.
         (A)   Unless otherwise provided in this paragraph, computing any
period of time prescribed in this subsection shall be in accordance with
Section
1-5 of the Dallas City Code.
         (B)   If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or official
holiday observed by the city, the period is extended to include the next day
that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or official holiday observed by the city.
         (C)   Except as otherwise specified, time periods will be calculated
based on calendar days.
      (9)   Termination of the predesignation moratorium. The predesignation
moratorium ends on the earliest of the following dates:
         (A)   The day after the city council, city plan commission, or
landmark commission that voted to initiate the historic designation procedure,
votes to terminate the historic designation procedure.
         (B)   The day after the city council, in an appeal from an initiation
by the city plan commission or landmark commission, votes to terminate the
historic designation procedure.
         (C)   In the case of initiation by the property owner(s), the day
after the zoning change application is withdrawn.
         (D)   If the proposed historic overlay district zoning change is
approved, the effective date of the ordinance establishing the historic overlay
district.
         (E)   If the proposed historic overlay district zoning change is
denied, the day after either the city council makes its final decision denying
the change or the expiration of the time period for appeal to the city council
from a city plan commission recommendation of denial.
         (F)   Two years after the date the historic designation procedure was
initiated, regardless of who initiated the procedure.
   (d)   Predesignation certificate of appropriate-ness.
      (1)   When required. A person shall not alter a site, or alter, place,
construct, maintain, or expand any structure on the site during the
predesignation moratorium without first obtaining a predesignation certificate
of appropriateness in accordance with this subsection.
      (2)   Penalty. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
continued, from the first day the unlawful act was committed until either a
predesignation certificate of appropriateness is obtained or the property is
restored to the condition it was in immediately prior to the violation.
      (3)   Application. An application for a predesignation certificate of
appropriateness must be submitted to the director. The application must include
complete documentation of the proposed work. Within 10 days after submission of
an application, the director shall notify the applicant in writing of any
additional documentation required. No application shall be deemed to be filed
until it is made on forms promulgated by the director and contains all required
supporting plans, designs, photographs, reports, and other exhibits required by
the director. The applicant may consult with the department before and after
the submission of an application.
      (4)   Predesignation certificate of appropriateness review procedure.
Upon receipt of an application for a predesignation certificate of
appropriateness, the director shall determine whether the structure is
contributing or noncontributing. Within 40 days after a complete application is
filed for a noncontributing structure, the landmark commission shall hold a
public hearing and shall approve, deny with prejudice, or deny without
prejudice the application and forward its decision to the director. Within 65
days after a complete application is filed for a contributing structure, the
landmark commission shall hold a public hearing and shall approve, deny with
prejudice, or deny without prejudice the application and forward its decision
to the director. The landmark commission may impose conditions on the
predesignation certificate of appropriateness. The applicant has the burden of
proof to establish the necessary facts to warrant favorable action. The
director shall immediately notify the applicant of the landmark commission’s
action. The landmark commission’s decision must be in writing and, if the
decision is to deny the predesignation certificate of appropriateness, with or
without prejudice, the writing must state the reasons why the predesignation
certificate of appropriateness is denied.
      (5)   Standard for approval. The landmark commission must approve the
application if it determines that:
         (A)   for contributing structures, the application will not adversely
affect the character of the site or a structure on the site; and the proposed
work is consistent with the regulations contained in this section and the
proposed preservation criteria; or
         (B)   for noncontributing structures, the proposed work is compatible
with the historic overlay district.
      (6)   Issuance. If a predesignation certificate of appropriateness has
been approved by the landmark commission or if final action has not been taken
by the landmark commission within 40 days (for a noncontributing structure) or
65 days (for a contributing structure) after a complete application is filed:
         (A)   the director shall issue the predesignation certificate of
appropriateness to the applicant; and
         (B)   if all requirements of the development and building codes are
met and a building permit is required for the proposed work, the building
official shall issue a building permit to the applicant for the proposed work.
      (7)   Appeal. If a predesignation certificate of appropriateness is
denied, the chair of the landmark commission shall verbally inform the
applicant of the right to appeal to the city plan commission. If the applicant
is not present at the hearing, the director shall inform the applicant of the
right to appeal in writing within 10 days after the hearing. The applicant may
appeal the denial to the city plan commission by filing a written notice with
the director within 30 days after the date of the decision of the landmark
commission. The director shall forward to the city plan commission a complete
record of the matter being appealed, including a transcript of the tape of the
hearing before the landmark commission. In considering an appeal, the city plan
commission shall review the landmark commission record and hear and consider
arguments from the appellant and the representative for the landmark
commission. The city plan commission may only hear new testimony or consider
new evidence that was not presented at the time of the hearing before the
landmark commission to determine whether that testimony or evidence was
available at the landmark commission hearing. If the city plan commission
determines that new testimony or evidence exists that was not available at the
landmark commission hearing, the city plan commission shall remand the case
back to the landmark commission in accordance with Subsection (o). In reviewing
the landmark commission decision the city plan commission shall use the
substantial evidence standard in Subsection (o). The city plan commission may
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, modify the decision of the landmark
commission, or remand any case back to the landmark commission for further
proceedings. Appeal to the city plan commission constitutes the final
administrative remedy.
      (8)   Reapplication. If a final decision is reached denying a
predesignation certificate of appropriateness, no further applications may be
considered for the subject matter of the denied predesignation certificate of
appropriateness unless the predesignation certificate of appropriateness has
been denied without prejudice or the landmark commission finds that there are
changed circumstances sufficient to warrant a new hearing. A simple majority
vote by the landmark commission is required to grant the request for a new
hearing.
      (9)   Suspension of work. After the work authorized by the predesignation
certificate of appropriateness is commenced, the applicant must make continuous
progress toward completion of the work, and the applicant shall not suspend or
abandon the work for a period in excess of 180 days. The director may, in
writing, authorize a suspension of the work for a period greater than 180 days
upon written request by the applicant showing circumstances beyond the control
of the applicant.
      (10)   Revocation. The director may, in writing, revoke a predesignation
certificate of appropriateness if:
         (A)   the predesignation certificate of appropriateness was issued on
the basis of incorrect information supplied;
         (B)   the predesignation certificate of appropriateness was issued in
violation of the regulations contained in this section, the proposed
preservation criteria, or the development code or building codes; or
         (C)   the work is not performed in accordance with the predesignation
certificate of appropriateness, the development code, or building codes.
      (11)   Amendments to a predesignation certificate of appropriateness. A
predesignation certificate of appropriateness may be amended by submitting an
application for amendment to the director. The application shall then be
subject to the standard predesignation certificate of appropriateness review
procedure.
      (12)   Effect of approval of the historic overlay district. A
predesignation certificate of appropriateness will be treated as a certificate
of appropriateness after the effective date of the ordinance implementing the
historic overlay district.
   (e)   Additional uses and regulations.
      (1)   A historic overlay district is a zoning overlay which supplements
the primary underlying zoning district classification. A historic overlay
district is subject to the regulations of the underlying zoning district,
except the ordinance establishing the historic overlay district may permit
additional uses and provide additional regulations for the historic overlay
district.
      (2)   If there is a conflict, the regulations contained in the historic
overlay district ordinance control over the regulations of the underlying
zoning district. If there is a conflict, the regulations contained in the
historic overlay district ordinance control over the regulations of this
section.
      (3)   The historic overlay district ordinance may include preservation
criteria for the interior of historic structures if the interior is customarily
open and accessible to the public and the interior has extraordinary
architectural, archaeological, cultural, economic, social, ethnic, political or
historical value. Unless there are specific provisions for the interior, the
preservation criteria in the historic overlay district ordinance and the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic
Properties apply only to the exterior of structures within a historic overlay
district.
      (4)   The landmark commission shall consider the Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic Properties (“the
Standards”), as amended, when reviewing applications for predesignation and
standard certificates of appropriateness. Rehabilitation is defined as the act
or process of making possible a compatible use for a property through repair,
alterations, and additions while preserving those portions or features which
convey its historical, cultural, or architectural values. The Standards are
common sense principles in non-technical language developed to help promote
consistent rehabilitation practices. It should be understood that the Standards
are a series of concepts about maintaining, repairing, and replacing historic
materials, as well as designing new additions or making alterations; as such,
they cannot, in and of themselves, be used to make essential decisions about
which features of a historic property should be saved and which might be
changed. The director shall make the current Standards available for public
inspection at all times. For informational purposes, the Standards published at
Section 68.3 of Title 36 of the Code of Federal Regulations (current through
January 1, 2001) are set forth below:
         (A)   A property will be used as it was historically or be given a new
use that requires minimal changes to its distinctive materials, features,
spaces and spatial relationships.
         (B)   The historic character of a property will be retained and
preserved. The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features,
spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property will be avoided.
         (C)   Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its
time, place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other
historic properties, will not be undertaken.
         (D)   Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance
in their own right will be retained and preserved.
         (E)   Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction
techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property will be
preserved.
         (F)   Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in design, color,
texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features will
be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence.
         (G)   Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to
historic materials will not be used.
         (H)   Archeological resources will be protected and preserved in
place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be
undertaken.
         (I)   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
will not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial relationships that
characterize the property. The new work will be differentiated from the old and
will be compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale and
proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its
environment.
         (J)   New additions and adjacent or related new construction will be
undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
   (f)   Notice of designation.
      (1)   Upon passage of a historic overlay district ordinance, the director
shall send a notice to the owner or owners of property within the historic
overlay district stating the effect of the designation, the regulations
governing the historic overlay district, and the historic preservation
incentives that may be available.
      (2)   Upon passage of a historic overlay district ordinance, the director
shall file a copy of the ordinance in the county deed records to give notice of
the historic regulations. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Section
315.006, the director shall also file in the county deed records a verified
written instrument listing each historic structure or property by the street
address, if available, the legal description of the real property, and the name
of the owner, if available.
      (3)   The director may erect suitable plaques appropriately identifying
each historic overlay district.
   (g)   Certificate of appropriateness.
      (1)   When required. A person shall not alter a site within a historic
overlay district, or alter, place, construct, maintain, or expand any structure
on the site without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness in
accordance with this subsection and the regulations and preservation criteria
contained and in the historic overlay district ordinance.
      (2)   Penalty. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
continued, from the first day the unlawful act was committed until either a
certificate of appropriateness is obtained or the property is restored to the
condition it was in immediately prior to the violation.
      (3)   Application. An application for a certificate of appropriateness
must be submitted to the director. The application must include complete
documentation of the proposed work. Within 10 days after submission of an
application, the director shall notify the applicant in writing of any
additional documentation required. No application shall be deemed to be filed
until it is made on forms promulgated by the director and contains all required
supporting plans, designs, photographs, reports, and other exhibits required by
the director. The applicant may consult with the department before and after
the submission of an application.
      (4)   Director’s determination of procedure. Upon receipt of an
application for a certificate of appropriateness, the director shall determine
whether the application is to be reviewed under the routine work review
procedure or the standard certificate of appropriateness review procedure.
      (5)   Routine maintenance work review procedure.
         (A)   If the director determines that the applicant is seeking a
certificate of appropriateness to authorize only routine maintenance work, he
may review the application to determine whether the proposed work complies with
the regulations contained in this section and the preservation criteria
contained in the historic overlay district ordinance and approve or deny the
application within 20 days after a complete application is filed. The applicant
must supply complete documentation of the work. Upon request, staff will
forward copies of applications to the task force. The director may forward any
application to the landmark commission for review.
         (B) Routine maintenance work includes:
            (i)   the installation of a chimney located on an accessory
building, or on the rear 50 percent of a main building and not part of the
corner side facade;
            (ii)   the installation of an awning located on an accessory
building, or on the rear facade of a main building;
            (iii)   the replacement of a roof of the same or an original
material that does not include a change in color;
            (iv)   the installation of a wood or chain link fence that is not
painted or stained;
            (v)   the installation of gutters and downspouts of a color that
matches or complements the dominant trim or roof color;
            (vi)    the installation of skylights and solar panels;
            (vii)   the installation of storm windows and doors;
            (viii)   the installation of window and door screens;
            (ix)   the application of paint that is the same as the existing or
that is an appropriate dominant, trim, or accent color;
            (x)   the restoration of original architectural elements;
            (xi)   minor repair using the same material and design as the
original;
            (xii)   repair of sidewalks and driveways using the same type and
color of materials;
            (xiii)   the process of cleaning (including but not limited to low-
pressure water blasting and stripping), but excluding sandblasting and high-
pressure water blasting; and
            (xiv)   painting, replacing, duplicating, or stabilizing
deteriorated or damaged architectural features (including but not limited to
roofing, windows, columns, and siding) in order to maintain the structure and
to slow deterioration.
         (C)   The applicant may appeal the director’s decision by submitting
to the director a written request for appeal within 10 days of the decision.
The written request for appeal starts the standard certificate of
appropriateness review procedure by the landmark commission.
      (6)   Standard certificate of appropriate-ness review procedure.
         (A)   If the director determines that the applicant is seeking a
certificate of appropriateness to authorize work that is not routine
maintenance work, or if the director’s decision concerning a certificate of
appropriateness to authorize only routine maintenance work is appealed, the
director shall immediately forward the application to the landmark commission
for review.
         (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the director shall determine whether the structure is
contributing or noncontributing. Within 40 days after a complete application is
filed for a noncontributing structure, the landmark commission shall hold a
public hearing and shall approve, deny with prejudice, or deny without
prejudice the application and forward its decision to the director. Within 65
days after a complete application is filed for a contributing structure, the
landmark commission shall hold a public hearing and shall approve, deny with
prejudice, or deny without prejudice the certificate of appropriateness and
forward its decision to the director. The landmark commission may approve a
certificate of appropriateness for work that does not strictly comply with the
preservation criteria upon a finding that the proposed work is historically
accurate and is consistent with the spirit and intent of the preservation
criteria and that the proposed work will not adversely affect the historic
character of the property or the integrity of the historic overlay district.
The landmark commission may impose conditions on the certificate of
appropriateness. The applicant has the burden of proof to establish the
necessary facts to warrant favorable action. The director shall immediately
notify the applicant of the landmark commission’s action. The landmark
commission’s decision must be in writing and, if the decision is to deny the
certificate of appropriateness, with or without prejudice, the writing must
state the reasons why the certificate of appropriateness is denied.
         (C)   Standard for approval. The landmark commission must grant the
application if it determines that:
            (i)   for contributing structures:
               (aa)   the proposed work is consistent with the regulations
contained in this section and the preservation criteria contained in the
historic overlay district ordinance;
               (bb)   the proposed work will not have an adverse effect on the
architectural features of the structure;
               (cc)   the proposed work will not have an adverse effect on the
historic overlay district; and
               (dd)   the proposed work will not have an adverse effect on the
future preservation, maintenance and use of the structure or the historic
overlay district.
            (ii)   for noncontributing structures, the proposed work is
compatible with the historic overlay district.
         (D)    Issuance. If a certificate of appropriateness has been approved
by the landmark commission or if final action has not been taken by the
landmark commission within 40 days (for a noncontributing structure) or 65 days
(for a contributing structure) after a complete application is filed:
            (i)   the director shall issue the certificate of appropriateness
to the applicant; and
            (ii)   if all requirements of the development and building codes
are met and a building permit is required for the proposed work, the building
official shall issue a building permit to the applicant for the proposed work.
         (E)   Appeal. If a certificate of appropriateness is denied, the chair
of the landmark commission shall verbally inform the applicant of the right to
appeal to the city plan commission. If the applicant is not present at the
hearing, the director shall inform the applicant of the right to appeal in
writing within 10 days after the hearing. The applicant may appeal the denial
to the city plan commission by filing a written notice with the director within
30 days after the date of the decision of the landmark commission. The director
shall forward to the city plan commission a complete record of the matter being
appealed, including a transcript of the tape of the hearing before the landmark
commission. In considering an appeal, the city plan commission shall review the
landmark commission record and hear and consider arguments from the appellant
and the representative for the landmark commission. The city plan commission
may only hear new testimony or consider new evidence that was not presented at
the time of the hearing before the landmark commission to determine whether
that testimony or evidence was available at the landmark commission hearing. If
the city plan commission determines that new testimony or evidence exists that
was not available at the landmark commission hearing, the city plan commission
shall remand the case back to the landmark commission in accordance with
Subsection (o). In reviewing the landmark commission decision the city plan
commission shall use the substantial evidence standard in Subsection (o). The
city plan commission may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, modify the
decision of the landmark commission, or remand any case back to the landmark
commission for further proceedings. Appeal to the city plan commission
constitutes the final administrative remedy.
         (F)   Reapplication. If a final decision is reached denying a
certificate of appropriateness, no further applications may be considered for
the subject matter of the denied certificate of appropriateness for one year
from the date of the final decision unless:
            (i)   the certificate of appropriateness has been denied without
prejudice; or
            (ii)   the landmark commission waives the time limitation because
the landmark commission finds that there are changed circumstances sufficient
to warrant a new hearing. A simple majority vote by the landmark commission is
required to grant the request for waiver of the time limitation.
         (G)   Suspension of work. After the work authorized by the certificate
of appropriateness is commenced, the applicant must make continuous progress
toward completion of the work, and the applicant shall not suspend or abandon
the work for a period in excess of 180 days. The director may, in writing,
authorize a suspension of the work for a period greater than 180 days upon
written request by the applicant showing circumstances beyond the control of
the applicant.
         (H)   Revocation. The director may, in writing, revoke a certificate
of appropriateness if:
            (i)   the certificate of appropriateness was issued on the basis of
incorrect information supplied;
            (ii)   the certificate of appropriateness was issued in violation
of the regulations contained in this section, the preservation criteria
contained in the historic overlay district ordinance, the development code, or
building codes; or
            (iii)   the work is not performed in accordance with the
certificate of appropriateness, the development code, or building codes.
         (I)   Amendments to a certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of
appropriateness may be amended by submitting an application for amendment to
the director. The application shall then be subject to the standard certificate
of appropriateness review procedure.
      (8)   Emergency procedure. If a structure on a property subject to the
predesignation moratorium or a structure in a historic overlay district is
damaged and the building official determines that the structure is a public
safety hazard or will suffer additional damage without immediate repair, the
building official may allow the property owner to temporarily protect the
structure. In such a case, the property owner shall apply for a predesignation
certificate of appropriateness, certificate of appropriateness, or certificate
for demolition or removal within 10 days of the occurrence which caused the
damage. The protection authorized under this subsection must not permanently
alter the architectural features of the structure.
   (h)   Certificate for demolition or removal.
      (1)   Findings and purpose. Demolition or removal of a historic structure
constitutes an irreplaceable loss to the quality and character of the city.
Therefore, demolition or removal of historic structures should be allowed only
for the reasons described in this subsection.
      (2)   Application. A property owner seeking demolition or removal of a
structure on a property subject to the predesignation moratorium or a structure
in a historic overlay district must submit a complete application for a
certificate for demolition or removal to the landmark commission. Within 10
days after submission of an application, the director shall notify the
applicant in writing of any additional documentation required. The application
must be accompanied by the following documentation before it will be considered
complete:
         (A)   An affidavit in which the owner swears or affirms that all
information submitted in the application is true and correct.
         (B)   An indication that the demolition or removal is sought for one
or more of the following reasons:
            (i)   To replace the structure with a new structure that is more
appropriate and compatible with the historic overlay district.
            (ii)   No economically viable use of the property exists.
            (iii)   The structure poses an imminent threat to public health or
safety.
            (iv)   The structure is non-contributing to the historic overlay
district because it is newer than the period of historic significance.
         (C)   For an application to replace the structure with a new structure
that is more appropriate and compatible with the historic overlay district:
            (i)   Records depicting the original construction of the structure,
including drawings, pictures, or written descriptions.
            (ii)   Records depicting the current condition of the structure,
including drawings, pictures, or written descriptions.
            (iii)   Any conditions proposed to be placed voluntarily on the new
structure that would mitigate the loss of the structure.
            (iv)   Complete architectural drawings of the new structure.
            (v)   A guarantee agreement between the owner and the city that
demonstrates the owner’s intent and financial ability to construct the new
structure. The guarantee agreement must:
               (aa)   contain a covenant to construct the proposed structure by
a specific date in accordance with architectural drawings approved by the city
through the predesignation certificate of appropriateness process or the
certificate of appropriateness process;
               (bb)   require the owner or construction contractor to post a
performance and payment bond, letter of credit, escrow agreement, cash deposit,
or other arrangement acceptable to the director to ensure construction of the
new structure; and
               (cc)   be approved as to form by the city attorney.
         (D)   For an application of no economically viable use of the
property:
            (i)   The past and current uses of the structure and property.
            (ii)   The name of the owner.
            (iii)   If the owner is a legal entity, the type of entity and
states in which it is registered.
            (iv)   The date and price of purchase or other acquisition of the
structure and property, and the party from whom acquired, and the owner’s
current basis in the property.
            (v)   The relationship, if any, between the owner and the party
from whom the structure and property were acquired. (If one or both parties to
the transaction were legal entities, any relationships between the officers and
the board of directors of the entities must be specified.)
            (vi)   The assessed value of the structure and property according
to the two most recent tax assessments.
            (vii)   The amount of real estate taxes on the structure and
property for the previous two years.
            (viii)   The current fair market value of the structure and
property as determined by an independent licensed appraiser.
            (ix)   All appraisals obtained by the owner and prospective
purchasers within the previous two years in connection with the potential or
actual purchase, financing, or ownership of the structure and property.
            (x)   All listings of the structure and property for sale or rent
within the previous two years, prices asked, and offers received.
            (xi)   A profit and loss statement for the property and structure
containing the annual gross income for the previous two years; itemized
expenses (including operating and maintenance costs) for the previous two
years, including proof that adequate and competent management procedures were
followed; the annual cash flow for the previous two years; and proof that the
owner has made reasonable efforts to obtain a reasonable rate of return on the
owner’s investment and labor.
            (xii)   A mortgage history of the property during the previous five
years, including the principal balances and interest rates on the mortgages and
the annual debt services on the structure and property.
            (xiii)   All capital expenditures during the current ownership.
            (xiv)   Records depicting the current conditions of the structure
and property, including drawings, pictures, or written descriptions.
            (xv)   A study of restoration of the structure or property,
performed by a licensed architect, engineer or financial analyst, analyzing the
physical feasibility (including architectural and engineering analyses) and
financial feasibility (including pro forma profit and loss statements for a ten
year period, taking into consideration redevelopment options and all incentives
available) of adaptive use of restoration of the structure and property.
            (xvi)   Any consideration given by the owner to profitable adaptive
uses for the structure and property.
            (xvii)   Construction plans for any proposed development or
adaptive reuse, including site plans, floor plans, and elevations.
            (xviii)   Any conditions proposed to be placed voluntarily on new
development that would mitigate the loss of the structure.
            (xix)   Any other evidence that shows that the affirmative
obligation to maintain the structure or property makes it impossible to realize
a reasonable rate of return.
         (E)   For an application to demolish or remove a structure that poses
an imminent threat to public health or safety:
            (i)   Records depicting the current condition of the structure,
including drawings, pictures, or written descriptions.
            (ii)   A study regarding the nature, imminence, and severity of the
threat, as performed by a licensed architect or engineer.
            (iii)   A study regarding both the cost of restoration of the
structure and the feasibility (including architectural and engineering
analyses) of restoration of the structure, as performed by a licensed architect
or engineer.
         (F)   For an application to demolish or remove a structure that is
noncontributing to the historic overlay district because the structure is newer
than the period of historic significance:
            (i)   Documentation that the structure is noncontributing to the
historic overlay district.
            (ii)   Documentation of the age of the structure.
            (iii)   A statement of the purpose of the demolition.
         (G)   Any other evidence the property owner wishes to submit in
support of the application.
         (H)   Any other evidence requested by the landmark commission or the
historic preservation officer.
      (3)   Certificate of demolition or removal review procedure.
         (A)   Economic review panel. For an application of no economically
viable use of the property, the landmark commission shall cause to be
established an ad hoc three-person economic review panel. The economic review
panel must be comprised of three independent experts knowledgeable in the
economics of real estate, renovation, and redevelopment. “Independent” as used
in this subparagraph means that the expert has no financial interest in the
property, its renovation, or redevelopment; is not an employee of the property
owner; is not a city employee; is not a member of the landmark commission; and
is not compensated for serving on the economic review panel. The economic
review panel must consist of one person selected by the landmark commission,
one person selected by the property owner, and one person selected by the first
two appointees. If the first two appointees cannot agree on a third appointee
within 30 days after submission of the documentation supporting the
application, the third appointee will be selected by the director within 5
days. Within 35 days after submission of the documentation supporting the
application, all appointments to the economic review panel shall be made.
Within 35 days after appointment, the economic review panel shall review the
submitted documentation; hold a public hearing; consider all options for
renovation, adaptive reuse, and redevelopment; and forward a written
recommendation to the landmark commission. The historic preservation officer
shall provide administrative support to the economic review panel. The economic
review panel’s recommendation must be based on the same standard for approval
to be used by the landmark commission. An application of no economically viable
use will not be considered complete until the economic review panel has made
its recommendation to the landmark commission. If the economic review panel is
unable to reach a consensus, the report will indicate the majority and minority
recommendations.
         (B)   Within 65 days after submission of a complete application, the
landmark commission shall hold a public hearing and shall approve or deny the
application. If the landmark commission does not make a final decision within
that time, the building official shall issue a permit to allow the requested
demolition or removal. The property owner has the burden of proof to establish
by clear and convincing evidence the necessary facts to warrant favorable
action by the landmark commission.
      (4)   Standard for approval. The landmark commission shall deny the
application unless it makes the following findings:
         (A)   The landmark commission must deny an application to replace a
structure with a new structure unless it finds that:
            (i)   the new structure is more appropriate and compatible with the
historic overlay district than the structure to be demolished or removed; and
            (ii)   the owner has the financial ability and intent to build the
new structure. The landmark commission must first approve the predesignation
certificate of appropriateness or certificate of appropriateness for the
proposed new structure and the guarantee agreement to construct the new
structure before it may consider the application to demolish or remove.
         (B)   The landmark commission must deny an application of no
economically viable use of the property unless it finds that:
            (i)   the structure is incapable of earning a reasonable economic
return unless the demolition or removal is allowed (a reasonable economic
return does not have to be the most profitable return possible);
            (ii)   the structure cannot be adapted for any other use, whether
by the owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable economic
return; and
            (iii)   the owner has failed during the last two years to find a
developer, financier, purchaser, or tenant that would enable the owner to
realize a reasonable economic return, despite having made substantial ongoing
efforts to do so.
         (C)   The landmark commission must deny an application to demolish or
remove a structure that poses an imminent threat to public health or safety
unless it finds that:
            (i)   the structure constitutes a documented major and imminent
threat to public health and safety;
            (ii)   the demolition or removal is required to alleviate the
threat to public health and safety; and
            (iii)   there is no reasonable way, other than demolition or
removal, to eliminate the threat in a timely manner.
         (D)   The landmark commission must deny an application to demolish or
remove a structure that is noncontributing to the historic overlay district
because it is newer than the period of historic significance unless it finds
that:
            (i)   the structure is non-contributing to the historic overlay
district;
            (ii)   the structure is newer than the period of historic
significance for the historic overlay district; and
            (iii)   demolition of the structure will not adversely affect the
historic character of the property or the integrity of the historic overlay
district.
      (5)   Appeal. The chair of the landmark commission shall give verbal
notice of the right to appeal at the time a decision on the application is
made. If the applicant is not present at the hearing, the director shall inform
the applicant of the right to appeal in writing within 10 days after the
hearing. Any interested person may appeal the decision of the landmark
commission to the city plan commission by filing a written notice with the
director within 30 days after the date of the decision of the landmark
commission. If no appeal is made of a decision to approve the certificate for
demolition or removal within the 30-day period, the building official shall
issue the permit to allow demolition or removal. If an appeal is filed, the
city plan commission shall hear and decide the appeal within 65 days after the
date of its filing. The director shall forward to the city plan commission a
complete record of the matter being appealed, including a transcript of the
tape of the hearing before the landmark commission. In considering an appeal,
the city plan commission shall review the landmark commission record and hear
and consider arguments from the appellant and the representative for the
landmark commission. The city plan commission may only hear new testimony or
consider new evidence that was not presented at the time of the hearing before
the landmark commission to determine whether that testimony or evidence was
available at the landmark commission hearing. If the city plan commission
determines that new testimony or evidence exists that was not available at the
landmark commission hearing, the city plan commission shall remand the case
back to the landmark commission in accordance with Subsection (o). In reviewing
the landmark commission decision the city plan commission shall use the
substantial evidence standard in Subsection (o). The city plan commission may
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, modify the decision of the landmark
commission, or remand any case back to the landmark commission for further
proceedings. Appeal to the city plan commission constitutes the final
administrative remedy.
      (6)   Reapplication. If a final decision is reached denying a certificate
for demolition or removal, no further applications may be considered for the
subject matter of the denied certificate for demolition or removal for one year
from the date of the final decision unless:
         (A)   the certificate for demolition or removal has been denied
without prejudice; or
         (B)   the landmark commission waives the time limitation because the
landmark commission finds that there are changed circumstances sufficient to
warrant a new hearing. A simple majority vote by the landmark commission is
required to grant the request for waiver of the time limitation.
      (7)   Expiration. A certificate for demolition or removal expires if the
work authorized by the certificate for demolition or removal is not commenced
within 180 days from the date of the certificate for demolition or removal. The
director may extend the time for commencement of work upon written request by
the applicant showing circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. If the
certificate for demolition or removal expires, a new certificate for demolition
or removal must first be obtained before the work can be commenced.
   (i)   Reserved.
 
   (j)   Summary abatement by fire marshal. If the fire marshal finds that
conditions on a structure subject to a predesignation moratorium or in a
historic overlay district are hazardous to life or property and present a clear
and present danger, the fire marshal may summarily abate those conditions
without a predesignation certificate of appropriateness, certificate of
appropriateness, or certificate for demolition.
   (k)   Demolition by neglect.
      (1)   Definition. Demolition by neglect is neglect in the maintenance of
any structure on property subject to the predesignation moratorium or in a
historic overlay district that results in deterioration of the structure and
threatens the preservation of the structure.
      (2)   Demolition by neglect prohibited. No person shall allow a structure
to deteriorate through demolition by neglect. All structures on properties
subject to the predesignation moratorium and in historic overlay districts must
be preserved against deterioration and kept free from structural defects. The
property owner or the property owner’s agent with control over the structure,
in keeping with the city’s minimum housing standards and building codes, must
repair the structure if it is found to have any of the following defects:
         (A)   Parts which are improperly or inadequately attached so that they
may fall and injure persons or property.
         (B)   A deteriorated or inadequate foundation.
         (C)   Defective or deteriorated floor supports or floor supports that
are insufficient to carry the loads imposed.
         (D)   Walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split, lean,
list, or buckle due to defect or deterioration, or are insufficient to carry
the loads imposed.
         (E)   Ceilings, roofs, ceiling or roof supports, or other horizontal
members which sag, split, or buckle due to defect or deterioration, or are
insufficient to support the loads imposed.
         (F)   Fireplaces and chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to
defect or deterioration, or are of insufficient size or strength to carry the
loads imposed.
         (G)   Deteriorated, crumbling, or loose exterior stucco or mortar.
         (H)   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls,
roofs, foundations, or floors, including broken or open windows and doors.
         (I)   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall
coverings, including lack of paint or other protective covering.
         (J)   Any fault, defect, or condition in the structure which renders
it structurally unsafe or not properly watertight.
         (K)   Deterioration of any exterior feature so as to create a
hazardous condition which could make demolition necessary for the public
safety.
         (L)   Deterioration or removal of any unique architectural feature
which would detract from the original architectural style.
      (3)   Demolition by neglect procedure.
         (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the demolition by neglect procedure is
to allow the landmark commission to work with the property owner to encourage
maintenance and stabilization of the structure and identify resources available
before any enforcement action is taken.
         (B)   Request for investigation. Any interested party may request that
the historic preservation officer investigate whether a property is being
demolished by neglect.
         (C)   First meeting with the property owner. Upon receipt of a
request, the historic preservation officer shall meet with the property owner
or the property owner’s agent with control of the structure to inspect the
structure and discuss the resources available for financing any necessary
repairs. After the meeting, the historic preservation officer shall prepare a
report for the landmark commission on the condition of the structure, the
repairs needed to maintain and stabilize the structure, any resources available
for financing the repairs, and the amount of time needed to complete the
repairs.
         (D)   Certification and notice. After review of the report, the
landmark commission may vote to certify the property as a demolition by neglect
case. If the landmark commission certifies the structure as a demolition by
neglect case, the landmark commission shall notify the property owner or the
property owner’s agent with control over the structure of the repairs that must
be made. The notice must require that repairs be started within 30 days and set
a deadline for completion of the repairs. The notice must be sent by certified
mail.
         (E)   Second meeting with the property owner. The historic
preservation officer shall meet with the property owner or the property owner’s
agent with control over the structure within 30 days after the notice was sent
to inspect any repairs completed and assist the property owner in obtaining any
resources available for financing the repairs.
         (F)   Referral for enforcement. If the property owner or the property
owner’s agent with control over the structure fails to start repairs by the
deadline set in the notice, fails to make continuous progress toward
completion, or fails to complete repairs by the deadline set in the notice, the
landmark commission may refer the demolition by neglect case to the code
compliance department or the city attorney for appropriate enforcement action
to prevent demolition by neglect.
   (l)   Historic preservation incentives. Consult
Article XI, “Development Incentives,” for regulations concerning the tax
exemptions, conservation easements, and transfer of development rights
available to structures in historic overlay districts.
   (m)   Historic preservation fund.
      (1)   The department, in cooperation with community organizations, shall
develop appropriate funding structures and shall administer the historic
preservation fund.
      (2)   The historic preservation fund is composed of the following funds:
         (A)   Outside funding (other than city general funds or capital
funds), such as grants and donations, made to the city for the purpose of
historic preservation and funding partnerships with community organizations.
         (B)   Damages recovered pursuant to Texas Local Government Code
Section 315.006 from persons who illegally demolish or adversely affect
historic structures.
      (3)   The outside funding may be used for financing the following
activities:
         (A)   Necessary repairs in demolition by neglect cases.
         (B)   Full or partial restoration of low-income residential and
nonresidential structures.
         (C)   Full or partial restoration of publicly owned historic
structures.
         (D)   Acquisition of historic structures, places, or areas through
gift or purchase.
         (E)   Public education of the benefits of historic preservation or the
regulations governing historic overlay districts.
         (F)   Identification and cataloging of structures, places, areas, and
districts of historical, cultural, or architectural value along with factual
verification of their significance.
      (4)   Damages recovered pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Section
315.006 must be used only for the following purposes:
         (A)   Construction, using as many of the original materials as
possible, of a structure that is a reasonable facsimile of a demolished
historic structure.
         (B)   Restoration, using as many of the original materials as
possible, of the historic structure.
         (C)   Restoration of another historic structure.
   (n)   Enforcement and criminal penalties.
      (1)   A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this section
if:
         (A)   the person owns part or all of the property and knowingly allows
the violation to exist;
         (B)    the person is the agent of the property owner or is an
individual employed by the agent or property owner; is in control of the
property; knowingly allows the violation to exist; and fails to provide the
property owner’s name, street address, and telephone number to code enforcement
officials;
         (C)   the person is the agent of the property owner or is an
individual employed by the agent or property owner, knowingly allows the
violation to exist, and the citation relates to the construction or development
of the property; or
         (D)   the person knowingly commits the violation or assists in the
commission of the violation.
      (2)   Any person who adversely affects or demolishes a structure on
property subject to the predesignation moratorium or in a historic overlay
district in violation of this section is liable pursuant to Texas Local
Government Code Section 315.006 for damages to restore or replicate, using as
many of the original materials as possible, the structure to its appearance and
setting prior to the violation. No predesignation certificates of
appropriateness, certificates of appropriateness, or building permits will be
issued for construction on the site except to restore or replicate the
structure. When these restrictions become applicable to a site, the director
shall cause to be filed a verified notice in the county deed records and these
restrictions shall be binding on future owners of the property. These
restrictions are in addition to any fines imposed.
      (3)   Prosecution in municipal court for an offense under this section
does not prevent the use of other enforcement remedies or procedures provided
by other city ordinances or state or federal laws applicable to the person
charged with or the conduct involved in the offense.
   (o)   Substantial evidence standard of review for appeals. The city plan
commission shall give deference to the landmark commission decision and may not
substitute its judgment for the landmark commission’s judgment.
      (1)   The city plan commission shall remand the matter back to the
landmark commission if it determines that there is new testimony or evidence
that was not available at the landmark commission hearing.
      (2)   The city plan commission shall affirm the landmark commission
decision unless it finds that it:
         (A)   violates a statutory or ordinance provision;
         (B)   exceeds the landmark commission’s authority; or
         (C)   was not reasonably supported by substantial evidence considering
the evidence in the record.
   (p)   Judicial review of decisions. The final decision of the city planning
commission regarding an appeal of a landmark commission decision may be
appealed to a state district court. The appeal to the state district court must
be filed within 30 days after the decision of the city planning commission. If
no appeal is made to the state district court within the 30-day period, then
the decision of the city plan commission is final and unappealable. An appeal
to the state district court is limited to a hearing under the substantial
evidence rule. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19499; 20585; 21244; 21403; 21513; 21874;
22018; 23506; 23898; 24163; 24542; 24544; 25047; 26286; 27430; 27922; 28073;
28553; 29478; 31433; 32669)
SEC. 51A-4.502.   INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   The institutional overlay district promotes cultural, educational,
and medical institutions, and enhances their benefit to the community while
protecting adjacent property.
      (2)   The following main uses may be permitted in an institutional
overlay district:
            --   Ambulance service.
            --   Ambulatory surgical center.
            --   Cemetery or mausoleum.
            --   Church.
            --   College dormitory, fraternity or sorority house.
            --   College, university, or seminary.
            --   Community service center.
            --   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions.
            --   Convent or monastery.
            --   Day care center.
            --   Foster home.
            --   Halfway house.
            --   Hospital.
            --   Library, art gallery, or museum.
            --   Medical clinic.
            --   Medical or scientific laboratory.
            --   Overnight general purpose shelter.
            --   Post office.
            --   Public or private school.
      (3)   All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district are allowed in
an institutional overlay district.
      (4)   The zoning regulations of the underlying zoning district are
applicable to an institutional overlay district unless otherwise provided in
this section.
   (b)   Special yard, lot, and space regulations.
      (1)   In an institutional overlay district, additional setbacks, if any,
for institutional buildings greater than 36 feet in height may be established
by the site plan process.
      (2)   Buildings in an institutional overlay district must comply with
applicable height regulations.
      (3)   If any portion of a structure is over 26 feet in height, that
portion may not be located above a residential proximity slope originating in
an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, or TH(A) district. Exception: Structures listed in
Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) may project through the slope to a height not to exceed the
maximum structure height, or 12 feet above the slope, whichever is less.
   (c)   Special parking regulations.
      (1)   Required off-street parking for institutional uses may be located
anywhere within the boundaries of the institutional overlay district or outside
the district if the parking meets the requirements of Division
51A-4.320.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   Reserved.
   (d)   Procedures for establishing an institutional overlay district.
      (1)   The applicant for an institutional overlay district shall comply
with the zoning amendment procedure for a change in the zoning district
classification.
      (2)   A site plan must be submitted after the institutional district is
established and before a building permit or certificate of occupancy is issued.
   (e)   Site plan process.
      (1)   The building official shall not issue a building permit for
additions to existing structures or for new structures except in accordance
with an approved site plan and all applicable regulations.
      (2)   Preapplication conference. An applicant for site plan approval
shall request, by letter, a preapplication conference with the director. The
letter must contain a brief, general description of the nature, location,
extent of the proposed institutional use and the list of any professional
consultants advising the applicant concerning the proposed site plan.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a request, the director shall schedule a
preapplication conference to discuss the proposed site plan. Based on the
information provided by the applicant, the director shall:
         (A)   provide initial comments concerning the merits of the proposed
development;
         (B)   state what information must be provided in the site plan
application for a complete review of the proposed development; and
         (C)   provide any other information necessary to aid the applicant in
the preparation of the site plan application.
      (4)   Application for site plan approval. An applicant for site plan
approval shall submit to the director:
         (A)   a site plan application in the form prescribed by the director
that contains at least the following information:
            (i)   The applicant’s name and address and his ownership interest
in the property proposed for development.
            (ii)   The signatures of all owners of the property proposed for
development.
            (iii)   The size of the parcel proposed for development, its street
address, and a legal description of the property.
            (iv)   A statement setting forth the current uses of the property
and plans for future development;
         (B)   ten copies of the site plan and one 8- 1/2 x 11 inch clear
transparency of the site plan;
         (C)   copies of legal instruments guaranteeing the availability of
remote off-street parking and the mode of transportation to serve that parking,
and copies of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect to
the institutional uses; and
         (D)   a site plan fee.
      (5)   Site plan. The applicant shall provide a site plan drawn to a scale
not less than 100 feet to the inch or to a scale specified by the director, on
a sheet of paper no larger than two feet by three feet. The site plan must
depict the following for a complete review of the proposed development:
         (A)   The boundary lines and dimensions of the property, existing
subdivision lots, available utilities, easements, roadways, rail lines, and
public rights-of-way that cross or are adjacent to the property.
         (B)   Topography of the property proposed for development in contours
of not less than five feet, together with any proposed grade elevations, if
different from existing elevations.
         (C)   Flood plains, water courses, marshes, drainage areas, and other
significant environmental features including, but not limited to, rock
outcroppings and major tree groupings.
         (D)   The location and use of all existing and proposed buildings or
structures.
         (E)   Total number and location of off-street parking and loading
spaces.
         (F)   All points of vehicular ingress and egress and circulation
within the property.
         (G)   Setbacks, lot coverage, and when relevant, the relationship of
the setbacks provided and the height of any existing or proposed building or
structure.
         (H)   The location, size, and arrangement of all outdoor signs and
lighting.
         (I)   The type, location, and quantity of all plant material used for
landscaping, and the type, location, and height of fences or screening and the
plantings around them.
         (J)   Location, designation, and total area of all usable open space
and any proposed improvements to the open space.
         (K)   Land uses and zoning districts contiguous to the property.
         (L)   Any other information the director determines necessary for a
complete review of the proposed development.
      (6)   Departmental review. The director shall forward the information to
the department of planning and development, transportation and public works,
sanitation services, water utilities, and code compliance, and to any other
appropriate departments. Within 30 days following receipt of a completed
application for site plan approval, or for a longer time agreed to by the
applicant, the departments shall review the proposed development and forward
their comments, if any, in writing to the director. Upon conclusion of the
departmental review, the director shall forward to the commission the
application for site plan approval and the written information provided by the
departments.
         (A)   The directors of the departments of transportation and public
works and water utilities shall prepare a written statement evaluating the
impact of the proposed institutional uses on public facilities including
sewers, water utilities, and streets.
         (B)   The director of water utilities shall prepare a written
statement describing any known drainage or topography problems.
      (7)   Conferences and modifications during review. If the application for
site plan approval meets one or more of the standards for site plan
disapproval, and the director and the applicant meet to discuss the application
for site plan approval, the director may accept an amended application for site
plan approval.
      (8)   City plan commission review. The commission shall review the
application for site plan approval and render its decision within 21 days from
the date of referral by the director, or for a longer time that has been agreed
to by the applicant. The commission shall review the application for site plan
approval and may approve the application, disapprove the application, or
approve the application subject to specified conditions and modifications that
are permanently marked on the site plan or made a part of the site plan
conditions.
      (9)   Standards for site plan disapproval. The commission may disapprove
an application for site plan approval upon findings of fact based on one or
more of the following standards:
         (A)   The application for site plan approval is incomplete or contains
violations of this chapter or other applicable regulations, and the applicant,
after written request from the director, has failed to supply the additional
information or correct the violation.
         (B)   The proposed site plan interferes with or is in conflict with a
right-of-way, easement, or any approved plan such as a thoroughfare plan or
transit plan.
         (C)   The proposed site plan destroys, damages, or interferes with
significant natural, topographic, or physical features of the site that are
determined significant by the commission.
         (D)   The proposed site plan is incompatible with adjacent land use
and detrimental to the enjoyment of surrounding property in that the proposed
development would create noise above the ambient level, substantially increase
traffic, or fail to provide adequate buffers.
         (E)   The points of egress and ingress or the internal circulation of
traffic within the site creates a traffic hazard, either on or off the site.
         (F)   The proposed site plan creates drainage or erosion problems to
the site or adjacent property.
      (10)   City council appeal. An applicant may appeal to city council the
decision of the commission concerning an application for site plan approval by
filing a written request with the director within ten days of the action of the
commission.
      (11)   Amendment. A site plan may be amended by following the same
procedure as required in this section. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20920; 21044;
22026; 23694; 25047; 28073; 28424; 30239; 30654; 30994; 32002; 32864)
SEC. 51A-4.503.   D AND D-1 LIQUOR CONTROL OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
   General provisions. Note: These provisions apply only to D and D-1 Liquor
Control Overlay Districts enacted before June 11, 1987.
      (1)   A D or D-1 liquor control overlay district is designated as “dry”
by the suffix “D” or “D-1” on the zoning district map.
      (2)   In a “D” liquor control overlay district, a person shall not sell
or serve alcoholic beverages or setups for alcoholic beverages for consumption
on or off the premises.
      (3)   In a “D-1” liquor control overlay district, a person shall not sell
or serve alcoholic beverages, or setups for alcoholic beverages, for
consumption on or off the premises, unless the sale or service is part of the
operation of a use for which a specific use permit has been granted by the city
council.
      (4)   It is a defense to prosecution under Paragraphs (2) and (3) of this
section that the alcoholic beverage or setup for alcoholic beverage is served,
but not sold, at a private residence for consumption at the residence. For
purposes of this subsection, a private residence must be a permitted
residential or lodging use listed in the use regulations of this article. If
the use is a lodging use, the term “private residence” means the guest room
only. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 21735)
SEC. 51A-4.504.   DEMOLITION DELAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose. A demolition delay overlay district is intended to encourage
the preservation of historically significant buildings that are not located in
a historic overlay district by helping the property owner identify alternatives
to demolition.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   The city plan commission or city council may initiate a demolition
delay overlay district following the procedure in Section 51A-4.701, "Zoning
Amendments."
      (2)   This section applies to any building located in a demolition delay
overlay district that is at least 50 years old and meets one of the following
criteria:
         (A)   the building is located in a National Register Historic District
or is individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places;
         (B)   the building is designated as a Recorded Texas Historic
Landmark;
         (C)   the building is designated as a State Antiquities Landmark;
         (D)   the building is designated as a National Historic Landmark;
         (E)   the building is listed as individually significant or
contributing to a potential historic district in any historic resource surveys
and resurveys conducted according to the Secretary of the Interior National
Register of Historic Places Bulletin “Guidelines for Local Surveys,” or the
Texas Historic Commission’s Historic Resources Survey Manual.
   (c)   Demolition delay process.
      (1)   Phase I.
         (A)   Upon receipt of a complete application to demolish a building
that is in a demolition delay overlay district, the building official shall
refer the application to the historic preservation officer.
         (B)   Within 10 days after the historic preservation officer receives
an application to demolish a building within a demolition delay overlay
district, the historic preservation officer shall determine whether the
building meets the requirements in Subsection (b)(2).
         (C)   If the historic preservation officer determines that a building
within a demolition delay overlay district does not meet the criteria in
Subsection (b)(2) and the application meets the requirements for issuing a
demolition permit in the Dallas Building Code, the building official shall
grant the application to demolish a building.
      (2)   Phase II.
         (A)   Within 45 days after determining whether a building within a
demolition delay overlay district meets the requirements in Subsection (b)(2),
the historic preservation officer shall schedule a meeting with the building's
owner and appropriate city officials to discuss alternatives to demolition,
such as historic designation under Section 51A-4.501; historic preservation tax
exemptions and economic development incentives for historic properties under
Article XI; loans or grants from public or private resources; acquisition of
the building; and variances.
         (B)   The historic preservation officer shall post notice of the
meeting with the building's owner on the city's website.
         (C)    Within two working days after the historic preservation officer
determines the building within the demolition delay overlay district meets the
requirements in Subsection (b)(2), the historic preservation officer shall post
a sign on the property to notify the public that an application has been made
for a demolition permit within a demolition delay overlay district. The sign
must include a phone number where citizens can call for additional information.
         (D)   The meeting may include organizations that foster historic
preservation, urban planning, urban design, development, and improve ment in
demolition delay overlay districts.
         (E)   If at the end of the 45-day period the application meets the
requirements of the Dallas Building Code and the building owner declines to
enter into an agreement as outlined in Paragraph (3), the building official
shall grant the application to demolish a building within a demolition delay
overlay district.
      (3)   Phase III. The property owner may enter into an agreement with the
city to delay granting a demolition permit for an additional time period to
continue exploration of alternatives to demolition. (Ord. Nos. 29893; 33113)
SEC. 51A-4.505.   CONSERVATION DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   AREA means the land within the boundaries of a proposed CD that may
include subdistricts, land within the boundaries proposed to be added to an
established CD that may include subdistricts, or land within the boundaries of
a proposed subdistrict.
      (2)   BLOCKFACE means the linear distance of lots along one side of a
street between the two nearest intersecting streets. If a street dead ends, the
terminus of the dead end will be treated as an intersecting street.
      (3)   CD means conservation district.
      (4)   CD ORDINANCE means the ordinance establishing or amending a
particular conservation district.
      (5)   DEMOLITION means the intentional destruction of an entire building.
      (6)   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMITTEE means the property owners of at least 10
properties within a proposed CD, proposed area to be added to an established
CD, or an established CD; or, if less than 10 properties, 50 percent of the
property owners within the proposed CD, proposed area to be added to an
established CD, or an established CD.
      (7)   PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES means the physical features of buildings and
structures, including the architectural style; characteristics of a period; and
method of construction, and may also include those physical characteristics of
an area that help define or make an area unique, including scale; massing;
spatial relationship between buildings; lot layouts; setbacks; street layouts;
streetscape characteristics or other natural features; or land-use patterns.
      (8)   STABLE means that the area is expected to remain substantially the
same over the next 20 years with continued maintenance of the property. While
some changes in structures, land uses, and densities may occur, all such
changes are expected to be compatible with surrounding development.
      (9)   STABILIZING means that the area is expected to become stable over
the next 20-year period through continued reinvestment, maintenance, or
remodeling.
   (b)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   State law authorizes the city of Dallas to regulate the
construction, alteration, reconstruction, or razing of buildings and other
structures in "designated places and areas of historic, cultural, or
architectural importance and significance."
      (2)   Conservation districts are intended to provide a means of
conserving an area's distinctive character by protecting or enhancing its
physical attributes.
      (3)   Conservation districts are distinguished from historic overlay
districts, which preserve historic residential or commercial places;
neighborhood stabilization overlay districts, which preserve single family
neighborhoods by imposing neighborhood- specific yard, lot, and space
regulations that reflect the existing character of the neighborhood; and
planned development districts, which provide flexibility in planning and
construction while protecting contiguous land uses and significant features.
      (4)   The purpose of a CD is to:
         (A)   protect the physical attributes of an area or neighborhood;
         (B)   promote development or redevelopment that is compatible with an
existing area or neighborhood;
         (C)   promote economic revitalization;
         (D)   enhance the livability of the city; and
         (E)   ensure harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth.
   (c)   General provisions.
      (1)   Each CD must be established by a separate CD ordinance.
      (2)   A CD may replace a planned development district or a neighborhood
stabilization overlay. A CD may include an historic district overlay. A CD may
not be placed on a planned development district or a neighborhood stabilization
overlay.
      (3)   For purposes of determining the applicability of regulations in
this chapter triggered by adjacency or proximity to another zoning district, an
identifiable portion of a CD governed by a distinct set of use regulations is
treated as though it were a separate zoning district. If the CD district or a
portion of the district is limited to those uses permitted in an expressly
stated zoning district, the CD district or portion of the district is treated
as though it were that expressly stated zoning district; otherwise it is
treated as though it were:
         (A)   a TH-3(A) zoning district if it is restricted to single family
and/or duplex uses;
         (B)   an MF-2(A) zoning district if it is restricted to residential
uses not exceeding 36 feet in height and allows multifamily uses;
         (C)   an MF-3(A) zoning district if it is restricted to residential
uses and allows multifamily uses exceeding 36 feet in height; or
         (D)   a nonresidential zoning district if it allows a nonresidential
use.
   (d)   Establishing a conservation district.
      (1)   Determination of eligibility.
         (A)   Before a neighborhood committee may request pre-application
meetings or apply for a CD, a neighborhood committee must request a
determination of eligibility and the director must determine that an area is
eligible. A request for determination of eligibility is not an application for
a CD.
         (B)   A neighborhood committee must submit a request for determination
of eligibility on a form furnished by the department. The request for a
determination of eligibility must include:
            (i)   The names and addresses of the neighborhood committee
members.
            (ii)   The name and address of the neighborhood committee member
designated to receive notice and information from the department.
            (iii)   A map of the request area.
            (iv)   A written statement explaining how the neighborhood
committee selected the request area. For example, the request area is the
original subdivision.
            (v)   A list of the architectural styles of each main building in
the area of request and the year that each main building was constructed.
            (vi)   A written statement describing the physical attributes of
the area, including the architectural styles, period of significance, and
method of construction.
            (vii)   A written statement describing how the area of request
meets all of the eligibility criteria in Section
51A-4.505(d)(1)(C).
            (viii)   Any other information that the director deems necessary.
         (C)   Within 65 days after a complete request for determination of
eligibility is submitted, the director shall make a determination of
eligibility. An area is not eligible for a CD unless it satisfies all of the
following criteria:
            (i)   The area contains at least one blockface.
            (ii)   The area must be either "stable" or "stabilizing" as defined
in this section.
            (iii)   The area is compact and contiguous with boundary lines
drawn to the logical edges of the area or subdivision, as indicated by a creek,
street, subdivision line, utility easement, zoning boundary line, or other
boundary.
            (iv)   At least 75 percent of the lots are developed with main
buildings that are at least 25 years old.
            (v)   The area has physical attributes that include recognizable
architectural style(s).
         (D)   If the director determines that the area is eligible for a CD,
the director shall notify the designated neighborhood committee member in
writing. Notice is given by depositing the notice properly addressed and
postage paid, return receipt requested, in the United States mail. The
director's determination that an area is eligible for a CD may not be appealed.
         (E)   After the director determines an area is eligible for a CD, the
boundaries may only be changed by city council at a public hearing to consider
a proposed CD or by a request for a new determination of eligibility after the
original determination of eligibility expires. A request for a new
determination of eligibility with different boundaries must be made before a
neighborhood committee may request pre- application meetings or apply for a CD.
          (F)   If the director determines that the area is not eligible for a
CD, the director shall notify the designated neighborhood committee member in
writing why the proposed area is not eligible. Notice is given by depositing
the notice properly addressed and postage paid, return receipt requested, in
the United States mail. The director's determination that an area is not
eligible for a CD classification may be appealed to the city plan commission by
the neighborhood committee.
         (G)   An appeal of a determination that an area is not eligible for a
CD is made by filing a written notice of appeal with the director. The notice
of appeal must be filed within 30 days after the director provides written
notice to the designated neighborhood committee member. The sole issue on
appeal is whether the director erred in the determination of eligibility. The
city plan commission shall consider the same criteria that the director is
required to consider.
         (H)   The city plan commission's determination of eligibility on
appeal is final. If the city plan commission determines that the area is not
eligible for a CD, no further requests for determination of eligibility may be
considered for the area of request for two years from the date of its decision.
A property owner within the area of request may apply for a waiver of the two-
year limitation period pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(d)(3).
      (2)   Pre-application meetings.
         (A)   After an area is determined eligible for a CD and before a
neighborhood committee may apply for a CD, a neighborhood committee must
request pre-application meetings. A request for pre- application meetings is
not an application for a CD.
         (B)   Pre-application meetings are held by the department. Pre-
application meetings are intended to inform the neighborhood committee and
property owners within the eligible area about the determination of eligibility
process, purpose of a CD, and the CD ordinance process. Pre-application
meetings are also held to discuss and establish a list of development and
architectural standards the neighborhood is interested in regulating.
         (C)   Within 65 days after the director has determined that an area is
eligible for a CD, the neighborhood committee must submit a request for pre-
application meetings on a form furnished by the department or the determination
of eligibility for that area expires. If the determination of eligibility
expires, a neighborhood committee must submit a new request for determination
of eligibility and the director must determine that the area is eligible before
a request for pre-application meetings may be submitted.
         (D)   Within 60 days after a complete request for pre-application
meetings is submitted, the director shall schedule the first of at least two
pre- application meetings. Notice of each pre-application meeting shall be
given at least 10 days before the pre- application meeting to all property
owners within the area eligible for a CD as evidenced by the last certified
municipal tax roll.
         (E)   Within 14 days after the last pre- application meeting, the
department shall provide the designated neighborhood committee member with the
original petition forms.
         (F)   The original petition forms must include a map showing the
boundaries of the area determined eligible for a CD; a list of the development
and architectural standards a CD may regulate; the development and
architectural standards established at the pre-application meetings that
neighborhood is interested in regulating; the name and address of all property
owners within the proposed CD; the deadline for the required signatures; and a
statement that by signing the petition, the property owner is indicating
support for initiating a process that may result in a change of zoning.
         (G)   Once the original petition forms are provided to the designated
neighborhood committee member, additions to the development and architectural
standards established by the neighborhood and listed on the original petition
forms may only be recommended by city plan commission and approved by the city
council.
      (3)   Application for a CD.
         (A)   After an area is determined eligible for a CD and the pre-
application meetings have been held by the department, a neighborhood committee
may submit an application for a CD.
         (B)   The application must be on a form provided by the department and
must include:
            (i)   The original petition forms submitted with the dated
signatures of property owners within the area determined eligible for a CD in
support of the proposed CD that represent at least 58 percent of the land,
excluding streets and alleys, within the proposed CD or 58 percent of the lots
within the proposed CD.
               (aa)   For a proposed CD with 200 or fewer lots, the signatures
on the original petition forms must be dated within 12 months following the
date the original petition forms are provided to the designated neighborhood
committee member.
               (bb)   For a proposed CD with 201 to 500 lots, the signatures on
the original petition forms must be dated within 15 months following the date
the original petition forms are provided to the designated neighborhood
committee member.
               (cc)   For a proposed CD with more than 500 lots, the signatures
on the original petition forms must be dated within 18 months following the
date the original petition forms are provided to the designated neighborhood
committee member.
            (ii)   The application fee, if applicable.
               (aa)   If the original petition forms are signed by 75 percent
or more of the lots within the proposed CD boundaries, the application fee is
waived.
               (bb)   If the proposed CD is authorized pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1), the application fee is waived.
            (iii)   Any other information that the director deems necessary.
         (C)   Within 30 days after an application for a CD is submitted, the
director shall verify the original petition forms and determine if the
application is complete. The time the director takes to review an application
for completeness is not counted toward the date requirements in Section
51A-4.505(d)(3)(B)(i) for signatures in support of the proposed CD.
         (D)   If the application is deemed complete or the CD is authorized
pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1), a public hearing to create a CD is initiated.
         (E)   If the director deems the application incomplete, the director
shall notify the designated neighborhood committee member in writing of the
application deficiencies and return the incomplete application. Notice is given
by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid, return receipt
requested, in the United States mail.
         (F)   For purposes of Section
51A-4.701, "Zoning Amendments," once a CD application has been deemed complete,
the CD shall be treated as a city plan commission authorized public hearing and
may not be appealed to city council if the city plan commission recommends
denial. If the proposed CD is initiated by application, the notice of
authorization in Section
51A-4.701(a)(1) is not required.
      (4)   Preparing a CD ordinance.
         (A)   Within 30 days after a CD application is deemed complete, the
director shall begin scheduling neighborhood meetings. Neighborhood meetings
shall be held as necessary to receive input from property owners regarding the
content of the CD ordinance.
         (B)   The city shall prepare a CD ordinance that includes:
            (i)   a map showing the boundaries of the area, including any
subdistricts, that the director determined eligible for a CD;
            (ii)   maps and other graphic and written materials describing the
physical attributes of the proposed CD; and
            (iii)   regulations for development and architectural standards.
         (C)   The CD ordinance must include the following:
            (i)   Development standards.
               (aa)   accessory structures.
               (bb)   building and structure height;
               (cc)   density;
               (dd)   fences and walls;
               (ee)   floor area ratio;
               (ff)   lot coverage;
               (gg)   lot size;
               (hh)   off-street parking and loading requirements;
               (ii)   permitted uses;
               (jj)   setbacks; and
               (kk)   stories.
            (ii)   Architectural standards.
               (aa)   architectural styles;
               (bb)   building elevations;
               (cc)   building materials;
               (dd)   chimneys;
               (ee)   porch styles;
               (ff)   roof form or pitch;
               (gg)   roofing materials; and
               (hh)   windows.
         (D)   The CD ordinance may also include, but is not limited to, the
following development and architectural standards:
            (i)   building relocation;
            (ii)   building width;
            (iii)   demolition;
            (iv)   driveways, curbs, and sidewalks;
            (v)   foundations;
            (vi)   garage location and entrance;
            (vii)   impervious surfaces;
            (viii)   landscaping or other natural features;
            (ix)   massing;
            (x)   paint colors;
            (xi)   solar energy systems and the components;
            (xii)   steps; or
            (xiii)   window and dormer size and location.
         (E)   At least 30 days before the city plan commission public hearing
to consider the proposed CD ordinance, the director shall conduct a
neighborhood meeting to review the proposed CD ordinance.
         (F)   Notice of the neighborhood meeting shall be given at least 10
days before the neighborhood meeting to all property owners within the
boundaries of the proposed CD as evidenced by the last certified municipal tax
roll. The notice must include a web address where an electronic copy of the
draft CD ordinance may be found.
         (G)   After the neighborhood meeting and at least 10 days before
consideration by the city plan commission, the director shall send written
notice of the city plan commission public hearing and a reply form to all
property owners within the area of notification as evidenced by the last
certified municipal tax roll. The reply form allows the recipient to indicate
support or opposition to the proposed CD and give written comments. The
director shall report to the city plan commission the percentage of replies in
favor and in opposition, and summarize any comments.
         (H)   If city plan commission recommends approval of the proposed CD,
at least 10 days before consideration by the city council, the director shall
send written notice of the city council public hearing and a reply form to all
property owners within the area of notification as evidenced by the last
certified municipal tax roll. The reply form allows the recipient to indicate
support or opposition to the proposed CD and give written comments. The
director shall report to the city council the percentage of replies in favor
and in opposition, and summarize any comments.
   (e)   Expanding an established CD.
      (1)   In general. Before a neighborhood committee or, if the area
proposed to be added is one lot, an applicant may request petitions or apply to
expand an established CD, a neighborhood committee or applicant must request a
determination of eligibility for the proposed area to be added and the director
must determine that the area is eligible. A request for determination of
eligibility is not an application to amend an established CD.
      (2)   Determination of eligibility.
         (A)   A neighborhood committee or, if the area proposed to be added is
one lot, an applicant must submit a request for determination of eligibility on
a form furnished by the department. The request for determination of
eligibility must include:
            (i)   The names and addresses of the neighborhood committee members
or applicant.
            (ii)   If applicable, the name and address of the neighborhood
committee member designated to receive notice and information from the
director.
            (iii)   A map of the request area to be added that is compact and
contiguous with the established CD.
            (iv)   A written statement explaining how the neighborhood
committee or the applicant selected the request area. For example, the proposed
area is part of the original subdivision but was not included when the CD was
established.
            (v)   A list of the architectural styles of each main building in
the area of request and the year that each main building was constructed.
            (vi)   A written statement describing the physical attributes of
the area, including the architectural styles, period of significance, and
method of construction and how these physical attributes, including the
architectural styles, are similar to and compatible with the established CD.
            (vii)   A written statement describing how the proposed area meets
all of the eligibility requirements in Section
51A-4.505(d)(1)(C) except that the area proposed is not required to be at least
one blockface.
            (viii)   Any other information that the director deems necessary.
         (B)   Within 65 days after a complete request for determination of
eligibility is submitted, the director shall make a determination of
eligibility. An area is not eligible to be added to an established CD unless:
            (i)   the area satisfies all of the criteria in Section
51A-4.505(d)(1)(C), except that the area to be added is not required to be at
least one blockface, and
            (ii)   the area to be added is similar to and compatible with the
physical attributes of the established CD.
         (C)   If the director determines that the proposed area is eligible to
be added to an established CD, the director shall notify the designated
neighborhood committee member or applicant in writing. Notice is given by
depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid, return receipt
requested, in the United States mail. The director's determination that an area
is eligible for a CD may not be appealed.
         (D)   After the director determines an area is eligible to be added to
an established CD, the boundaries may only be changed by city council at a
public hearing to consider expanding an established CD or by a request for a
new determination of eligibility after the original determination of
eligibility expires. A request for a new determination of eligibility with
different boundaries must be made before a neighborhood committee or applicant
may request petitions or apply to expand an established CD.
         (E)   If the director determines that the area is not eligible to be
added to an established CD, the director shall notify the designated
neighborhood committee member or applicant in writing why the area is not
eligible. Notice is given by depositing the notice properly addressed and
postage paid, return receipt requested, in the United States mail.
         (F)   The director's determination that an area is not eligible to be
added to a CD may be appealed to the city plan commission by the neighborhood
committee or applicant.
         (G)   An appeal of a determination that an area is not eligible for a
CD is made by filing a written notice of appeal with the director. The notice
of appeal must be filed within 30 days after the director provides written
notice to the designated neighborhood committee member or applicant. The sole
issue on appeal is whether the director erred in the determination of
eligibility. The city plan commission shall consider the same criteria that the
director is required to consider.
         (H)   The city plan commission's determination of eligibility on
appeal is final. If the city plan commission determines that the area is not
eligible for a CD, no further requests for determination of eligibility may be
considered for the area of request for two years from the date of its decision.
A property owner within the area of request may apply for a waiver of the two-
year limitation period pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(d)(3).
      (3)   Request for petitions.
         (A)   After an area is determined eligible to be added into an
established CD and before a neighborhood committee or applicant may apply to
expand an established CD, a neighborhood committee or applicant must request
petitions. A request for petitions is not an application to amend an
established CD.
         (B)   A neighborhood committee or applicant must submit a request for
petitions within 65 days after the director determines that the area is
eligible to be added to an established CD or the determination of eligibility
for that proposed area to be added expires. If the determination of eligibility
expires, a neighborhood committee or applicant must submit a new request for
determination of eligibility and the director must determine that the area is
eligible before a request for petitions may be submitted.
         (C)   The request for petitions must be on a form furnished by the
department and must include the names and addresses of the neighborhood
committee members or the applicant and a list of the development and
architectural standards listed in Sections
51A-4.505(d)(4)(C) and (D) that a neighborhood committee or applicant is
interested in regulating.
         (D)   Within 14 days after a complete request for petitions is
submitted, the director shall provide the designated neighborhood committee
member or applicant with the original petition forms.
         (E)   The original petition forms must include a map showing the
boundaries of the established CD and the area eligible to be added to the
established CD; a list of the development and architectural standards a CD may
regulate; the development and architectural standards the neighborhood or
applicant is interested in regulating; the name and address of all property
owners within the area proposed to be added to an established CD; the deadline
for the required signatures; and a statement that by signing the petition, the
property owner is indicating support for initiating a process that may result
in a change of zoning.
         (F)   Once the original petition forms are provided to the designated
neighborhood committee member or applicant, additions to the development and
architectural standards established by the neighborhood and listed on the
original petition forms may only be recommended by city plan commission and
approved by the city council.
         (G)   Within 60 days after the department provides the designated
neighborhood committee member or applicant with the original petition forms,
the department shall schedule a neighborhood meeting. Notice of the
neighborhood meeting shall be given at least 10 days before the neighborhood
meeting to all property owners within the proposed area to be added and the
established CD as evidenced by the last certified municipal tax roll.
         (H)   The neighborhood meeting is held by the department. The purpose
of the neighborhood meeting is to inform the property owners within the
established CD, and the proposed area to be added, that petitions have been
requested to expand the established CD.
      (4)   Application to expand an established CD.
         (A)   After an area is determined eligible to be added to an
established CD and the neighborhood committee or applicant has requested and
received the original petition forms, the neighborhood committee or applicant
may submit an application to expand an established CD.
         (B)   The application must be on a form provided by the department and
must include:
            (i)   The original petition forms with dated signatures of property
owners within the proposed area to be added into the established CD that are in
support of being added to the established CD.
            (ii)   The signatures on the original petition forms must be dated
within 60 days after the date the director provides the original petition forms
to the neighborhood committee or applicant and must represent at least 58
percent of the land, excluding streets and alleys, within the proposed area to
be added to the CD; or 58 percent of the lots within the area proposed to be
added to the CD.
            (iii)   The application fee, if applicable. If the proposed
expansion of the established CD is authorized pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1), the application fee is waived.
            (iv)   Any other information that the director deems necessary.
         (C)   Within 30 days after an application to expand an established CD
is submitted, the director shall verify the original petition forms and
determine if the application is complete. The 30 day application review period
is not counted toward the signature date requirement in Section
51A-4.505(e)(4)(B)(ii).
         (D)   If the director deems the application complete or the request to
expand the established CD is authorized pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1), a public hearing to expand an established CD is initiated.
         (E)   If the director deems the application incomplete, the director
shall notify the designated neighborhood committee member in writing of the
deficiencies and return the incomplete application. Notice is given by
depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid, return receipt
requested, in the United States mail.
      (5)   Preparing an ordinance to expand an established CD.
         (A)   The city shall prepare amendments to the established CD in
accordance with Sections
51A-4.505(d)(4)(B) through (D) to establish development and architectural
standards for the area to be added.
         (B)   At least 10 days before consideration by the city plan
commission, the director shall send written notice of the city plan commission
public hearing and a reply form to all property owners within the area of
notification as evidenced by recent tax rolls. The reply form allows the
recipient to indicate support or opposition to the proposed expansion of the
established CD and give written comments. The director shall report to the city
plan commission the percentage of replies in favor and in opposition, and
summarize any comments.
         (C)   At least 10 days before consideration by the city council, the
director shall send written notice of the city council public hearing and a
reply form to all property owners within the area of notification as evidenced
by recent tax rolls. The reply form allows the recipient to indicate support or
opposition to the proposed expansion of the established CD and give written
comments. The director shall report to the city council the percentage of
replies in favor and in opposition, and summarize any comments.  
   (f)   Amending regulations in an established CD.
      (1)   Pre-application meetings.
         (A)   To amend regulations that affect an entire established CD, a
neighborhood committee must first request pre-application meetings. A request
for pre-application meetings is not an application for a CD.
         (B)   Pre-application meetings are held by the department. Pre-
application meetings are intended to inform the property owners within the
established CD that a neighborhood committee is interested in amending
regulations in the established CD and to discuss and establish a list of
development and architectural standards the neighborhood is interested in
amending or adding to the established CD.
         (C)   Within 60 days after a complete request for pre-application
meetings is submitted, the director shall schedule the first of at least two
pre-application meetings. Notice of each pre-application meeting shall be given
at least 10 days before the pre-application meeting to all property owners
within the established CD as evidenced by the last certified municipal tax
roll.
         (D)   Within 14 days after the last pre-application meeting, the
department shall provide the designated neighborhood committee member with the
original petition forms.
         (E)   The original petition forms must include a map showing the
boundaries of the established CD; a list of the development and architectural
standards a CD may regulate; the development and architectural standards
established at the pre-application meetings that the neighborhood is interested
in amending or adding; the name and address of all property owners within the
established CD; the deadline for the required signatures; and a statement that
by signing the petition, the property owner is indicating support for
initiating a process that may result in a change of zoning.
         (F)   Once the original petition forms are provided to the designated
neighborhood committee member, additions to the development and architectural
standards established by the neighborhood and listed on the original petition
forms may only be recommended by the city plan commission and approved by the
city council.
      (2)   Application to amend an established CD.
         (A)   After the pre-application meetings have been held by the
department, a neighborhood committee may submit an application to amend an
established CD that affects the entire CD.
         (B)   The application must be on a form provided by the department and
must include:
            (i)   The original petition forms submitted with the dated
signatures of property owners within the established CD in support of amending
the established CD that represent at least 58 percent of the land, excluding
streets and alleys, within the established CD or 58 percent of the lots within
the established CD.
               (aa)   For an established CD with 200 or fewer lots, the
signatures on the original petition forms must be dated within 12 months
following the date the original petition forms are provided to the designated
neighborhood committee member.
               (bb)   For an established CD with 201 to 500 lots, the
signatures on the original petition forms must be dated within 15 months
following the date the original petition forms are provided to the designated
neighborhood committee member.
               (cc)   For an established CD with more than 500 lots, the
signatures on the original petition forms must be dated within 18 months
following the date the original petition forms are provided to the designated
neighborhood committee member.
            (ii)   The application fee, if applicable.
               (aa)   If the original petition forms are signed by 75 percent
or more of the lots within the established CD boundaries, the application fee
is waived.
               (bb)   If the established CD is authorized pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1), the application fee is waived.
            (iii)   Any other information that the director deems necessary.
         (C)   Within 30 days after an application to amend an established CD
is submitted, the director shall verify the original petition forms and
determine if the application is complete. The time the director takes to review
an application for completeness is not counted toward the date requirements in
Section
51A-4.505(d)(3)(B)(i) for signatures in support of the proposed CD.
         (D)   If the application is deemed complete or an amendment to the
established CD is authorized pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1), a public hearing to create a CD is initiated.
         (E)   If the director deems the application incomplete, the director
shall notify the designated neighborhood committee member in writing of the
application deficiencies and return the incomplete application. Notice is given
by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid, return receipt
requested, in the United States mail.
         (F)   For purposes of Section
51A-4.701, "Zoning Amendments," once an application to amend regulations in an
established CD has been deemed complete, the application shall be treated as a
city plan commission authorized public hearing and may not be appealed to city
council if the city plan commission recommends denial. If the application to
amend regulations in an established CD is initiated by application, the notice
of authorization in Section
51A-4.701(a)(1) is not required.
      (3)   Preparing an ordinance to amend an established CD.
         (A)   Within 30 days after an application to amend an established CD
is deemed complete, the director shall begin scheduling neighborhood meetings.
Neighborhood meetings shall be held as necessary to receive input from property
owners regarding the amendments to the established CD. Notice of neighborhood
meetings shall be given at least 10 days before the neighborhood meeting to all
property owners within the boundaries of the established CD as evidenced by the
last certified municipal tax roll.
         (B)   The city shall prepare an ordinance amending an established CD
in accordance with Sections
51A-4.505(d)(4) (B) through (D).
         (C)   At least 30 days before the city plan commission public hearing
to consider proposed amendments to an established CD, the director shall
conduct a neighborhood meeting to review the proposed ordinance amending the
established CD.
         (D)   Notice of the neighborhood meeting shall be given at least 10
days before the neighborhood meeting to all property owners within the
boundaries of the established CD as evidenced by the last certified municipal
tax roll. The notice must include a web address where an electronic copy of the
draft proposed ordinance amending the established CD may be found.
         (E)   After the neighborhood meeting and at least 10 days before
consideration by the city plan commission, the director shall send written
notice of the city plan commission public hearing and a reply form to all
property owners within the area of notification as evidenced by the last
certified municipal tax roll. The reply form allows the recipient to indicate
support or opposition to the proposed CD and give written comments. The
director shall report to the city plan commission the percentage of replies in
favor and in opposition, and summarize any comments.
         (F)   If city plan commission recommends approval of the proposed CD,
at least 10 days before consideration by the city council, the director shall
send written notice of the city council public hearing and a reply form to all
property owners within the area of notification. The reply form allows the
recipient to indicate support or opposition to the proposed CD and give written
comments. The director shall report to the city council the percentage of
replies in favor and in opposition, and summarize any comments.
   (g)   Creating or amending a subdistrict within an established CD.
      (1)   An application to create or amend a subdistrict within an
established CD must comply with Section
51A-4.701(a)(2).
      (2)   At least 30 days before a city plan commission public hearing to
consider creating or amending a subdistrict within an established CD, the
director shall hold a neighborhood meeting.
      (3)   Notice of the neighborhood meeting shall be given at least 10 days
before the neighborhood meeting to all property owners within the established
CD as evidenced by the last certified municipal tax roll.
      (4)   The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is to inform the property
owners within the established CD of the application to create or amend a
subdistrict within an established CD.
      (5)   The city shall prepare an ordinance creating or amending a
subdistrict within an established CD in accordance with Sections
51A-4.505(d)(4)(B) through (D).
      (6)   The city council shall not grant a request to create or amend a
subdistrict within an established CD except upon a finding that the creating or
amending a subdistrict within the established CD will not:
         (A)   alter the essential character of the established CD, or
         (B)   be detrimental to the overall purpose of the established CD.
   (h)   Removing property from an established CD.
      (1)   An application to remove property from an established CD must
comply with Section
51A-4.701(a)(2).
      (2)   At least 30 days before a city plan commission public hearing to
consider removing property from an established CD, the director shall hold a
neighborhood meeting.
      (3)   Notice of the neighborhood meeting shall be given at least 10 days
before the neighborhood meeting to all property owners within the established
CD as evidenced by the last certified municipal tax roll.
      (4)   The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is to inform the property
owners within the established CD of the application to remove a property from
an established CD.
      (5)   The city council shall not grant a request to remove property from
an established CD except upon a finding that removing property from the
established CD will not:
         (A)   alter the essential character of the established CD, or
         (B)   be detrimental to the overall purpose of the established CD.
   (i)   Work review procedures.
      (1)   Review form applications. A review form application must be
submitted for any work covered by the standards in a CD ordinance.
      (2)   Work requiring a building permit.
         (A)   Upon receipt of a review form application for work requiring a
building permit, the building official shall refer the review form application
to the director to determine whether the work complies with the standards of
the applicable CD ordinance. Within 30 days after submission of a complete
review form application, the director shall review and determine whether the
work complies with the standards of the applicable CD ordinance.
         (B)   If the director determines that the work complies with the
standards of the applicable CD ordinance, the director shall approve the review
form application and send it back to the building official, who shall issue the
building permit if all requirements of the construction codes and other
applicable ordinances have been met.
         (C)   If the director determines that the work does not comply with
the standards of the applicable CD ordinance, the director shall state in
writing the specific CD ordinance requirements that must be met before a
building permit may be issued and send it back to the building official, who
shall deny the building permit. The director shall give written notice to the
applicant stating the reasons the building permit is denied.
      (3)   Work not requiring a building permit.
         (A)   Upon receipt of a review form application for work not requiring
a building permit, the director shall review and determine whether the work
complies with the standards of the applicable CD ordinance within 10 days after
submission of a complete review form application.
         (B)   If the director determines that the work complies with the
standards of the applicable CD ordinance, the director shall approve the review
form application and give written notice to the applicant.
         (C)   If the director determines that the work does not comply with
the standards of the applicable CD ordinance, the director shall state in
writing the specific CD ordinance requirements to be met before the work review
application may be approved. The director shall give written notice to the
applicant stating the reasons for denial.
   (j)   Appeals.
      (1)   An applicant may appeal any decision regarding a review form
application made by the director or any aggrieved person may appeal a final
decision of an administrative official, to the board of adjustment by filing a
written appeal within 15 days after notice of the decision is given by the
director or the official in accordance with Section
51A-4.703(a).
      (2)   The regulations and procedures in Section
51A-4.703 apply to an appeal to the board of adjustment under this section,
including staying proceedings, notice of hearing, and board action.
      (3)   In considering the appeal, the sole issue before the board of
adjustment shall be whether the director or the administrative official erred
in the decision. The board shall consider the same standards required to be
considered by the director or the administrative official.
      (4)   Appeals to the board of adjustment are the final administrative
remedy.
   (k)   Conflicts. If there is a conflict between the text of this section and
the text of a CD ordinance, the text of the CD ordinance controls.
   (l)   Board of adjustment fee waiver. The board of adjustment may waive any
filing fee for an appeal from a decision of the building official interpreting
a CD ordinance, or for a variance or special exception to a CD ordinance
requirement when the board finds that payment of the fee would result in
substantial financial hardship to the applicant. The applicant may either pay
the fee and request reimbursement as part of his appeal or request that the
matter be placed on the board's miscellaneous docket for predetermination. If
the matter is placed on the miscellaneous docket, the applicant may not file
his appeal until the merits of the request for waiver have been determined by
the board. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19930; 20037; 20308; 24843; 29702)
SEC. 51A-4.506.   MODIFIED DELTA OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section:
   DELTA THEORY means “delta theory” as defined in Section
51A-4.704 of this chapter.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   The city council may establish a modified delta overlay district in
those areas where it determines that a continued application of the delta
theory is not justified because:
         (A)   there is no longer a need to encourage redevelopment and
adaptive reuse of existing structures; or
         (B)   a continued application of the delta theory will create traffic
congestion and public safety problems and would not be in the public interest.
      (2)   In a modified delta overlay district, the city council may limit
the number or percentage of nonconforming parking or loading spaces that may be
carried forward by a use under the delta theory. An ordinance establishing a
modified delta overlay district in which nonconforming parking or loading
spaces are limited by number rather than by percentage must specify the method
by which the nonconforming spaces are to be allocated among property owners.
      (3)   An ordinance establishing a modified delta overlay district may not
increase the number of nonconforming parking or loading spaces that may be
carried forward under the delta theory when a use is converted or expanded.
      (4)   An ordinance establishing a modified delta overlay district must
provide that when a use located in the district is converted to a new use
having lesser parking or loading requirements, the rights to any portion of the
nonconforming parking or loading not needed to meet the new requirements are
lost.
      (5)   An ordinance establishing a modified delta overlay district may
restrict or eliminate the availability of the off-street parking special
exception described in Section
51A-4.301(i).
      (6)   An ordinance establishing a modified delta overlay district may
allow the remote parking distances contained in the special parking regulations
(Division
51A-4.320) to be increased and allow special parking to account for more than
50 percent of the off-street parking required for any use. (Ord. Nos. 19786;
22471)
SEC. 51A-4.507.   NEIGHBORHOOD STABILIZATION OVERLAY.
   (a)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   The city council finds that the construction of new single family
structures that are incompatible with existing single family structures within
certain established neighborhoods is detrimental to the character, stability,
and livability of that neighborhood and the city as a whole.
      (2)   The neighborhood stabilization overlay is intended to preserve
single family neighborhoods by imposing neighborhood-specific yard, lot, and
space regulations that reflect the existing character of the neighborhood. The
neighborhood stabilization overlay does not prevent construction of new single
family structures or the renovation, remodeling, repair or expansion of
existing single family structures, but, rather, ensures that new single family
structures are compatible with existing single family structures.
      (3)   The yard, lot, and space regulations of the neighborhood
stabilization overlay are limited to facilitate creation and enforcement of the
regulations.
      (4)   Neighborhood stabilization overlay districts are distinguished from
historic overlay districts, which preserve historic residential or commercial
places; and from conservation districts, which conserve a residential or
commercial area’s distinctive atmosphere or character by protecting or
enhancing its significant architectural or cultural attributes.
   (b)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   BLOCKFACE means the linear distance of lots along one side of a
street between the two nearest intersecting streets. If a street dead-ends, the
terminus of the dead-end will be treated as an intersecting street.
      (2)   CORNER SIDE YARD is a side yard abutting a street.
      (3)   DISTRICT means a neighborhood stabilization overlay district.
      (4)   HEIGHT PLANE means a plane projecting upward and toward the subject
lot from a point six feet above grade at the center line of the street adjacent
to the front property line, and extending to the intersection of a vertical
plane from the front building facade with the maximum height established by the
neighborhood stabilization overlay and continuing at the same angle to the
maximum height of the underlying zoning. The height plane is illustrated below.
For purposes of this paragraph, BUILDING FACADE means the front-facing exterior
wall or walls of the first floor of the principal structure on a lot, and
excludes the building facade of the portion of the principal structure designed
or used as a parking structure or a projecting porch. For purposes of
interpreting the vertical plane in the neighborhood stabilization overlay
districts adopted prior to December 13, 2023, the term "building line" means
"building facade."
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10159.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10157.jpg]
      (5)   INTERIOR SIDE YARD is a side yard not abutting a street.
      (6)   MEDIAN means the middle number in a set of numbers where one-half
of the numbers are less than the median number and one-half of the numbers are
greater than the median number. For example, 4 is the median number of 1, 3, 4,
8, and 9. If the set of numbers has an even number of numbers, then the median
is the average of the two middle numbers. For example, if the set of numbers is
1, 3, 4, 6, 8, and 9, then the median is the average of 4 and 6, or 5.
      (7)   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMITTEE means the owners of at least 10 properties
within a proposed district.
      (8)   SINGLE FAMILY STRUCTURE means a main structure designed for a
single family use, without regard to whether the structure is actually used for
a single family use. For example, a house containing a child care facility is a
single family structure, but an institutional building, such as a church or
school, converted to a single family use is not.
   (c)   Petition, initiation, and process.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, the procedures for zoning
amendments contained in Section
51A-4.701, “Zoning Amendments,” apply.
      (2)   A neighborhood stabilization overlay may only be placed on an area
that is zoned as a single family residential district and developed primarily
with single family structures. A neighborhood stabilization overlay may not be
placed on a conservation district or a neighborhood with a historic overlay. A
neighborhood stabilization overlay may be placed on an established neighborhood
even though it contains vacant lots. A neighborhood stabilization overlay may
not be placed on a new subdivision being developed on a tract of land.
      (3)   A district must contain at least 50 single family structures in a
compact, contiguous area, or be an original subdivision if the subdivision
contains fewer than 50 single family structures. Boundary lines should be drawn
to include blockfaces on both sides of a street, and to the logical edges of
the area or subdivision, as indicated by a creek, street, subdivision line,
utility easement, zoning boundary line, or other boundary. Boundary lines that
split blockfaces in two should be avoided. The minimum area of a subdistrict
within a district is one blockface.
      (4)   The neighborhood committee may request a petition form by
submitting a request to the department on a form furnished by the department.
The request must include the boundaries of the proposed district. The
boundaries of the proposed district must comply with the requirements of this
section.
      (5)   As soon as possible after the department provides the neighborhood
committee with a petition form, the department shall conduct a neighborhood
meeting. The department shall give notice of the neighborhood meeting to all
property owners within the proposed district as evidenced by the last approved
city tax roll at least 10 days prior to the neighborhood meeting.
      (6)   The petition must be on a form furnished by the department. The
petition form must include a map of the boundaries of the proposed district, a
list of the proposed regulations, the name and address of all property owners
within the proposed district, and a statement that by signing the petition the
signers are indicating their support of the district.
      (7)   The petition must be submitted with the following:
         (A)   The dated signatures of property owners within the proposed
district in support of the proposed district.
            (i)   For a proposed district with 50 or fewer single family
structures, the signatures on the petition must be dated within three months
following the date of the neighborhood meeting.
            (ii)   For a proposed district with more than 50 single family
structures, the signatures on the petition must be dated within six months
following the date of the neighborhood meeting.
         (B)   The application fee, if applicable.
            (i)   If a petition is signed by more than 50 percent but less than
75 percent of the lots within the proposed district, the application fee must
be paid.
            (ii)   If a petition is signed by 75 percent or more of the lots
within the proposed district, the application fee is waived.
            (iii)   If the proposed district is authorized pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1), the application fee is waived.
         (C)   A map showing the boundaries of the proposed district.
         (D)   A list of any neighborhood associations that represent the
interests of property owners within the proposed district.
         (E)   A list of the names and addresses of the neighborhood committee
members.
         (F)   Any other information the director determines is necessary.
      (8)   A public hearing to create a district is initiated by submission of
a complete petition or by authorization pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1).
      (9)   For purposes of Section
51A-4.701, “Zoning Amendments,” once a complete petition has been submitted to
the director, the neighborhood stabilization overlay shall be treated as a city
plan commission authorized public hearing. If the district is initiated by
petition, the notice of authorization contained in Section
51A-4.701(a)(1) is not required.
      (10)   Along with any other required notice, at least 10 days prior to
consideration by the city plan commission, the director shall mail a draft of
the proposed neighborhood stabilization overlay ordinance and a reply form to
all owners of real property within the area of notification. The reply form
must allow the recipient to indicate support or opposition to the proposed
neighborhood stabilization overlay and give written comments. The director
shall report to the city plan commission and the city council the percentage of
replies in favor and in opposition, and summarize any comments.
   (e)   Neighborhood stabilization overlay.
      (1)   In general.
         (A)   A neighborhood stabilization overlay is not required to specify
standards for each category of yard, lot, and space regulation in this
subsection, but if it does, the regulations must be selected from the options
described in this subsection.
         (B)   The yard, lot, and space regulations of the neighborhood
stabilization overlay must reflect the existing conditions within the
neighborhood.
         (C)   Except as provided in the neighborhood stabilization overlay,
the yard, lot, and space regulations of the underlying zoning remain in effect.
         (D)   The provisions of Section
51A-4.704(c), regarding renovation, remodeling, repair, rebuilding, or
enlargement of nonconforming structures, remain in effect.
         (E)   The yard, lot, and space regulations of the neighborhood
stabilization overlay apply only to single family structures.
         (F)   The yard, lot, and space regulations of the neighborhood
stabilization overlay must be read together with the yard, lot, and space
regulations in Division
51A-4.400. In the event of a conflict between the neighborhood stabilization
overlay and Division
51A-4.400, the neighborhood stabilization overlay controls.
      (2)   Front yard setback. The minimum front yard setback must be within
the range between the setback of the underlying zoning and the median front
yard setback of single family structures within the district. This range may
allow for a front yard setback that is greater or lesser than the front yard
setback of the underlying zoning. For example, if the minimum front yard
setback of the underlying zoning is 25 feet and the median front yard setback
of single family structures within the district is 40 feet, the minimum front
yard setback selected must be between 25 feet and 40 feet.
      (3)   Corner side yard setback. The minimum corner side yard setback must
be within the range between the setback of the underlying zoning and the median
corner side yard setback of single family structures within the district. This
range may allow for a corner side yard setback that is greater or lesser than
the corner side yard setback of the underlying zoning. For example, if the
minimum corner side yard setback of the underlying zoning is five feet and the
median corner side yard setback of single family structures within the district
is 20 feet, the minimum corner side yard setback selected must be between five
feet and 20 feet.
      (4)   Interior side yard setback. The minimum interior side yard setback
must be within the range between the setback of the underlying zoning and the
median interior side yard setback of single family structures within the
district. This range may allow for an interior side yard setback that is
greater or lesser than the interior side yard setback of the underlying zoning.
For example, if the minimum interior side yard setback of the underlying zoning
is five feet and the median interior side yard setback of single family
structures within the district is 20 feet, the minimum interior side yard
setback selected must be between five feet and 20 feet. The minimum side yard
setback for each side yard may be separately established. For example, the
minimum side yard on the west side may be five feet, and the minimum side yard
on the east side may be 10 feet.
      (5)   Height.
         (A)   If the petition is signed by the owners of more than 50 percent
but less than 60 percent of the lots within the district, height regulations
may not be included in the overlay.
         (B)   If the petition is signed by the owners of 60 percent or more of
the properties within the district, the maximum height selected must be
selected from the following:
            (i)   If the median height of single family structures within the
district is 20 feet or more, then the district height must be within the range
between the median height of single family structures within the district and
the maximum height of the underlying zoning.
            (ii)   If the median height of single family structures within the
district is less than 20 feet, then the district height must be either the
median height of single family structures within the district or within the
range between 20 feet and the maximum height of the underlying zoning.
         (C)   If the district regulates height, single family structures,
including structures listed in Section
51A-4.408(a)(2) but excluding chimneys, may not be built to heights that exceed
the height plane. Height is measured from grade to the midpoint between the
lowest eaves and the highest ridge of the structure. See Paragraph
51A-2.102(47), “Height.”
      (6)   Garage access, connection, location. The garage access, connection,
or location must be selected from one or more of the following options:
         (A)   garage access of:
            (i)   front entry;
            (ii)   side entry; or
            (iii)   rear entry;
         (B)   garage connection of:
            (i)   attached to the single family structure; or
            (ii)   detached from the single family structure; and
         (C)   garage location:
            (i)   in front of the single family structure;
            (ii)   to the side of the single family structure; or
            (iii)   to the rear of the single family structure. (Ord. Nos.
26161; 32624)
SEC. 51A-4.508.   TURTLE CREEK ENVIRONMENTAL CORRIDOR.
   (a)   The Turtle Creek Environmental Corridor (“the corridor”) consists of
the following area:
      Beginning at the intersection of the west line of Turtle Creek Boulevard
and the south line of Wycliff Avenue; thence in a westerly direction along said
south line of Wycliff Avenue to a point in a line, said line being 75 feet west
of and parallel to the west line of Turtle Creek Boulevard;
      Thence in a southerly direction along said line, crossing Avondale
Street, Irving Avenue, Blackburn Street, Gilbert Avenue and Holland Avenue, to
a point in the southwest line of Lemmon Avenue, said point being 75 feet
northwest of the northwest line of Turtle Creek Boulevard;
      Thence in a northwesterly direction along the southwest line of Lemmon
Avenue to a point in a line, said line being 25 feet northwest of and parallel
to the northwest line of Hood Street;
      Thence in a southwesterly direction along said line, crossing Rawlins
Street and Hall Street, to a point in a line, said line being 25 feet southwest
of and parallel to the southwest line of Hall Street;
      Thence in a southeasterly direction along said line, crossing Hood Street
and Sale Street, to a point in a line, said line being 75 feet northwest of and
parallel to the northwest line of Turtle Creek Boulevard;
      Thence in a southwesterly direction along said line, crossing Cedar
Springs Road (when Cedar Springs is positioned in a northwest-southeast
direction) and continuing along a line 75 feet northwest of and parallel to the
northwest line of Cedar Springs Road (when Cedar Springs is positioned in a
northeast-southwest direction), crossing Dickason Avenue and Gillespie Avenue
to a point in the southwest line of Gillespie Avenue, said point being 75 feet
northwest of the intersection of the southwest line of Gillespie Avenue and the
northwest line of Turtle Creek Drive;
      Thence in a southwesterly direction from said point along a line 75 feet
northwest of and parallel to the northwest line of Turtle Creek Drive, crossing
Fairmount Avenue, to a point in a line, said line being 25 feet northeast of
and parallel to the northeast line of Maple Avenue;
      Thence in a northwesterly direction along said line to a point in the
southeast line of Hood Street;
      Thence in a southwesterly direction along the southeast line of Hood
Street extended to the centerline of Maple Avenue;
      Thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Maple Avenue
to a point in the northwest right-of-way line of the M.K.&T. Railroad;
      Thence in a northeasterly direction along said railroad right-of-way
line, crossing Fairmount Avenue, Cedar Springs Road, Bowen Street, Hall Street,
Lemmon Avenue, Lemmon Avenue East, and Blackburn Street to a point in the
northeast line of Blackburn Street;
      Thence in a northwesterly direction along the northeast line of Blackburn
Street to a point in a line, said line being 75 feet southeast of and parallel
to the centerline of Turtle Creek;
      Thence in an easterly and northerly direction along said line to a point
in the Dallas/Highland Park City Limit Line;
      Thence in a westerly and northerly direction along said city limit line
to the place of beginning.
   (b)   No off-street vehicular surface parking shall be constructed closer
than 50 feet from the right-of-way line of Turtle Creek Boulevard, Turtle Creek
Drive, and Cedar Springs Road (when Cedar Springs Road is positioned in a
northeast-southwest direction), or closer than 50 feet from the centerline of
Turtle Creek. No building permit for any proposed subsurface parking facility
shall be issued by the Building Inspector unless a surface landscape plan for
such lot or tract has been approved by the Park and Recreation Board of the
City.
   (c)   Except as provided in Subsections (d), (e), and (f) of this Section,
no structure shall be constructed closer to the right-of-way lines of Turtle
Creek Boulevard, Turtle Creek Drive, and Cedar Springs Road (when Cedar Springs
Road is positioned in a northeast-southwest direction), than as specified
below:
Stories Height (feet) Setback (feet)
Stories Height (feet) Setback (feet)
1       12            25
2       24            36
3       36            44
4       48            50
5       60            55
6       72            59
7       84            62
8       96            65
9       108           67
10      120           68
11      132           69
12      144           70
13      156           71
14      168           72
15      180           72
16      192           73
17      204           73
18      216           74
19      228           74
20      240           75
 
For those properties lying between the M.K.&T. Railroad right-of-way and Turtle
Creek, such setback shall be measured from the centerline of Turtle Creek.
   (d)   At the intersections of Turtle Creek Boulevard with Blackburn Street,
with Lemmon Avenue, with Hall Street, and with Cedar Springs Road, and the
intersection of Turtle Creek Drive with Gillespie Street, no structure shall be
constructed closer to such intersection than an imaginary line formed between
points on each curb line 100 feet from such intersection.
   (e)   On those lots or tracts which face Lee Park or Reverchon Park across a
public right-of-way, no structure or surface parking shall be constructed
closer to the front property line than 25 feet.
   (f)   The minimum setback for any building or other structure may be
decreased by transfer to such lot of an allowable setback which is unused upon
a contiguous lot which is located within the corridor. Such transferred rights
may be used at a ratio of two feet acquired for every one foot used. No
transfer of additional setback shall be effective unless an instrument, in a
form approved by the City Attorney, has been executed by the parties concerned
and recorded in the Deed Records of Dallas County, Texas, serving as a notice
of the restrictions under this section applying both to the contiguous lot and
the transferee lot. Such document shall specify:
      (1)   the amount of setback to be transferred, the decreased minimum
setback permitted on the transferee lot by virtue of the transfer, and the
increased minimum setback on the contiguous lot;
      (2)   the duration of the transfer, which shall be specified to be not
less than the actual lifetime of any building on the transferee lot whose
construction is made possible, in whole or in part, by the transfer;
      (3)   the effect of any subsequent changes in the setback requirement
under this section for both lots; and
      (4)   the effect of any subsequent change in the size of either lot,
whether by virtue of conveyance, condemnation, or otherwise, upon the setback
for both lots.
In no case shall the setback of the transferee lot be less than that minimum
specified below:
Stories Height (feet) Minimum Setback (feet)
Stories Height (feet) Minimum Setback (feet)
1       12            25
2       24            27
3       36            29
4       48            32
5       60            35
6       72            38
7       84            41
8       96            44
9       108           47
10      120           50
11      132           53
12      144           56
13      156           58
14      168           60
15      180           62
16      192           64
17      204           66
18      216           68
19      228           70
20      240           75
 
   (g)   Any property owner within the corridor may on his own initiative,
offer to the city, subject to Park and Recreation Board approval, a dedication
in fee simple or for park purposes any area of land fronting on any public
street within the corridor as permanent open space. Upon dedication of such
property, the Tax Assessor shall reassess the remaining area to reflect such
dedication prior to the next assessment ordinance, and the city shall maintain
such property so dedicated with normal landscape standards. The owner may, in
lieu of such dedication, grant to the city a landscape easement on any area of
land fronting on any public street in the corridor. The city shall, upon
approval of a landscape plan for such easement by the Park and Recreation
Board, to be carried out by the property owner, either maintain the same or
arrange for its maintenance, and the Tax Assessor shall make such tax
reassessments as the facts justify. Any property dedicated or granted for a
landscape easement shall be considered in computing floor-area ratio, coverage,
and density. (Ord. Nos. 26026; 26248)
SEC. 51A-4.509.   PARKING MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   See Section 51A-13.410, “Parking Management Overlay (-PM),” for the
regulations governing the parking management overlay. (Ord. 27495)
SEC. 51A-4.510.   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT OVERLAY.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU) means a rentable additional dwelling
unit, subordinate to the main unit, located on a building site with a single
family use.
      (2)   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMITTEE means the owners of at least 10 properties
within a proposed overlay.
   (b)   Petition, initiation, and process.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, the procedures for zoning
amendments contained in Section
51A-4.701, "Zoning Amendments," apply.
      (2)   An accessory dwelling unit overlay may only be placed on an area
that allows single family uses and does not expressly prohibit accessory
dwelling units.
      (3)   An overlay must contain at least 50 single family structures in a
compact, contiguous area, or be an original subdivision if the subdivision
contains fewer than 50 single family structures. Boundary lines should be drawn
to include blockfaces on both sides of a street, and to the logical edges of
the area or subdivision, as indicated by a creek, street, subdivision line,
utility easement, zoning boundary line, or other boundary. Boundary lines that
split blockfaces in two should be avoided.
      (4)   As soon as possible after the department provides the neighborhood
committee with a petition form or city council authorizes a hearing, the
department shall conduct a neighborhood meeting. The department shall give
notice of the neighborhood meeting to all property owners within the proposed
overlay as evidenced by the last approved city tax roll at least 10 days before
the neighborhood meeting.
      (5)   The neighborhood committee may request a petition form by
submitting a request to the department on a form furnished by the department.
The request must include the boundaries of the proposed overlay. The boundaries
of the proposed overlay must comply with the requirements of this section.
      (6)   The petition must be on a form furnished by the department. The
petition form must include a map of the boundaries of the proposed overlay, a
list of the proposed regulations (including a proposed off-street parking
reduction), the name and address of all property owners within the proposed
overlay, and a statement that by signing the petition the signers are
indicating their support of the overlay.
      (7)   The petition must be submitted with the following:
         (A)   The dated signatures of property owners within the proposed
overlay in support of the proposed overlay.
            (i)   For a proposed overlay with 50 or fewer single family
structures, the signatures on the petition must be dated within three months
following the date of the neighborhood meeting.
            (ii)   For a proposed overlay with more than 50 single family
structures, the signatures on the petition must be dated within six months
following the date of the neighborhood meeting.
         (B)   The application fee, if applicable.
            (i)   If a petition is signed by more than 50 percent but less than
75 percent of the lots within the proposed overlay, the application fee must be
paid.
            (ii)   If a petition is signed by 75 percent or more of the lots
within the proposed overlay, the application fee is waived.
            (iii)   If the proposed overlay is authorized pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1), the application fee is waived.
         (C)   A map showing the boundaries of the proposed overlay.
         (D)   A list of any neighborhood associations that represent the
interests of property owners within the proposed overlay.
         (E)   A list of the names and addresses of the neighborhood committee
members.
         (F)   Any other information the director determines is necessary.
      (8)   For purposes of Section
51A-4.701, "Zoning Amendments," once a complete petition has been submitted to
the director, the accessory dwelling unit overlay shall be treated as a city
plan commission authorized public hearing. If the overlay is initiated by
petition, the notice of authorization contained in Section
51A-4.701(a)(1) is not required.
      (9)   Along with any other required notice, at least 10 days before
consideration by the city plan commission, the director shall mail a draft of
the proposed accessory dwelling unit overlay ordinance and a reply form to all
owners of real property within the area of notification. The reply form must
allow the recipient to indicate support or opposition to the proposed accessory
dwelling unit overlay and give written comments. The director shall report to
the city plan commission and the city council the percentage of replies in
favor and in opposition, and summarize any comments.
   (c)   Accessory dwelling unit overlay.
      (1)   In general.
         (A)   The provisions of Section
51A-4.704(c), regarding renovation, remodeling, repair, rebuilding, or
enlargement of nonconforming structures, remain in effect.
         (B)   An accessory dwelling unit may not be sold separately from the
main building.
         (C)   For an accessory dwelling unit, the prohibition on
advertisements in Section
51A-4.209(b)(6)(E)(vii)(bb) do not apply.
         (D)   The yard, lot, and space regulations of the accessory dwelling
unit overlay must be read together with the yard, lot, and space regulations in
Division
51A-4.400. If there is a conflict between this section and Division
51A-4.400, this section controls.
         (E)   If there is a conflict between this section and the single-
family use regulations in Section
51A-4.209, this section controls.
      (2)   Yard, lot, and space regulations.
         (A)   In general. Except as provided in this subsection, the yard,
lot, and space regulations of the underlying zoning remain in effect.
         (B)   Side and rear yard.
            (i)   If the structure containing the accessory dwelling unit is
less than 15 feet in height and is located in the rear 30 percent of the lot,
minimum side yard is three feet.
            (ii)   If the structure containing the accessory dwelling unit is
less than 15 feet in height, minimum rear yard is three feet.
            (iii)   Structures 15 feet or more in height containing accessory
dwelling units must comply with the side and rear yard setbacks of the base
zoning.
         (C)   Floor area.
            (i)   Detached accessory dwelling unit.
               (aa)   Minimum floor area is 200 square feet.
               (bb)   Maximum floor area is the greater of 700 square feet or
25 percent of the main structure.
            (ii)   Attached accessory dwelling unit. Maximum floor area is the
greater of 700 square feet or 25 percent of the main use.
         (D)   Height.
            (i)   General. Except as provided in this subparagraph, the maximum
height of the structure containing the accessory dwelling unit cannot exceed
the height of the main dwelling unit.
            (ii)   Accessory dwelling units located above detached garages. For
accessory dwelling units located over detached garages, maximum height is the
maximum height allowed in that zoning overlay.
         (E)   Location.
            (i)   An accessory dwelling unit may not be located in front of a
main structure.
            (ii)   The board may grant a special exception to authorize the
placement of an accessory dwelling unit in front of a structure when, in the
opinion of the board, the accessory dwelling unit:
               (aa)   will not adversely affect neighboring properties;
               (bb)   will not be contrary to the public interest; and
               (cc)   denial of the special exception will unduly burden the
property.
         (F)   Off-street parking.
            (i)   Except as provided in this paragraph, a minimum of one space
is required.
            (ii)   Off-street parking is not required for an accessory dwelling
unit located within 1,200 feet of a DART bus or transit stop.
            (iii)   Off-street parking may be reduced if 75 percent of the
property owners within the proposed overlay sign the petition agreeing to the
reduction.
            (iv)   City council may also reduce the off-street parking
requirement if a reduction is recommended by the neighborhood steering
committee during the authorized hearing process.
         (G)   Stories. Maximum number of stories for an accessory dwelling
unit is one.
      (3)    Utility meters. A lot with an accessory dwelling unit may be
supplied by not more than two electrical utility services, and metered by not
more than two electrical meters.
      (4)   Owner occupancy.
         (A)   Except as provided in this paragraph, if one dwelling unit is
used as rental accommodations, the property owner must reside in the main
structure or the accessory dwelling unit during the tenancy.
         (B)   The owner may be absent for one year with director approval.
      (5)   Single family rental program. The rental unit must be registered in
the city single family rental program. (Ord. 30931)
SEC. 51A-4.511.   NEIGHBORHOOD FOREST OVERLAY.
   (a)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   The city council intends to provide a means of conserving and
maintaining the existing urban forest within the boundaries of neighborhood
forest overlays.
      (2)   The neighborhood forest overlay is provided for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety, and the general welfare of present and future
inhabitants of city neighborhoods through the managed conservation and
protection of the trees in the community. It is intended to help promote or
restore the character of established communities as recognized by its
inhabitants; to stabilize and protect the air quality near homes; to conserve
the city's tree canopy; to retain the living green infrastructure for reducing
flood and stormwater effects; to protect property against depreciation; to
encourage sustainable construction methods and design in redevelopment; and to
assure the sustained stability of neighborhoods for the future.
      (3)   A neighborhood forest overlay is a neighborhood-driven process that
extends the protections prescribed within Division
51A-10.130, "Urban Forest Conservation," to the properties within the overlay
area that contain single-family and duplex uses in residential districts on
lots smaller than two acres in size.
   (b)   Interpretations. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the
regulations in Article X apply in neighborhood forest overlay districts.
Sections
51A-10.135(c),
51A-10.135(d),
51A-10.135(e), and
51A-10.135(f) do not apply. If there is a conflict between this section and
Article X, this section applies. If there is a conflict between a neighborhood
forest overlay ordinance and Article X, the neighborhood forest overlay
ordinance controls.
   (c)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   MEDIAN means the middle number in a set of numbers where one-half
of the numbers are less than the median number and one-half of the numbers are
greater than the median number. For example, 4 is the median number of 1, 3, 4,
8, and 9. If the set of numbers has an even number of numbers, then the median
is the average of the two middle numbers. For example, if the set of numbers is
1, 3, 4, 6, 8, and 9, then the median is the average of 4 and 6, or 5.
      (2)   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMITTEE means the owners of at least 10 properties
within a proposed overlay.
      (3)   STRUCTURE PROXIMITY AREA means the five-foot area around a dwelling
unit.
      (4)   TREE CONSERVATION AREA means the area of tree protection and the
site subject to urban forest conservation regulations.
   (d)   Petition, initiation, and process.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, the procedures for zoning
amendments contained in Section
51A-4.701, "Zoning Amendments," apply.
      (2)   A neighborhood forest overlay may only be placed on an area:
         (A)   containing lots that are primarily smaller than two acres in
size;
         (B)   developed primarily with single family or duplex structures; and
         (C)   that is zoned either:
            (i)   as a residential district; or
            (ii)   as a planned development district, conservation district, or
form district (or portion thereof) that is restricted to single family or
duplex uses.
      (3)   The boundary lines of a neighborhood forest overlay should be drawn
to include blockfaces on both sides of a street, and to the logical edges of
the area or subdivision, as indicated by a creek, street, subdivision line,
utility easement, zoning boundary line, or other boundary. Boundary lines that
split blockfaces in two should be avoided. The minimum area of a subdistrict
within a district is one blockface. An overlay:
         (A)   must contain at least 50 lots in a compact, contiguous area, or
be an original subdivision if the subdivision contains fewer than 50 single
family or duplex structures; or
         (B)   may contain less than 50 lots, but no less than 10 lots, if the
lots are located alongside a primary natural area or if the lots maintain a
current forest cover of mature large and medium trees, including significant
trees, or trees established prior to the original subdivision.
      (4)   A neighborhood forest overlay may contain vacant lots and lots
greater than two acres in size even though those lots will not be subject to
the overlay regulations. Vacant lots within the boundaries of a neighborhood
forest overlay, however, are not subject to the unrestricted zone exception in
Section
51A-10.134(b).
      (5)   The neighborhood committee may request a petition form by
submitting a request to the department on a form furnished by the department.
The request must include the boundaries of the proposed district. The
boundaries of the proposed district must comply with the requirements of this
section.
      (6)   As soon as possible after the department provides the neighborhood
committee with a petition form, the department shall conduct a neighborhood
meeting. The department shall give notice of the neighborhood meeting to all
property owners within the proposed overlay as evidenced by the last approved
city tax roll at least 10 days prior to the neighborhood meeting.
      (7)   The petition must be on a form furnished by the department. The
petition form must include a map of the boundaries of the proposed overlay, a
list of the proposed regulations, the name and address of all property owners
within the proposed district, and a statement that by signing the petition the
signers are indicating their support of the overlay.
      (8)   The petition must be submitted with the following:
         (A)   The dated signatures of property owners within the proposed
overlay in support of the proposed overlay.
            (i)   For a proposed overlay with 50 or fewer single family or
duplex structures, the signatures on the petition must be dated within three
months following the date of the neighborhood meeting.
            (ii)   For a proposed overlay with more than 50 single family or
duplex structures, the signatures on the petition must be dated within six
months following the date of the neighborhood meeting.
            (iii)   If the proposed overlay is pursuant to Sections
51A-4.511(e)(2)(A)(i) or (ii), 60 percent of property owner signatures are
required for staff to accept the petition.
            (iv)   If the proposed overlay is pursuant to Sections
51A-4.511(e)(2)(A)(iii) or (iv), 70 percent of property owner signatures are
required for staff to accept the petition.
         (B)   The application fee, if applicable.
            (i)   If a petition is signed by property owners of fewer than 75
percent of the lots within the proposed district, the application fee must be
paid.
            (ii)   If a petition is signed by property owners of 75 percent or
more of the lots within the proposed district, the application fee is waived.
            (iii)   If the proposed overlay is authorized pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1), the application fee is waived.
         (C)   A map showing the boundaries of the proposed district.
         (D)   A list of the names and addresses of the neighborhood committee
members.
         (E)   Any other information the director determines is necessary.
      (9)   A public hearing to create an overlay is initiated by submission of
a complete petition or by authorization pursuant to Section
51A-4.701(a)(1).
      (10)   For purposes of Section
51A-4.701, "Zoning Amendments," once a complete petition has been submitted to
the director, the neighborhood forest overlay shall be treated as a city plan
commission authorized public hearing. If the district is initiated by petition,
the notice of authorization contained in Section
51A-4.701(a)(1) is not required.
      (11)   Along with any other required notice, at least 10 days prior to
consideration by the city plan commission, the director shall mail a draft of
the proposed neighborhood forest overlay ordinance and a reply form to all
owners of real property within the area of notification. The reply form must
allow the recipient to indicate support or opposition to the proposed
neighborhood forest overlay and give written comments. The director shall
report to the city plan commission and the city council the percentage of
replies in favor and in opposition and summarize any comments.
      (12)   Upon passage of a neighborhood forest overlay ordinance, the
director shall file a copy of the ordinance in the county deed records to give
notice of the regulations. The director shall also file in the county deed
records a verified written instrument listing each property by the street
address, if available, the legal description of the real property, and the name
of the owner, if available.
   (e)   Neighborhood forest overlay.
      (1)   In general.
         (A)   A neighborhood forest overlay establishes regulations that must
be selected from the options described in this subsection.
         (B)   The regulations of the neighborhood forest overlay must reflect
the existing forest conditions within the neighborhood.
         (C)   Except as provided in the neighbor hood forest overlay, all
regulations of the underlying zoning remain in effect.
      (2)   Tree conservation area.
         (A)   The neighborhood committee will select their tree conservation
area from the following options:
            (i)   Front yard setback.
            (ii)   Front yard to structure.
            (iii)   Front, side, and rear yard setbacks.
            (iv)   Entire lot.
         (B)   The conservation, establishment, and maintenance of trees in
Section
51A-10.136(a) apply to trees within a tree conservation area.
      (3)   Additional options.
         (A)   Tree canopy cover goal option. To reduce tree replacement
requirements, a portion of existing tree canopy coverage over a tree
conservation area must be preserved.
            (i)   The tree canopy cover goal is determined by the neighborhood
during the petition process. The minimum percentage is to be determined by the
median of the tree canopy coverage in the tree conservation area on each lot
within the proposed overlay.
            (ii)   Healthy large and medium trees preserved in the tree
conservation area, including boundary trees, may be included in tree canopy
cover calculations. Invasive trees and trees located within 20 feet on center
of the nearest overhead public electric line are not included in the
calculation.
            (iii)   Each large and medium nursery stock tree planted as
landscaping may also qualify as 300 square feet of tree canopy cover. If the
tree canopy cover goal is met, additional landscape trees are not required,
except that one tree must be provided in the required front yard.
            (iv)   Boundary trees located on adjacent private property must be
protected to the drip line according to the tree protection shown on the site
assessment plan.
            (v)   The tree canopy cover for the tree conservation area on the
lot may be measured by the property owner, and verified and approved by the
building official.
         (B)   Minimum front yard tree option. Lots must maintain a minimum
number of trees in the front yard, as designated by the neighborhood forest
overlay ordinance. Replacement is not required in the case that a property
falls below the minimum number of large or medium trees due to a reason
enumerated in the defense to prosecution section of Section
51A-10.140(b).
      (4)   Structure proximity area. More than 50 percent of the tree trunk at
grade must be within the structure proximity area to qualify for an exception
from mitigation. An approved tree removal application is required prior to tree
removal.
      (5)   Site assessment plan. Prior to any development, construction
activity, or disturbance of an area that may affect trees within the tree
conservation area, a tree removal application, or permits for construction or
grading, a site assessment plan must be submitted to the building official. The
overlay regulations do not prohibit the removal or alteration of unprotected
trees, or landscape ornamental and small trees, or other landscape shrubs,
grasses, or other materials, that do not qualify as a protected tree. Any work
or disturbance which includes significant soil compaction, trenching, tilling,
excavation, paving, grading, chemical mixing, or pruning exceeding 10 percent
tree canopy reduction, on the tree and within the dripline of the protected
tree, is subject to the site assessment plan review. The site assessment plan
must show the following:
         (A)   Structures.
         (B)   Paving.
         (C)   Proposed development, construc tion or disturbance.
         (D)   Location, diameter, and species of all trees (including boundary
trees) in the tree conservation area, and 10 feet beyond.
         (E)   Tree protection, as applicable.
         (F)   Replacement trees, as applicable.
      (6)   Tree mitigation. Upon approval of tree removal within the tree
conservation area, or an unauthorized removal of a protected tree, tree
mitigation or replacement is required in accordance with Section
51A-10.134(c). The applicable methods are:
         (A)   Replacement on the site of removal.
         (B)   Replacement with a legacy tree on the site of removal.
         (C)   If replacement is not possible on the lot of removal, then
replacement on other property within boundaries of the neighborhood forest
overlay.
         (D)   If replacement is not possible within the neighborhood forest
overlay, the tree must be replaced within five miles of the neighborhood forest
overlay.
         (E)   Payment into reforestation fund. This option is only available
if the building official determines that, due to restrictive site conditions,
it would be impracticable or imprudent for the responsible party to plant a
replacement tree on the tree removal property or comply with one or more of the
mitigation methods in this section.
   (f)   Criminal responsibility and defenses to prosecution.
      (1)   The criminal liability and defenses to prosecution provisions in
Section
51A-10.140 apply to properties subject to a neighborhood forest overlay.
      (2)   A tree removal application or tree replacement is not required if
the tree is determined by a certified arborist to be diseased or dead or poses
an imminent threat to people or property and such determination was not caused
by an intentional act of the owner or an agent of the owner. (Ord. 31174)
Division 51A-4.600. Regulations of Special Applicability.
SEC. 51A-4.601.   CREATION OF A BUILDING SITE.
   (a)   The building official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy or a
building permit until a building site is established in one of the following
ways:
      (1)   A lot is part of a plat that has been approved by the commission,
or approved by the platting authority recognized by state law for the
jurisdiction where the property was located before annexation or consolidation
with the city of Dallas, and filed in the plat records of the appropriate
county. Unless a lot is part of a shared access development, or unless
otherwise provided in an ordinance establishing or amending a planned
development district, all platted lots must contact, through fee simple
ownership, a dedicated street or a private street.
      (2)   A parcel was separately owned before September 11, 1929, or before
annexation or consolidation and the parcel has contact, through fee simple
ownership, with a dedicated street. For purposes of this paragraph, a parcel is
considered “separately owned” if it:
         (A)   is described in a different deed than that of adjacent
properties; and
         (B)   has remained in the same configuration since September 10, 1929,
regardless of whether ownership has changed since that date.
Documented evidence must be provided by the owner to demonstrate that land has
remained in the same configuration during the relevant time period. Under this
paragraph, the building official may issue a building permit for only one main
building on each building site.
      (3)   A lot is part of an industrial subdivision in which only streets,
easements, and blocks are delineated. The industrial subdivision must be
approved by the commission and filed in the plat records of the appropriate
county. No specific lot delineation is required, but yard, lot, and space
requirements will be determined by property lines or lease lines.
      (4)   Any area in a CA-1(A) district that is bound on all sides by public
streets or alleys constitutes a legal building site.
      (5)   A parcel upon which a building permit was authorized for
development of a single family or duplex use before August 1, 1984, provided
the single family or duplex use is not changed to a different use than that
approved before August 1, 1984. The authorized single family or duplex use need
not exist at the time of application for a certificate of occupancy or building
permit under this paragraph, but evidence must be provided showing that the
single family or duplex use was authorized on the property before August 1,
1984, did in fact exist, and no other use has been made of the property since
the single family or duplex use was authorized by the city. A building site
must be established under another paragraph of this section if a change of use
has been made or is proposed for the property.
      (6)   A parcel upon which a building permit was authorized for
development of other than a single family or duplex use and:
         (A)   the building permit authorizing an existing structure was issued
before August 1, 1984;
         (B)   the proposed work does not increase the floor area of the
structure by more than 35 percent; and
         (C)   the proposed addition does not exceed 10,000 square feet of
floor area. Evidence must be provided showing that the use was authorized on
the property before August 1, 1984.
      (7)   A parcel with less lot area, depth, or width than required in this
chapter provided:
         (A)   the parcel has an area, depth, or width that is not more than 10
percent smaller or is greater than the average lot area, depth, or width of
other platted lots or recognized building sites capable of development with
single family or duplex uses within the same platted block (for purposes of
this subsection, “platted block” means the legal block as shown on the plat
map);
         (B)   the platted lots or recognized building sites contiguous to the
parcel are developed with single family or duplex uses;
         (C)   the majority of the platted lots and recognizable building sites
within the same platted block as the parcel have been platted or have been
recognizable building sites for at least 20 years; and
         (D)   the parcel complies with all other zoning regulations other than
lot area, depth, or width regulations.
   (b)   Land used in meeting the requirements of this article for a particular
use or building may not be used to meet the requirements for any other use or
building.
   (c)   Except as provided in the regulations for the single family and duplex
uses, more than one main building may be erected on a building site when there
is compliance with all applicable regulations in this chapter.
   (d)   A lot with less lot area than required in this chapter that was
lawfully established under the regulations in force at the time of the creation
of the building site may be used for a single family use if permitted by all
zoning regulations applicable to the property other than lot area regulations.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 23383; 24731; 25809)
SEC. 51A-4.602.   FENCE, SCREENING AND VISUAL OBSTRUCTION REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Fence standards. Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this
chapter, fences must be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following regulations.
      (1)   In this subsection:
         (A)   FENCE PANEL means the portion of a fence located between the
posts or columns.
         (B)   RETAINING WALL means a wall designed to hold in place earthen or
similar materials and to prevent the material from sliding away or eroding.
      (2)   A person shall not erect or maintain a fence in a required yard
more than nine feet above grade. In all residential districts except
multifamily districts, a fence may not exceed four feet above grade when
located in the required front yard, except when the required front yard is
governed by the side or rear yard regulations pursuant to Section
51A-4.401.
      (3)   In single family districts, a fence panel with a surface area that
is less than 50 percent open may not be located less than five feet from the
front lot line. This paragraph does not apply to retaining walls.
      (4)   In multifamily districts, a fence located in the required front
yard may be built to a maximum height of six feet above grade if all conditions
in the following subparagraphs are met:
         (A)   No lot in the blockface may be zoned as a single family or
duplex district.
         (B)   No gates for vehicular traffic may be located less than 20 feet
from the back of the street curb.
         (C)   No fence panel having less than 50 percent open surface area may
be located less than five feet from the front lot line.
      (5)   If a fence panel setback is required under Paragraph (4)(C), the
entire setback area, except for driveways and sidewalks, must be located within
100 feet of a verifiable water supply and landscaped with living evergreen
shrubs or vines recommended for local use by the park and recreation director.
Initial plantings must be calculated to cover a minimum of 30 percent of the
fence panel(s) within three years after planting. Shrubs or vines must be
planted 24 inches on center over the entire length of the setback area unless a
landscape architect recommends otherwise.
      (6)   Unless all of the conditions in Paragraphs (4) and (5) are met, a
fence in a multifamily district may not exceed four feet above grade when
located in the required front yard, except when the required front yard is
governed by the side or rear yard regulations pursuant to Section
51A-4.401.
      (7)   Fence heights shall be measured from:
         (A)   In single family and duplex districts:
            (i)   the top of the fence to the level of the ground on the inside
and outside of any fence within the required front yard. The fence height shall
be the greater of these two measurements. If the fence is constructed on fill
material that alters grade, as determined by the building official, the height
of the artificially altered grade shall be included in the height of the fence.
For purposes of this provision, artificially altered grade means the placement
of fill material on property that exceeds a slope of one foot of height for
three feet of distance; and
            (ii)   the top of the fence to the level of the ground on the
inside of the fence in the required side or rear yard.
         (B)   In all other zoning districts, fence heights shall be measured
from the top of the fence to the level of the ground on the inside of the
fence.
      (8)   A fence may not be located within an easement without the prior
written approval by the agencies having interest in the easement.
      (9)   Except as provided in this subsection, the following fence
materials are prohibited:
         (A)   Sheet metal;
         (B)   Corrugated metal;
         (C)   Fiberglass panels;
         (D)    Plywood;
         (E)    Plastic materials other than preformed fence pickets and fence
panels with a minimum thickness of seven-eighths of an inch;
         (F)    Barbed wire and razor ribbon (concertina wire) in residential
districts other than an A(A) Agricultural District; and
         (G)   Barbed wire and razor ribbon (concertina wire) in nonresidential
districts unless the barbed wire or razor ribbon (concertina wire) is six feet
or more above grade and does not project beyond the property line.
      (10)   All fences must provide firefighting access to the side and rear
yard.
      (11)   The board may grant a special exception to the fence standards in
this subsection when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will
not adversely affect neighboring property.
   (b)   Required screening. Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this
chapter, screening must be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following regulations.
      (1)   Screening required in this article must be not less than six feet
in height.
      (2)   The board may grant a special exception to the height requirement
for screening when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will not
adversely affect neighboring property, except that the board may not grant a
special exception to the height requirements for screening around off-street
parking.
      (3)   Required screening must be constructed of:
         (A)   brick, stone, concrete masonry, concrete, or wood;
         (B)   earthen berm planted with turf grass or ground cover recommended
for local area use by the building official. The berm may not have a slope that
exceeds one foot of height for each two feet of width;
         (C)   evergreen plant materials recommended for local area use by the
building official. The plant materials must be located in a bed that is at
least three feet wide with a minimum soil depth of 24 inches. Initial plantings
must be capable of obtaining a solid appearance within three years. Plant
materials must be placed a maximum of 24 inches on center over the entire
length of the bed unless the building official approves an alternative planting
density that a landscape authority certifies as being capable of providing a
solid appearance within three years; or
         (D)   any combination of the above.
      (4)   A required screening wall or fence may not have more than 10 square
inches of openings in any given square foot of surface. Plant materials used
for required screening must obtain a solid appearance and provide a visual
barrier of the required height within three years after their initial planting.
      (5)   Access through required screening may be provided only by a solid
gate equalling the height of the screening. The gate must remain closed:
         (A)   between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.; and
         (B)   at all other times except when in actual use.
      (6)   Garbage storage areas must be visually screened on any side visible
from a street or an adjoining property by a brick, stone, concrete masonry,
concrete, or wood wall or fence or by landscape screening. Screening is not
required on a side adjacent to an alley or easement used for garbage pick-up
service. Screening is not required if the garbage storage area is 200 feet or
more from the street or adjoining property. To allow air circulation and
visibility, the screening from grade to one foot above grade may be up to 50
percent open.
      (7)   An owner shall provide screening in accordance with this section
for the rear or service side of a nonresidential building if:
         (A)   the nonresidential building is in a residential district and is
exposed to a residential use; or
         (B)   the nonresidential building is in an office, retail, CS, IL, IR,
or IM district and is exposed to and closer than 150 feet to the boundary line
of an A, A(A), R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A)
district.
      (8)   When all service, storage, and loading facilities are contained
within a nonresidential building, the screening requirement in Subsection (b)
(7) does not apply.
      (9)    Plant materials used for required screening must be maintained in
a healthy growing condition at all times. The property owner is responsible for
the regular weeding, mowing of grass, irrigating, fertilizing, pruning, and
other maintenance of all plantings as needed. Any plant that dies must be
replaced with another living plant that complies with screening requirements
within 90 days after notification by the city.
      (10)   All required screening with plant materials must be irrigated by
an automatic irrigation system installed to comply with industry standards.
      (11)   Fences that are painted or stained must be uniformly painted or
stained across the entire length of the fence. This provision prohibits
different colored patches of paint or stain on portions of a fence. For
example, if a fence is painted white, graffiti should be covered with the same
color of white paint, not with blue or red paint.
   (c)   Special screening and visual intrusion provisions.
      (1)   In an office district, if a building or a parking structure is
erected on a building site and a portion of the side or rear yard abuts or is
across an adjoining alley from an A, A(A), R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF,
MF(A), MH, or MH(A) district, any portion of the building site directly across
from that district must be screened from that district.
      (2) through (5) Reserved.
      (6)   In all nonresidential districts except central area districts, no
portion of any balcony or opening that faces an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A),
CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-1(SAH), MF-2, MF-2(A), or MF- 2(SAH) district may be
located above a residential proximity slope originating in that district.
   (d)   Visual obstruction regulations.
      (1)   A person shall not erect, place, or maintain a structure, berm,
plant life, or any other item on a lot if the item is:
         (A)   in a visibility triangle, as defined in Paragraph (2); and
         (B)   between two-and-one-half feet and eight feet in height measured
from the top of the adjacent street curb. If there is no adjacent street curb,
the measurement is taken from the grade of the portion of the street adjacent
to the visibility triangle.
      (2)   For purposes of Paragraph (1), the term “visibility triangle”
means:
         (A)   in all zoning districts except central area districts, the Deep
Ellum/Near Eastside District (Planned Development District No. 269), and the
State-Thomas Special Purpose District (Planned Development District No. 225),
the portion of a corner lot within a triangular area formed by connecting
together the point of intersection of adjacent street curb lines (or, if there
are no street curbs, what would be the normal street curb lines) and points on
each of the street curb lines 45 feet from the intersection;
         (B)   in central area districts, the Deep Ellum/Near Eastside District
(Planned Development District No. 269), and the State-Thomas Special Purpose
District (Planned Development District No. 225), the portion of a corner lot
within a triangular area formed by connecting together the point of
intersection of adjacent street curb lines (or, if there are no street curbs,
what would be the normal street curb lines) and points on each of the street
curb lines 30 feet from the intersection; and
         (C)   in all zoning districts, the portion of a lot within a
triangular area formed by connecting together the point of intersection of the
edge of a driveway or alley and an adjacent street curb line (or, if there is
no street curb, what would be the normal street curb line) and points on the
driveway or alley edge and the street curb line 20 feet from the intersection.
      (3)   The board shall grant a special exception to the requirements of
this section when, in the opinion of the board, the item will not constitute a
traffic hazard.
      (4)   It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that a
structure becomes nonconforming with respect to the visibility triangle unless
the nonconforming rights attendant to the structure have been lost or
terminated under Section
51A-4.704. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20236; 20362; 20539; 21663; 22994; 25831;
26288; 27495; 29917; 30198; 30893)
SEC. 51A-4.603.   USE OF CONVEYANCE AS A BUILDING.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, conveyance means a railway coach or
car, streetcar, bus, airplane, trailer, or similar structure, vehicle, or
device originally intended for transporting people or goods.
   (b)   A person shall not place or use a conveyance as a building for the
operation of a use. It is a defense to prosecution that the use of a conveyance
is permitted under this section.
   (c)   A person may obtain permission to use a conveyance as a building for
the operation of a use at a location properly zoned for the use if the device
contributes to a theme or period development. The person shall submit an
application to the director requesting approval of the proposal. Within 60 days
of receipt of the application, the commission shall submit its recommendation
of approval or disapproval to the city council which may approve or reject a
resolution authorizing the use. The conveyance must comply with all applicable
ordinances and regulations.
   (d)   A person may use a conveyance as a temporary office, but not as a
residence, in connection with the sale of real estate within a specific
development project, after obtaining a building permit and certificate of
occupancy from the building official. The following measures to assure sanitary
conditions must be taken:
      (1)   If sanitary sewer facilities are available, temporary plumbing
connections must be made as prescribed by the Dallas plumbing code. No
permanent plumbing connection is permitted.
      (2)   If sanitary sewer facilities are not available, sanitation
facilities must be provided in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
department of code compliance. No building permit or certificate of occupancy
may be issued by the building official without the approval of the department
of code compliance.
      (3)   Electrical service in connection with the use described in this
subsection must be limited to temporary pole service.
   (e)   Governmental agencies and civic organizations may conduct a use in a
conveyance in accordance with this subsection.
      (1)   The use must be sponsored by and under the direct control of a
governmental agency or civic organization.
      (2)   The use must be a function relating to the public health, safety,
and welfare such as driver training, consumer and homemaking education, dental
hygiene, mobile library, mobile x-ray unit, or other similar public service use
that due to the equipment involved, logistics of scheduling locations and the
times needed in a specific community, the use is not appropriate for a
permanent location.
      (3)   The conveyance must be self-contained requiring only electrical
service. Only one electrical hook-up station served by a separate electrical
service accommodating not more than two conveyances is permitted on any
premise. The hook-up station must be a permanent installation installed under
permit. Temporary electrical or plumbing connections to existing facilities are
not permitted.
      (4)   The conveyance may be located in any zoning district; however, in
residential districts, the location is restricted to properties owned and
operated by sponsoring agencies. A sponsoring agency may by agreement
reciprocate with other sponsoring agencies to use their premises.
      (5)   The conveyance must comply with setback requirements of this
chapter and the building code.
      (6)   One sign that does not exceed 30 square feet in size may be
attached to each side of the conveyance.
   (f)   A person shall not place or use a conveyance as a dwelling unit. It is
a defense to prosecution under this subsection that:
      (1)   the person uses a railroad work car, caboose, or converted freight
car as a dwelling unit when it is confined to rails and located on the right-
of-way of a railway doing business as a common carrier; or
      (2)   the person uses a manufactured home or self-propelled recreational
vehicle as a dwelling unit in a properly zoned district.
   (g)   A person may use a conveyance as a building for the operation of a
recycling collection center.
   (h)   A person may use a conveyance as a building for the operation of x-ray
or other imaging equipment provided it is used in conjunction with a medical
clinic or ambulatory surgical center use or a hospital use.
   (i)   A person may use a conveyance as a building for the purpose of storing
food products provided:
      (1)   the conveyance is used in conjunction with a permitted use;
      (2)   a temporary food service permit is obtained from the Department of
Health and Human Services; and
      (3)   the use of the conveyance is limited to no more than twice each
calendar year for a maximum period of 15 consecutive days.
   (j)   A person may use a conveyance as a building for food preparation from
mobile vans and trucks provided:
      (1)   the conveyance is only allowed in the CS, LI, IR, and IM districts;
      (2)   the conveyance meets the standards of the department of code
compliance;
      (3)   the conveyance is operated as a temporary use which is accessory to
the main use on the property for the purpose of cooking, wrapping, packaging,
processing, or portioning ready-to-eat food for service, sale, or distribution;
and
      (4)   all required permits are obtained from the department of code
compliance. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20360; 21398; 21895; 22759; 23694; 27697)
SEC. 51A-4.604.   RESTRICTIONS ON ACCESS THROUGH A LOT.
   (a)   Access to a use may not go through a lot in a residential district
unless the use is permitted in that residential district. If the use is
permitted in the residential district by SUP only, the access is also permitted
by SUP only.
   (b)   This section does not affect access to a use through a lot in a
nonresidential district. (Ord. 20238)
SEC. 51A-4.605.   DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   Design standards for large retail uses.
      (1)   Purpose. Large retail uses often have negative impacts on community
aesthetics, the environment, mass transit, pedestrian circulation, the scale
and rhythm of streetscapes, traffic, and urban sprawl. These design standards
are intended to ensure that large retail uses are compatible with the
surrounding area and mitigate the negative impact of large retail uses while
allowing creativity, flexibility, and variety in design. These design standards
are also intended to make adaptive reuse of large retail spaces possible.
      (2)   Applicability.
         (A)   These design standards apply to the following uses built after
October 27, 2004, and the following existing uses expanded to 100,000 square
feet or more:
            (i)   In Chapter 51:
               (aa)   Retail stores other than listed uses of 100,000 square
feet or more.
               (bb)   Retail food store uses of 100,000 square feet or more.
               (cc)   Furniture store uses of 100,000 square feet or more.
               (dd)   Home improvement center uses of 100,000 square feet or
more.
            (ii)   In
Chapter 51A:
               (aa)   Furniture store uses of 100,000 square feet or more.
               (bb)   General merchandise and food store uses of 100,000 square
feet or more.
               (cc)   Home improvement center, lumber, brick or building
material sales yard uses of 100,000 square feet or more.
         (B)   These design standards do not apply to a covered mall building
containing more than 500,000 square feet. These design standards do apply to
any use listed in Subparagraph (A) within a covered mall building (an anchor
tenant) that has a means of ingress and egress independent of the covered mall
building and does not have an entrance into the common pedestrian area.
         (C)   The landscape requirements of these design standards may be used
to satisfy any landscaping required by
Article X.
         (D)   In the event that these design standards conflict with other
requirements of this chapter, the more stringent requirement applies.
      (3)   Definitions. The following definitions apply to these design
standards:
         (A)   COVERED MALL BUILDING means a single building enclosing 10 or
more retail, personal service, and office uses that have access into a climate-
controlled common pedestrian area.
         (B)   FACADE WALL means any separate face of a building, including
parapet walls and omitted wall lines, or any part of a building that encloses
usable space. Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction, or in
the directions within 45 degrees of one another, they are considered as part of
a single facade wall.
         (C)   FRONT PARKING AREA means, for developments with a single use,
the area in front of a line parallel to and extending outward from the primary
facade wall to the property lines, and means, for developments with multiple
uses, the area between two lines at the corners of the primary facade wall and
perpendicular to the primary facade wall and extending to the property line.
         (D)   PRIMARY FACADE WALL means the facade wall containing the primary
entrance. If two or more facades walls have entrances of equal significance,
each facade wall will be considered a primary facade wall.
         (E)   REAR FACADE WALL means the facade wall containing service areas.
         (F)   SIDE FACADE WALL means any facade wall that is not a primary
facade wall or a rear facade wall.
         (G)   SERVICE AREA means any area for loading docks, outdoor storage
(other than an outdoor display, sales, and storage area), trash collection or
compaction, truck parking, or other similar functions.
      (4)   Facade walls. Primary facade walls and side facade walls must
incorporate at least three of the following design elements. Rear facade walls
must incorporate at least two of the following design elements. The cumulative
length of these design elements must extend for at least 60 percent of the
facade wall’s horizontal length.
         (A)   A repeating pattern of wall recesses and projections, such as
bays, offsets, reveals, or projecting ribs, that have a relief of at least
eight inches.
         (B)   At least three of the following design elements at the primary
entrance, so that the primary entrance is architecturally prominent and clearly
visible from the abutting street:
            (i)   Architectural details such as arches, friezes, tile work,
murals, or moldings.
            (ii)   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaping
or seating.
            (iii)   Enhanced exterior light fixtures such as wall sconces,
light coves with concealed light sources, ground-mounted accent lights, or
decorative pedestal lights.
            (iv)   Prominent three-dimensional features, such as belfries,
chimneys, clock towers, domes, spires, steeples, towers, or turrets.
            (v)   A repeating pattern of pilasters projecting from the facade
wall by a minimum of eight inches or architectural or decorative columns.
         (C)   Arcades, awnings, canopies, covered walkways, or porticos.
         (D)   Display windows, faux windows, or decorative windows.
         (E)   Trim or accent elements using decorative contrasting colors or
decorative neon lighting of at least 10 percent of the area of the facade wall
exclusive of fenestration.
      (5)   Facade wall changes. Facade walls must have a one or more of the
following changes:
         (A)   Changes of color, texture, or material, either diagonally,
horizontally, or vertically, at intervals of not less than 20 feet and not more
than 100 feet.
         (B)   Changes in plane with a depth of at least 24 inches, either
diagonally, horizontally, or vertically, at intervals of not less than 20 feet
and not more than 100 feet.
      (6)   Materials and colors.
         (A)   No more than 75 percent of the area of a facade wall, exclusive
of fenestration, may have a single material or color.
         (B)   It is recommended that the following materials are only used on
rear facade walls:
            (i)   Smooth-faced concrete block that is non-tinted or non-
burnished.
            (ii)   Tilt-up concrete panels that are unadorned or untextured.
            (iii)   Prefabricated steel panels.
      (7)   Roofs.
         (A)   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment, skylights, and solar panels
must be screened or set back so that they not visible from a point five feet,
six inches above grade at the property line. Screening materials must match the
materials and colors used on the main building. Chain link fence may not be
used as a screening material.
         (B)   Roofs must have at least one of the following design elements:
            (i)   Parapets with horizontal tops having height changes of at
least one foot occurring horizontally no less than every 100 feet. Parapets
that do not have horizontal tops must have pitched or rounded tops with a
pattern that repeats or varies no less than every 100 feet. All parapets must
have detailing such as cornices, moldings, trim, or variations in brick
coursing.
            (ii)   Sloping roofs with at least two of the following design
elements:
               (aa)   Slope of at least 5:12.
               (bb)   Two or more slope planes.
               (cc)   Overhanging eaves extending at least three feet beyond
the supporting wall.
      (8)   Parking lots and landscaping.
         (A)   Landscaped islands of a minimum of 20 square feet per row of
cars must be placed at both ends of each grouping of parking rows. Landscaped
islands must have ground cover and trees or shrubs.
         (B)   Parking lots must be divided into sections containing no more
than 120 parking spaces. Parking lot sections must be divided by landscaped
dividers with a minimum width of five feet. Landscaped dividers must have trees
spaced at a maximum of 30 feet on center and ground cover or shrubs. Parking
lot sections may contain up to 160 parking spaces if, in addition to the
landscaped divider, each grouping of parking rows is divided by a landscape
island of a minimum of 20 square feet per row of cars. Landscaped islands must
have ground cover and trees or shrubs.
         (C)   No more than two-thirds of the off-street parking spaces may be
located in the front parking area. If more than 50 percent of a parking space
is within the front parking area, then that parking space shall be counted as
being within the front parking area. The two-thirds limitation on off-street
parking within the front parking area may be exceeded if one additional tree
beyond the requirements of these design standards is provided within the front
parking area for every 15 off-street additional parking spaces or fraction
thereof located within the front parking area.
         (D)   Parking lots must have a pedestrian pathway system distinguished
from the parking and driving surface by landscape barriers or a change in
surface materials such as pavers or patterned concrete. Pedestrian pathways may
not be distinguished by paint alone. Pedestrian pathways must be a minimum of
eight feet wide. Pedestrian pathways must connect mass transit stops, parking
areas, public sidewalks, and public rights-of-way to the primary entrance.
         (E)   A landscaped buffer strip with a minimum width of 20 feet must
be located between any parking area and any public right-of-way other than
alleys. The landscape buffer may be interrupted by vehicular and pedestrian
access areas. The landscape buffer strip may be located in whole or in part in
the public right-of-way if the requirements of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code are met. The landscape buffer strip must
have an evergreen berm with a minimum height of three feet. If the topography
prevents installation of a berm, an evergreen hedge with a minimum height of
three feet may be substituted. The landscape buffer must also have trees spaced
at a maximum of 30 feet on center.
         (F)   Trees spaced at a maximum of 30 feet on center must be provided
within 20 feet of the primary facade wall and one side facade wall for at least
50 percent of the length of each facade wall. Trees may be located in the
public right-of-way if the requirements of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code are met. Trees must be planted in a
landscape strip with a minimum width of five feet or in tree wells with minimum
dimensions of five feet by five feet.
         (G)   Parking areas must have access, either directly or via a private
access drive, to a four-lane public street with two lanes in each direction or
to a two-lane one-way public street.
         (H)   Shopping cart storage areas in parking lots must be screened
with landscaping along the length of the shopping cart storage area facing any
public right-of-way other than alleys.
      (9)   Miscellaneous design standards.
         (A)   Service areas must be oriented so that they are not visible from
abutting public rights-of-way or residential zoning districts, or must be
screened from abutting public rights-of-way or residential zoning districts by
solid masonry screening with a minimum height of eight feet extending the
entire length of the service area.
         (B)   Automotive service bays must be oriented away from any public
right-of-way or residential zoning district, unless screened from view with
solid masonry screening with a minimum height of eight feet extending the
entire length of the automotive service bays.
         (C)   Mechanical equipment on the ground must be screened using
materials matching the materials and colors used on the main building. Chain
link fence may not be used as a screening material.
         (D)   Merchandise may not be displayed or stored in parking areas or
on sidewalks adjacent to facade walls, except in screened outdoor display,
sales, and storage areas.
         (E)   Outdoor display, sales, and storage areas, such as nursery
departments, must be enclosed by screening with a solid base with a minimum
height of three feet surmounted by a wrought iron or tubular steel fence with a
minimum height of five feet. The screening must be surmounted with a minimum of
two feet of fascia with materials and colors matching the main building. No
merchandise other than trees may be visible above the screening.
         (F)   Shopping cart storage areas adjacent to facade walls (not in
parking lots) must be screened with landscaping or materials matching the
materials of the primary facade wall. No more than two shopping cart storage
areas (one on each side of an entrance) may be provided on any facade wall.
Shopping cart storage areas may not exceed 20 feet in length.
         (G)   In the CA-1 and CA-1(A) districts, a minimum of 75 percent of
the primary facade wall must be set back no more than 15 feet.
         (H)   If the use is within 300 feet of a residential zoning district
or a zoning district that allows residential uses, the following restrictions
apply. For purposes of this provision, measurements are made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
boundary of the lot where the use is conducted to the nearest boundary of the
zoning district in issue.
            (i)   External speakers are prohibited.
            (ii)   Staging, loading, or idling of commercial vehicles in a
service area is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Signs
prohibiting staging, loading, or idling of commercial vehicles between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. must be posted every 100 feet adjacent to the
service area.
            (iii)   An external lighting plan demonstrating compliance with all
city ordinances must be submitted to and approved by the building official
prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction, a building
permit to expand to 100,000 square feet or more, or a certificate of occupancy.
      (10)   Variations and exceptions. The city plan commission, whether or
not a specific use permit is required, may approve a site plan that does not
comply with the requirements of these design standards provided that:
         (A)   strict compliance with these design standards is impractical due
to site constraints or would result in substantial hardship;
         (B)   the site plan complies with the spirit and intent of these
design standards;
         (C)   the site plan furthers the stated purpose of these design
standards; and
         (D)   the variation or exception from these design standards will not
adversely affect surrounding properties.
The city plan commission shall follow the same procedure used for approval of
minor amendments to development plans and the fee for a minor plan amendment
shall apply. (Ord. Nos. 25785; 27404; 28553; 31607)
Division 51A-4.700. Zoning Procedures.
SEC. 51A-4.701.   ZONING AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   Initiation.
      (1)   The city council or the commission may authorize a public hearing
on an amendment to this article or a change in a zoning district classification
or boundary. If 10 or fewer property owners are involved, the director shall
send written notice to the owners of real property within the subject area not
less than 10 days before the meeting at which the city council or commission
will consider authorization of a public hearing. This notice must be written in
English and Spanish if the area of request is located wholly or partly within a
census tract in which 50 percent or more of the inhabitants are persons of
Spanish origin or descent according to the most recent federal decennial
census. If more than 10 property owners are involved, the director shall give
notice of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the city at least 10
days before the meeting at which the city council or commission will consider
authorization of a public hearing.
      (1.1)   In addition to any notice required by Paragraph (1) of this
subsection, the director shall send written notice of each public hearing for
an amendment to this chapter or a change in zoning district under which a
current conforming use would become a nonconforming use if the amendment to
this chapter or change in zoning district is adopted. The notice must:
         (A)   be mailed by U.S. mail to each owner of real or business
personal property where the proposed nonconforming use is located as indicated
by the most recently approved municipal tax roll and each occupant of the
property not later than the 10th day before the hearing date;
         (B)   contain the time and place of the hearing; and
         (C)   include the following text in bold 14-point type font or larger:
“THE CITY OF DALLAS IS HOLDING A HEARING THAT WILL DETERMINE WHETHER YOU MAY
LOSE THE RIGHT TO CONTINUE USING YOUR PROPERTY FOR ITS CURRENT USE. PLEASE READ
THIS NOTICE CAREFULLY.”
      (2)   A person may request a change in the zoning district classification
or boundary by filing an application with the director.
         (A)   The application must be on a form approved by the commission and
furnished by the department.
         (B)   Each owner of property within the area of request must sign the
application.
         (C)   The applicant must pay an application fee.
         (D)   If the area of request is adjacent to a public street or alley,
the director shall extend its boundaries to the centerline of the adjacent
street or alley.
         (E)   An applicant requesting a change in zoning to an urban corridor
district shall submit a concept plan in addition to the general requirements
for a zoning change. The concept plan must indicate:
            (i)   the location of the urban corridor district site showing
frontage along an urban corridor, indicating existing widths of rights-of-way,
number of lanes, lane widths, and street designations according to the city’s
thoroughfare plan or Texas Department of Transportation;
            (ii)   the existing zoning district classifications and land uses
for all properties within 250 feet of the area of request;
            (iii)   the proposed urban corridor lot dimensions, lot area,
existing building footprints, and setback lines showing buildable area based on
urban corridor regulations; and
            (iv)   the proposed mix of land uses.
   (b)   Commission report and recommendation required.
      (1)   The commission shall make a report and recommendation to the city
council on all proposed amendments to this article or requests for a change in
a zoning district classification or boundary.
      (2)   The director shall conduct those studies necessary for the
commission to make its recommendation and report to city council.
      (3)   The commission or a committee of the commission shall hold a public
hearing to allow proponents and opponents of an amendment to this article or
request for a change in a zoning district classification or boundary to present
their views.
      (4)   Before the commission holds the public hearing on an amendment to
this article or on a request for a change in a zoning district classification
or boundary, the director shall give notice of the public hearing in the
official newspaper of the city at least 10 days before the hearing.
      (5)   The director shall send written notice of a public hearing on a
city council, city plan commission, or landmark commission authorized hearing
for a change in a zoning district classification or boundary to all owners of
real property according to the following table:
 
Authorized Hearing Area   Area of Notification for Hearing
0-1 acre                  200 feet
over 1 acre to 5 acres    300 feet
over 5 acres to 15 acres  400 feet
over 15 acres to 25 acres 400 feet
over 25 acres             500 feet
 
See Section
51A-1.105 for the notification area for other applications. The measurement of
the notification area includes streets and alleys. The notice must be given not
less than 10 days before the date set for the city plan commission hearing by
depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid in the United States
mail to the property owners as evidenced by the last approved tax roll. This
notice must be written in English and Spanish if the area of request is located
wholly or partly within a census tract in which 50 percent or more of the
inhabitants are persons of Spanish origin or descent according to the most
recent federal decennial census. The applicant may not alter, change, amend,
enlarge, or withdraw a portion of an application after notices have been mailed
for the public hearing.
      (6)   The commission shall make its recommendation on a proposed
amendment to this article or request for a change in a zoning district
classification or boundary from staff reports of the director, field
inspections and the evidence presented at the public hearing.
      (7)   The director shall forward to the city council the commission’s
recommendation and report on all amendments to this article and requests for a
change in a zoning district classification or boundary except that when the
request for a change in a zoning district classification or boundary is denied
by the commission, the director shall not forward that recommendation and
report to the city council unless the applicant within 10 days of the denial
files with the director a request in writing that the city council review the
commission’s findings.
      (8)   A request for a change in a zoning district classification or
boundary that has been forwarded to the city council may not be held for longer
than six months from the date of the commission’s action without being
scheduled for a city council hearing. The commission shall review a request for
a change in a zoning district classification or boundary that has not been
scheduled within six months of the commission’s action to determine whether a
time extension should be granted for a specified period or whether the
application should be terminated and declared null and void.
   (c)   City council action.
      (1)   The director shall send written notice of a public hearing on a
city council, city plan commission, or landmark commission authorized hearing
for a change in a zoning district classification or boundary to all owners of
real property according to the following table:
 
Authorized Hearing Area   Area of Notification for Hearing
0-1 acre                  200 feet
over 1 acre to 5 acres    300 feet
over 5 acres to 15 acres  400 feet
over 15 acres to 25 acres 400 feet
over 25 acres             500 feet
 
See Section
51A-1.105 for the notification area for other applications. The measurement of
the notification area includes streets and alleys. The notice must be given not
less than 15 days before the date set for the city council hearing by
depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid in the United States
mail to the property owners as evidenced by the last approved tax roll. This
notice must be written in English and Spanish if the area of request is located
wholly or partly within a census tract in which 50 percent or more of the
inhabitants are persons of Spanish origin or descent according to the most
recent federal decennial census. The applicant may not alter, change, amend,
enlarge, or withdraw a portion of an application after notices have been mailed
for the public hearing.
      (2)   Before the city council holds the public hearing on an amendment to
this article or on a request for a change in a zoning district classification
or boundary, the city secretary shall give notice of the public hearing in the
official newspaper of the city at least 15 days before the hearing.
      (3)   An amendment to this article and requests for a change in a zoning
district classification or boundary must be approved by the affirmative vote of
a majority of city council members present; except, the favorable vote of
three-fourths of all members of the city council is required if:
         (A)   the request for a change in a zoning district classification or
boundary has been recommended for denial by the commission; or
         (B)   a written protest against a change in a zoning district boundary
or classification has been signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of either
the land in the area of request or land within 200 feet, including streets and
alleys, measured from the boundary of the area of request and the protest has
been filed with the director.
      (4)   When city council passes an amending ordinance, the city secretary
shall file the amending ordinance in the official city records. Unless the
amending ordinance expressly indicates otherwise, the area of request is
presumed to include the area to the centerline of an adjacent street or alley.
   (d)   Two-year limitation.
      (1)   Except as provided in Subsections (d)(2) and (d)(3), after a final
decision is reached by the commission or city council denying a request for a
change in a zoning district classification or boundary, no subsequent
applications may be considered for that property for two years from the date of
the final decision.
      (2)   If the commission or the city council renders a final decision of
denial without prejudice, the two-year limitation is waived.
      (3)   A property owner may apply for a waiver of the two-year limitation
in the following manner:
         (A)   The applicant shall submit the request in writing to the
director. The director shall inform the applicant of the date on which the
commission shall consider the request and shall advise the applicant of the
right to appear before the commission.
         (B)   The commission may waive the time limitation if there are
changed circumstances sufficient to warrant a new hearing.
         (C)   A simple majority vote by the commission is required to grant
the request. If a waiver is granted, the applicant shall follow the procedure
for a zoning amendment under this article or a request for a change in a zoning
district classification or boundary.
         (D)   If the commission denies the request, the applicant may appeal
in writing to the city council by filing an appeal with the director.
   (e)   Postponements.
      (1)   The applicant and the opponents shall each be allowed to postpone
one hearing date before the commission and one hearing date before the city
council.
      (2)   A request for postponement must be in writing and must be submitted
to the director no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Monday of the week preceding the
week of the hearing. If the deadline falls on an official city holiday, then
the request must be submitted no later than noon on the following day.
      (3)   Before a hearing to be held by the city plan commission may be
postponed, the person requesting postponement shall pay a fee of $150.00 to the
director. Before a hearing to be held by the city council may be postponed, the
person requesting postponement shall pay a fee of $150.00 to the director.
      (4)   Only the applicant or his representative may postpone the hearing
date prior to the mailing of the hearing notices. A hearing postponed by the
applicant or his representative whether prior to the mailing of required
notices or after the mailing of required notices may be postponed for no longer
than 60 days from the date of the scheduled or advertised hearing. If the
applicant fails to request in writing within 60 days a new hearing date, the
application is automatically withdrawn, and the director shall return the
application to the applicant and the filing fee, less that amount necessary for
administrative cost as determined by the director.
      (5)   Only a property owner within the area of notification may request a
postponement for the opposition. The request for postponement must set forth
the grounds for the postponement and must be signed by the party making the
request. If postponed, the case will be rescheduled for the next hearing date
that is four weeks or more in the future, unless the party making the request
requests an earlier date.
   (f)   Withdrawals.
      (1)   If an applicant desires to withdraw his application, the applicant
shall request in writing to withdraw an entire application for a change in a
zoning district classification or boundary.
      (2)   If the applicant withdraws the application prior to the mailing of
notice, the director shall return the application to the applicant. The
director shall determine the administrative cost of processing the application,
and shall return the filing fee less the administrative cost to the applicant.
      (3)   If the applicant withdraws the application after the mailing of
notices for a public hearing before the commission, the applicant shall forfeit
65 percent of the filing fee to cover the administrative cost.
         (A)   If the application is withdrawn before 5:00 p.m. of the day that
will leave five full working days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and official
city holidays) before the date of the hearing, the applicant shall not be
subject to the two year waiting period required in Subsection (d).
         (B)   If an applicant requests withdrawal after 5:00 p.m. of the day
that will leave five full working days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
official city holidays) before the date of the hearing, the commission shall
hold the public hearing and make a formal recommendation on the application.
The applicant shall be subject to the two year waiting period required in
Subsection (d).
      (4)   Once the commission has acted on a request for a change in a zoning
district classification or boundary, the applicant may withdraw his
application, but the entire application fee shall be retained by the city to
cover administrative cost if:
         (A)   the commission approved the request; or
         (B)   the commission denied the request, but the applicant within 10
days of the denial files with the director a request in writing that the city
council review the commission’s findings.
      (5)   If the commission denies a request for a change in a zoning
district classification or boundary and the applicant does not appeal the
decision to city council, the city controller shall refund 35 percent of the
filing fee to the applicant.
   (g)   Written protest procedures.
      (1)   Purpose.
         (A)   The state law expressly enables the governing body of a
municipality to establish procedures for adopting and enforcing zoning
regulations and district boundaries. Pursuant to that authority, the city
council enacts this subsection governing the receipt of written protests
submitted for the purpose of requiring the favorable vote of three- fourths of
all members of the city council to effect a change in a zoning district
classification or boundary.
         (B)   This subsection is not intended to conflict with the state law;
it is being enacted at a time when the state law does not explicitly provide
how, when, or where a written protest must be filed. The city council expressly
recognizes that this subsection may be partially or completely preempted at any
such time that the state law is amended to explicitly provide how, when, or
where a written protest must be filed.
         (C)   This subsection is intended to accomplish the following listed
objectives which, in the opinion of the city council, are fully in keeping with
the purposes, spirit, and intent of the state law:
            (i)   To allow the staff sufficient time to accurately calculate
the land area percentages that determine the voting requirement.
            (ii)   To protect the rights of all parties by establishing minimum
criteria to assure the reliability of written protests received.
            (iii)   To protect the rights of those protesting by establishing
procedures and deadlines which are not unduly burdensome or restrictive.
            (iv)   To promote order and maintain the integrity of the zoning
process.
      (2)   Form of protest.
         (A)   A protest must be in writing and, at a minimum, contain the
following information:
            (i)   A description of the zoning case at issue.
            (ii)   The names of all persons protesting the proposed change in
zoning district classification or boundary.
            (iii)   A description of the area of lots or land owned by the
protesting parties that is either covered by the proposed change or located
within 200 feet of the area covered by the proposed change.
            (iv)   The mailing addresses of all persons signing the protest.
            (v)   The date and time of its execution.
         (B)   The protest must bear the original signatures of all persons
required to sign under Paragraph (3).
      (3)   Who must sign.
         (A)   A protest must be signed by the owner of the property in
question, or by a person authorized by power of attorney to sign the protest on
behalf of the owner. If the property is owned by two or more persons, the
protest must be signed by a majority of the owners, or by a person authorized
by power of attorney to sign the protest on behalf of a majority of the owners,
except that in the case of community property, the city shall presume the
written protest of one spouse to be the protest of both.
         (B)   In the case of property owned by a corporation, the protest must
be signed by the president, a vice-president, or by an attorney in fact
authorized to sign the protest on behalf of the corporation. In the case of
property owned by a general or limited partnership, the protest must be signed
by a general partner or by an attorney in fact authorized to sign the protest
on behalf of the partnership.
         (C)   Lots or land subject to a condominium regime are presumed to be
commonly owned in undivided interests by the owners of all condominium units
and under the control of the governing body of the condominium. For such lots
or land to be included in calculating the lots or land area protesting a
proposed rezoning, the written protest must state that the governing body of
the condominium has authorized a protest in accordance with procedures required
by its bylaws, and that the person signing the protest is authorized to act on
behalf of the governing body of the condominium. A written protest signed by
the owner of an individual condominium unit shall not be accepted unless the
filing party produces legal documents governing the condominium which clearly
establish the right of an individual owner to act with respect to his or her
respective undivided interest in the common elements of the condominium.
      (4)   When signatures must be acknowledged.
         (A)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraphs (B) and (C), all
signatures on a written protest must be acknowledged before a notary public.
         (B)   A signature on an original reply form sent by the city to the
mailing address of the property owner need not be acknowledged.
         (C)   A signature on a protest delivered in person by the person
signing need not be acknowledged if its reliability is otherwise established to
the satisfaction of the director. In such a case, a summary of the evidence of
reliability considered by the director must be endorsed on the protest by the
director.
      (5)   Filing deadline.
         (A)   A written protest must be filed with the director before noon on
the Friday immediately preceding the date advertised for the city council
public hearing in the statutory notice published in the official newspaper of
the city. If the deadline falls on a city holiday, written protest must be
filed by noon on the next working day after the deadline. A protest sent
through the mail must be received by the director before the deadline.
         (B)   Before the public hearing on the case, the filing deadline is
automatically extended whenever the public hearing is re-advertised in the
official newspaper of the city pursuant to statutory notice requirements.
         (C)   After the public hearing has begun, the filing deadline may only
be extended by calling a subsequent public hearing and advertising that public
hearing in the official newspaper of the city pursuant to statutory notice
requirements. In such a case, the new filing deadline is noon of the working
day immediately preceding the newly advertised public hearing date.
      (6)   Withdrawals of protests filed. Withdrawals of protests filed must
be in writing and filed with the director before the filing deadline. The
provisions of this subsection governing the form and filing of protests apply
equally to withdrawals.
      (7)   Presumptions of validity.
         (A)   In all cases where a protest has been properly signed pursuant
to this subsection, the city shall presume that the signatures appearing on the
protest are authentic and that the persons or officers whose signatures appear
on the protest are either owners of the property or authorized to sign on
behalf of one or more owners as represented.
         (B)   In cases of multiple ownership, the city shall presume that a
properly signed protest which on its face purports to represent a majority of
the property owners does in fact represent a majority of the property owners.
         (C)   The presumptions in Subparagraphs (A) and (B) are rebuttable,
and the city attorney may advise the city council that a presumption should not
be followed in a specific case based on extrinsic evidence presented.
      (8)   Conflicting instruments. In the event that multiple protests and
withdrawals are filed on behalf of the same owner, the instrument with the
latest date and time of execution controls. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19872; 19935;
20037; 20381; 21431; 22389; 24718; 26271; 28096; 31471; 32481; 33012)
SEC. 51A-4.702.   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the PD is to provide flexibility in the
planning and construction of development projects by allowing a combination of
land uses developed under a uniform plan that protects contiguous land uses and
preserves significant natural features.
      (2)   Uses. A PD may contain any use or combination of uses listed in
Division
51A-4.200. The uses permitted in a PD must be listed in the ordinance
establishing the district.
      (3)   Signs. An ordinance establishing or amending a PD may not authorize
the erection, relocation, or alteration of a detached non-premise sign. A
special provision sign district must be established to authorize the erection,
relocation, or alteration of a detached non-premise sign. For more information
regarding special provision sign districts, see Division
51A-7.500.
      (4)   Mandatory regulations. The ordinance establishing a PD must specify
regulations governing building height, floor area, lot area, lot coverage,
density, yards, off-street parking and loading, environmental performance
standards, signs, landscaping, and streets and alleys. The following table may
be used as a general guide in establishing these regulations:
General Guidelines for Establishing PD Regulations
GENERAL USE CATEGORY ZONING DISTRICT
General Guidelines for Establishing PD Regulations
GENERAL USE CATEGORY ZONING DISTRICT
   Single family     TH-3(A)*
   Multifamily       MF-3(A)
   Retail            CR
   Office            MO-1
   Commercial        CS
   Industrial        IR
*If platted lots for a single family use have a minimum width of 30 feet at
the front property line, then one parking space is required.
 
      (5)   Codification. The regulations of each PD ordinance shall be
codified in Chapter 51P. The conditions in the PD ordinance and the development
plan, landscape plan, or conceptual plan are conditions that must be complied
with before a certificate of occupancy may be granted.
      (6)   Applicable regulations.
         (A)   For PDs created on or after March 1, 1987, the regulations in
this chapter control unless they are expressly altered by a PD ordinance in
accordance with this section. The general guidelines in Subsection (a)(4)
control if the PD ordinance does not enumerate the regulations governing
building height, floor area, lot area, lot coverage, density, yards, off-street
parking and loading, environmental performance standards, signs, landscaping,
and streets and alleys.
         (B)   For PDs created prior to March 1, 1987, the regulations of
Chapter 51 control unless they are expressly altered by a PD ordinance in
accordance with this section. The general guidelines below control if the PD
ordinance does not enumerate the regulations governing building height, floor
area, lot area, lot coverage, density, yards, off-street parking and loading,
environmental performance standards, signs, landscaping, and streets and
alleys.
 
GENERAL USE CATEGORY         ZONING DISTRICT
   Single family             H-4
   Multiple-family           MF-3
   Retail                    GR
   Office                    MO
   Commercial and Industri   I-1
 
         (C)   Some provisions of Chapter 51 have been amended to refer to the
parallel provisions in
Chapter 51A. This type of amendment has been made to every extent possible in
order to make interpretation and application of the code more consistent and
simpler. The amendment process is referred to as “call-forwarding the
provisions of Chapter 51” because the amendment incorporates by reference into
Chapter 51 the corresponding language in
Chapter 51A as it exists on the date of amendment and as it may be amended in
the future. The following apply when interpreting call-forwarded provisions of
Chapter 51 for planned development districts created under Chapter 51 of the
Dallas City Code.
            (i)   If a call-forwarded provision contains a cross-reference in
Chapter 51A to another section in
Chapter 51A, the cross-reference should be read to apply to the parallel
provisions in Chapter 51.
               --   For example, the sexually oriented business regulations in
Section 51-4.221 have been call-forwarded. Within those regulations, there is a
reference to Section
51A-4.217, the accessory use regulations in
Chapter 51A. When applying these regulations to a Chapter 51 planned
development district, reference should be made to Section 51-4.217, the
accessory use regulations in Chapter 51.
               --   Similarly, Section 51-4.324 has been call-forwarded.
Section 51-4.324(b)(1) refers to “residential districts.” The definition of
“residential districts” is located in Section
51A-2.102(119), but the definition makes reference to only
Chapter 51A districts. When applying Section
51A-4.324(b)(1) to a Chapter 51 planned development district, reference should
be made to the definition of “residential districts” in Chapter 51, which is
provided in Section 51-2.102(104).
The building official shall determine the parallel provision in Chapter 51 when
applying a call-forwarded regulation.
            (ii)   If a call-forwarded provision contains a reference to “this
chapter,” Chapter 51 should also be included in its application. If a call-
forwarded provision contains a reference to “this section” or another internal
cross reference, and the regulation referenced has not been call-forwarded, the
parallel provision in Chapter 51 applies. The building official shall determine
the parallel cross-reference in Chapter 51 when applying a call-forwarded
regulation.
            (iii)   If a district category is referenced in a call-forwarded
provision, that district category, as defined in Chapter 51, should be included
in the application of the regulation. For example, if a regulation has been
call-forwarded, and the corresponding regulation in
Chapter 51A applies to “industrial districts,” the regulation applies to the
Industrial-1, Industrial-2, and Industrial-3 districts when applied to a
Chapter 51 planned development district. The building official shall determine
the parallel district category in Chapter 51 when applying a call-forwarded
regulation.
            (iv)   If a use category is referenced in a call-forwarded
provision, that use category, as defined in Chapter 51, should be included in
the application of the regulation. For example, if a regulation has been call-
forwarded, and the corresponding regulation in
Chapter 51A applies to “transportation uses,” the regulation also applies to
the transportation uses contained in Chapter 51 when applied to a Chapter 51
planned development district. The building official shall determine the
parallel use category in Chapter 51 when applying a call-forwarded regulation.
            (v)   The general guidelines below control if a provision of
Chapter 51 has been call-forwarded to the parallel provision in
Chapter 51A, and the regulation in
Chapter 51A refers only to a
Chapter 51A zoning classification in its application.
CHAPTER 51 ZONING CHAPTER 51A ZONING
CHAPTER 51 ZONING CHAPTER 51A ZONING
A                 A(A)
R-1ac             R-1ac(A)
R-1/2ac           R-1/2ac(A)
R-16              R-16(A)
R-13              R-13(A)
R-10              R-10(A)
R-7.5             R-7.5(A)
R-5               R-5(A)
D                 D(A)
TH-1              TH-1(A)
TH-2              TH-2(A)
TH-3              TH-3(A)
TH-4              TH-3(A)
MF-1              MF-1(A)
MF-2              MF-2(A)
MF-3              MF-3(A)
MF-4              MF-4(A)
MH                MH(A)
NO                NO(A)
LO                LO(A)
MO                MO(A)
GO                GO(A)
NS                NS(A)
SC                CR
GR                RR
HC                CS
I-1               LI
I-2               IR
I-3               IM
CA-1              CA-1(A)
CA-1-CP           CA-1(A)-CP
CA-1-SP           CA-1(A)-SP
CA-2              CA-2(A)
P                 P(A)
 
      (7)   Subdistricts. For purposes of determining the applicability of
regulations in this chapter triggered by adjacency or proximity to another
zoning district, any identifiable portion of a PD governed by a distinct set of
use regulations is treated as though it were a separate zoning district. If the
PD or a portion of the PD is limited to those uses permitted in an expressly
stated zoning district, the PD or portion of the PD is treated as though it
were that expressly stated zoning district; otherwise it is treated as though
it were:
         (A)   a TH-3(A) zoning district if it is restricted to single family
and/or duplex uses;
         (B)   an MF-2(A) zoning district if it is restricted to residential
uses not exceeding 36 feet in height and allows multifamily uses;
         (C)   an MF-3(A) zoning district if it is restricted to residential
uses and allows multifamily uses exceeding 36 feet in height; or
         (D)   a nonresidential zoning district if it allows a nonresidential
use.
      (8)   Residential proximity slope.
         (A)   The residential proximity slope defined in Section
51A-4.412 governs development in a PD only to the extent set forth in the
height regulations of the PD ordinance.
         (B)   Pursuant to Resolution No. 87-2319, the city council may
authorize exceptions to the residential proximity slope by establishing PD’s in
high-intensity commercial growth nodes, as described in the city’s growth
policy plan, in order to accomplish objectives such as transit ridership or
residential development, or to achieve other economic or development
objectives.
   (b)   PD preapplication conference.
      (1)   An applicant for a PD shall request a preapplication conference
with the director.
      (2)   At the preapplication conference, the applicant shall provide a
sketch plan that includes, but is not limited to, the following information:
proposed land uses, density, approximate gross square footage of nonresidential
uses, access, projected height, topography, and significant environmental
features.
      (3)   Based on the information provided by the applicant, the director
shall:
         (A)   provide initial comments concerning the merits of the proposed
development;
         (B)   state what information must be provided in the site plan
application for a complete review of the proposed development; and
         (C)   provide any other information necessary to aid the applicant in
the preparation of the site plan application.
   (c)   PD application procedure.
      (1)   The applicant for a PD shall comply with the zoning amendment
procedure for a change in the zoning district classification.
      (2)   At the time of applying for a change in zoning district
classification, an applicant shall submit:
         (A)   a site analysis in accordance with Subsection (d); and
         (B)   a development plan in accordance with Subsection (e).
      (3)   The applicant may initially submit a conceptual plan in accordance
with Subsection (f) instead of a development plan if the conceptual plan
provides sufficient information for the city plan commission and city council
to act on the PD application. If the applicant initially submits a conceptual
plan, the applicant shall submit a complete development plan that complies with
the conceptual plan and the conditions of the PD ordinance, and that must be
approved by the city plan commission before the issuance of a building permit.
If the city plan commission disapproves the development plan, the applicant may
appeal the decision to the city council.
      (4)   An applicant may also be required to submit a development schedule
in accordance with Subsection (g).
   (d)   Site analysis.
      (1)   The site analysis must be prepared on a topography base map with
one-foot, two-foot, or five-foot contour intervals, and must describe existing
natural features and physical improvements by including the following items:
         (A)   Location of flood plains, water bodies, creeks, marshes,
drainage areas, trees near proposed construction activity (including caliper,
common name, and scientific name [trees in close proximity that all have a
caliper of less than eight inches may be designated as a “group of trees” with
only the number noted]), rock outcroppings, important view corridors of scenic
vistas and skylines, and any other significant natural features.
         (B)   Location, identification, and dimensions of all existing public
and private easements.
         (C)   Location of major utility trunk lines and future tie-ins.
         (D)   Identification of land uses, cemeteries, and historic landmarks
on and adjacent to the site.
         (E)   Location of existing structures within the site and the
improvements to be retained.
         (F)   A site location map on a smaller scale showing major circulation
routes and other landmarks that would aid in the location of the site.
      (2)   If the director determines that the site analysis or one or more of
the items listed in Paragraph (1) is not necessary to allow for a complete
review of the proposed development, the director shall waive the requirement
that the site analysis or the item(s) be provided. In making this
determination, the director shall consider the existing topography, conditions,
and natural features of the site.
   (e)   Development plan.
      (1)   The development plan may be on a single drawing and must clearly
indicate:
         (A)   any proposed public or private streets and alleys;
         (B)   building sites;
         (C)   areas proposed for dedication or reserved as parks, open space,
parkways, playgrounds, utility and garbage easements, school sites, street
widenings, or street changes;
         (D)   the points of ingress and egress from existing public streets;
         (E)   an accurate survey of the boundaries of the site;
         (F)   topography of the site with one-foot, two-foot, or five-foot
contour intervals, or spot grades where relief is limited;
         (G)   location of proposed land uses;
         (H)   the location of buildings and the minimum distance between
buildings and between buildings and property lines, street and alley rights-of-
way, and private streets;
         (I)   the arrangement of off-street parking and loading. This may be
indicated as a ratio of off-street parking and loading area to building area if
all off-street parking and loading areas are indicated for the site and there
is an example that demonstrates a common feasible method of providing the off-
street parking and loading;
         (J)   indication of any special traffic regulation facilities proposed
or required;
         (K)   screening, landscaping, and major tree groupings to be retained
if this information is essential to the proper arrangement of the development
in relation to adjacent property and internal land uses;
         (L)   location of cemeteries and historic landmarks;
         (M)   location of flood plains, water bodies, creeks, marshes,
drainage areas, conservation areas, tree groupings, and any other significant
natural features to be preserved during development;
         (N)   location of all major natural or man-made surface drainage
features; and
         (O)   indication of each phase of development if separate phases are
proposed.
      (2)   If the director determines that the items in Subparagraphs (F),
(G), (J), or (O) are not necessary to allow for a complete review of the
proposed development, the director shall waive the requirement that the item(s)
be provided. In making this determination, the director shall consider the
existing conditions of the property and the extent of the changes necessitated
by the proposed development. The director shall notify the city plan commission
of any items that have been waived.
      (3)   The city plan commission may require elevations and perspective
drawings for buildings more than 12 feet in height that are not to be used for
single family or duplex uses.
      (4)   The applicant shall submit a legal instrument establishing a plan
for the use and permanent maintenance of any area or lot that is to be entirely
devoted to open space that is not part of a building site before the
development plan may be approved. The legal instrument must be approved by the
city attorney as to legal form, and by the city plan commission as to the
suitability for the proposed use of the open space.
   (f)   Conceptual plan. The conceptual plan must indicate:
      (1)   topography of the site with one-foot, two-foot, or five-foot
contour intervals, or spot grades where relief is limited;
      (2)   location of significant natural features to be preserved during
development;
      (3)   location of cemeteries and historic landmarks;
      (4)   the location of all land use areas showing the gross acreage for
each use or category of use, maximum lot coverage, net residential densities,
floor area ratio for each use or category of use, and the approximate floor
area for all nonresidential uses;
      (5)   delineation of all undeveloped areas to be conserved as open space;
      (6)   identification of all areas to be dedicated to the city and areas
designated as common areas;
      (7)   indication of maximum heights for all structures in feet and
stories;
      (8)   location of required screening and buffer areas between the site
and adjacent property and between land uses within the site;
      (9)   location of minimum building setbacks along the site boundaries, on
dedicated streets, and between residential and nonresidential uses;
      (10)   identification of major access points and rights-of-way to be
dedicated to the city; and
      (11)   indication of each phase of development if separate phases are
proposed.
   (g)   Development schedule.
      (1)   The applicant for a PD shall, if the applicant desires or the city
plan commission or city council requires, submit a development schedule
indicating the date on which construction is to begin and the rate of
development until completion. A city council approved development schedule must
be included in the ordinance establishing the PD.
      (2)   If the applicant fails to meet the development schedule, the
commission may call a public hearing to determine the proper zoning district
classification for all or part of the PD.
      (3)   The applicant may apply to the city plan commission for an
extension of the development schedule. If the city plan commission denies the
extension, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council.
      (4)   When a development schedule extends for more than one year, the
building official shall annually report to the city plan commission the actual
development in the PD compared with the development schedule.
   (h)   Amendments to the development plan.
      (1)   Purpose and scope. The minor amendment process allows flexibility
as necessary to meet the contingencies of development. Amendments that do not
qualify as minor amendments must be processed as a zoning amendment. Minor
amendments are limited to minor changes in the development plan that otherwise
comply with the PD ordinance and do not:
         (A)   alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to
adjacent property;
         (B)   increase a height shown on the original development plan by more
than 10 percent or 12 feet, whichever is less, provided there is no increase in
the number of habitable stories or parking levels above grade;
         (C)   decrease the amount of off-street parking spaces shown on the
original development plan so as to create a traffic hazard or traffic
congestion or fail to provide adequate parking; or
         (D)   reduce building setbacks at the boundary of the site shown on
the original development plan.
      (2)   Determination of procedure. Upon receipt of an application, the
director shall determine if the proposed amendments are minor amendments and,
if so, whether the proposed amendments are to be reviewed under the director
procedure, the city plan commission procedure, or the public notice procedure.
         (A)   Director procedure. The director may forward any application to
the city plan commission for review. The director may, however, approve minor
amendments to a development plan without the notification described in Section
51A-1.105(k) if:
            (i)   the purpose of the amendment is to bring the request area
into compliance with screening requirements; or
            (ii)   the proposed development plan:
               (aa)   does not have residential adjacency;
               (bb)   does not increase enclosed floor area from that allowed
on the original develop ment plan;
               (cc)   does not increase structure height from that allowed on
the original development plan;
               (dd)   does not change uses from those allowed on the original
development plan;
               (ee)   does not permit access to a street for which no ingress
or egress point was previously shown; and
               (ff)   does not reduce designated perimeter buffer area or
designated open space.
The director shall notify the city plan commission of all applications for
minor amendments eligible for approval under the director procedure.
         (B)   City plan commission procedure. The city plan commission may
approve a minor amendment to a development plan without the notification
described in Section
51A-1.105(k) if the proposed development plan:
            (i)   does not have residential adjacency;
            (ii)   does not change uses from those allowed on the original
development plan; and
            (iii)   does not reduce designated perimeter buffer area or
designated open space.
         (C)   Public notice procedure. Minor amendments that do not qualify
for the director procedure or the city plan commission procedure must be
reviewed under the public notice procedure. The notification described in
Section
51A-1.105(k) is required.
      (3)   “Original development plan.” For purposes of this subsection,
“original development plan” means the earliest approved development plan that
is still in effect, and does not mean a later amended development plan. For
example, if a development plan was approved with the planned development
district and then amended through the minor amendment process, the original
development plan would be the development plan approved with the planned
development district, not the development plan as amended through the minor
amendment process. If, however, the development plan approved with the planned
development district was replaced through the zoning amendment process, then
the replacement development plan becomes the original development plan. The
purpose of this definition is to prevent the use of several sequential minor
amendments to circumvent the zoning amendment process.
      (4)   Residential adjacency. For purposes of this subsection, a request
site has residential adjacency if the portion of the development plan being
amended is within 200 feet of:
         (A)   a lot in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-
2, or MF-2(A) district; or
         (B)   an area of planned development district that:
            (i)   is restricted to uses permitted in R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH
(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-2, or MF-2(A) districts; and
            (ii)   has a height restriction of 40 feet or less.
A request site does not have residential adjacency if the request site is
separated from the areas listed Subparagraphs (i) and (ii) above by a street
that measures 65 feet or more in width.
      (5)   Appeals.
         (A)   Director procedure. An applicant may appeal the decision of the
director to the city plan commission. An appeal must be requested in writing
within 10 days after the decision of the director. The proposed minor amendment
must then follow the city plan commission procedure.
         (B)   City plan commission procedure. An applicant may appeal the
decision of the city plan commission to the city council. An appeal must be
requested in writing within 10 days after the decision of the city plan
commission. City council shall decide whether the city plan commission erred,
using the same standards that city plan commission used. Appeal to the city
council is the final administrative remedy available.
         (C)   Public notice procedure. An applicant or owner of real property
within the notification area may appeal the decision of the city plan
commission to the city council. An appeal must be requested in writing within
10 days after the decision of the city plan commission. City council shall
decide whether the city plan commission erred, using the same standards that
the city plan commission used. Appeal to the city council is the final
administrative remedy available.
   (i)   Amendments to the landscape plan.
      (1)   Purpose and scope. The minor amendment process allows flexibility
as necessary to meet the contingencies of development. Amendments that do not
qualify as minor amendments must be processed as a zoning amendment. Minor
amendments are limited to minor changes in the landscape plan that otherwise
comply with the PD ordinance and do not:
         (A)   reduce the perimeter landscape buffer strip shown on the
original landscape plan;
         (B)   detrimentally affect the original landscape plan’s aesthetic
function relative to adjacent right-of-way or surrounding property; or
         (C)   detrimentally affect the original landscape plan’s screening or
buffering function.
      (2)    Determination of procedure. Upon receipt of an application, the
director shall determine if the proposed amendments are minor amendments and,
if so, whether the proposed amendments are to be reviewed under the director
procedure, the city plan commission procedure, or the public notice procedure.
         (A)   Director procedure. The director may forward any application to
the city plan commission for review. The director may, however, approve minor
amendments to a landscape plan without the notification described in Section
51A-1.105(k) if:
            (i)   the proposed minor amend ments are necessary to keep
landscaping from interfering with service provided by a public utility or state
regulated entity for the transmission of power, fuel, water, or communication
services; or
            (ii)   the proposed landscape plan:
               (aa)   does not change the landscape plan within 25 feet of a
property line with residential adjacency;
               (bb)   does not reduce the number of trees or amount of plan
materials in a landscape buffer area (locations and types of trees or plant
materials may be altered if the screening and aesthetic function of the buffer
area is not affected);
               (cc)   does not reduce the number of trees or amount of plant
materials within 25 feet of a street right-of-way; and
               (dd)   does not reduce the number of trees, plant materials, or
landscape points on the site.
The director shall notify the city plan commission of all applications for
minor amendments eligible for approval under the director procedure.
         (B)   City plan commission procedure. The city plan commission may
approve a minor amendment to a landscape plan without the notification
described in Section
51A-1.105(k) if the proposed landscape plan does not change the landscape plan
within 25 feet of a property line with residential adjacency.
         (C)   Public notice procedure. Minor amendments that do not qualify
for the director procedure or the city plan commission procedure must be
reviewed under the public notice procedure. The notification in Section
51A-1.105(k) is required.
      (3)   “Original landscape plan.” For purposes of this subsection,
“original landscape plan” means the earliest approved landscape plan that is
still in effect, and does not mean a later amended landscape plan. For example,
if a landscape plan was approved with the planned development district and then
amended through the minor amendment process, the original landscape plan would
be the landscape plan approved with the planned development district, not the
landscape plan as amended through the minor amendment process. If, however, the
landscape plan approved with the planned development district was replaced
through the zoning amendment process, then the replacement landscape plan
becomes the original landscape plan. The purpose of this definition is to
prevent the use of several sequential minor amendments to circumvent the zoning
amendment process.
      (4)   Residential adjacency. For purposes of this subsection, a request
site has residential adjacency if the portion of the landscape plan being
amended is within 200 feet of:
         (A)   a lot in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-
2, or MF-2(A) district; or
         (B)   an area of a planned development district that:
            (i)   is restricted to uses permitted in R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH
(A), CH, MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-2, or MF-2(A) districts; and
            (ii)   has a height restriction of 40 feet or less.
A request site does not have residential adjacency if the request site is
separated from the areas listed Subparagraphs (i) and (ii) above by a street
that measures 65 feet or more in width.
      (5)   Appeals.
         (A)   Director procedure. An applicant may appeal the decision of the
director to the city plan commission. An appeal must be requested in writing
within 10 days after the decision of the director. The proposed minor amendment
must then follow the city plan commission procedure.
         (B)   City plan commission procedure. An applicant may appeal the
decision of the city plan commission to the city council. An appeal must be
requested in writing within 10 days after the decision of the city plan
commission. City council shall decide whether the city plan commission erred,
using the same standards that city plan commission used. Appeal to the city
council is the final administrative remedy available.
         (C)   Public notice procedure. An applicant or owner of real property
within the notification area may appeal the decision of the city plan
commission to the city council. An appeal must be requested in writing within
10 days after the decision of the city plan commission. City council shall
decide whether the city plan commission erred, using the same standards that
city plan commission used. Appeal to the city council is the final
administrative remedy available. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20037; 20496; 21243;
22053; 23997; 24232; 24637; 26730; 27404; 28367; 28553; 30808; 31688; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.703.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Initiation.
      (1)   Authorized public hearings. Except for a request to establish a
compliance requirement for a nonconforming use under Section
51A-4.704 , the board may authorize a public hearing on issues within the
board's jurisdiction. A board authorized public hearing must comply with the
procedures in this section. If 10 or fewer property owners are involved, the
director shall send written notice to the owners of real property within the
subject area not less than 10 days before the meeting at which the board will
consider authorization of a public hearing. This notice must be written in
English and Spanish if the area of request is located wholly or partly within a
census tract in which 50 percent or more of the inhabitants are persons of
Spanish origin or descent according to the most recent federal decennial
census. If more than 10 property owners are involved, the director shall give
notice of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the city at least 10
days before the meeting at which the board will consider authorization of a
public hearing.
      (2)   Appeals of decisions of administrative officials. Parties listed in
Subparagraphs (A) and (B) may appeal a decision of an administrative official
to the board when that decision concerns issues within the jurisdiction of the
board. For purposes of this section, “administrative official” means that
person within a city department having the final decision- making authority
within the department relative to the zoning enforcement issue.
         (A)   For a decision made by an administrative official that is not
related to a specific application, address, or project, the following persons
may appeal to the board:
            (i)   a person aggrieved by the decision; or
            (ii)   any officer, department, or board of the city affected by
the decision.
         (B)   For a decision made by an administrative official that is
related to a specific application, address, or project, the following persons
may appeal to the board:
            (i)   a person who:
               (aa)   filed the application that is the subject of the
decision;
               (bb)   is the owner or representative of the owner of the
property that is the subject of the decision; or
               (cc)   is aggrieved by the de- cision and is the owner of real
property within 200 feet of the property that is the subject of the decision;
or
            (ii)   any officer, department, or board of the city affected by
the decision.
         (C)   An appeal to the board must be made not later than the 20th day
after the date the decision is made by the official
         (D)   The appellant shall file with the official a written notice of
appeal on a form approved by the board.
         (E)   The official shall forward the notice of appeal and the record
upon which the appeal is based to the director.
   (b)   Appeal stays all proceedings.
      (1)   An appeal to the board stays all enforcement proceedings involving
the action appealed from unless the official appealed from certifies in writing
to the board facts supporting the official’s opinion that a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property.
      (2)   If the official makes such a finding, enforcement proceedings will
be stayed only if, after notice to the official, the board or a court of
record, upon a finding of due cause, issues a restraining order.
   (c)   Notice of hearing.
      (1)   The board shall hold a public hearing on all applications.
      (2)   The director shall send written notice of a public hearing to the
applicant and all owners of real property located within 200 feet, including
streets and alleys, from the boundary of the area upon which the request is
made. The notice must be given not less than 10 days before the day set for the
hearing by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid in the
United States mail to the property owners as evidenced by the last approved
city tax roll. This notice must be written in English and Spanish if the area
of request is located wholly or partly within a census tract in which 50
percent or more of the inhabitants are persons of Spanish origin or descent
according to the most recent federal decennial census.
      (3)   The director shall give notice of the time and place of the public
hearing in the official newspaper of the city at least 10 days before the
hearing.
   (d)   Board action.
      (1)   The applicant has the burden of proof to establish the necessary
facts to warrant favorable action of the board.
      (2)   Cases must be heard by a minimum of 75 percent of the members of a
board panel. The concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of a panel is
necessary to:
         (A)   reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an
administrative official involving the interpretation or enforcement of the
zoning ordinance;
         (B)   decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board
is required to pass under state law, the city charter, or city ordinances; or
         (C)   grant a variance.
      (3)   The board shall decide an appeal of a decision of administrative
official at the next meeting for which notice can be provided following the
hearing and not later than the 60th day after the appeal date is filed. The
board shall have all the powers of the administrative official on the action
appealed from. The board may in whole or in part affirm, reverse, or amend the
decision of the official.
      (4)    The board may impose reasonable conditions in its order to be
complied with by the applicant in order to further the purpose and intent of
this chapter.
      (5)   The decision of the board does not set a precedent. The decision of
the board must be made on the particular facts of each case.
      (6)   The applicant shall file an application for a building permit or
certificate of occupancy within 180 days from the date of the favorable action
of the board, unless the applicant files for and is granted an extended time
period prior to the expiration of the 180 days. The filing of a request for an
extended time period does not toll the 180 day time period. If the applicant
fails to file an application within the time period, the request is
automatically denied without prejudice, and the applicant must begin the
process to have his request heard again.
   (e)   Two year limitation.
      (1)   Except as provided below, after a final decision is reached by the
board, no further request on the same or related issues may be considered for
that property for two years from the date of the final decision.
      (2)   If the board renders a final decision of denial without prejudice,
the two year limitation is waived.
      (3)   The applicant may apply for a waiver of the two year limitation in
the following manner:
         (A)   The applicant shall submit his request in writing to the
director. The director shall inform the applicant of the date on which the
board will consider the request and shall advise the applicant of his right to
appear before the board.
         (B)   The board may waive the two year time limitation if there are
changed circumstances regarding the property sufficient to warrant a new
hearing. A simple majority vote by the board is required to grant the waiver.
If a rehearing is granted, the applicant shall follow the process outlined in
this section. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20926; 22254; 22389; 22605; 25047; 27892;
28073; 31606; 33012)
SEC. 51A-4.704.   NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Compliance regulations for nonconforming uses. It is the declared
purpose of this subsection that nonconforming uses be eliminated and be
required to comply with the regulations of the Dallas Development Code, having
due regard for the property rights of the persons affected, the public welfare,
and the character of the surrounding area.
      (1)   Compliance requirement for nonconforming uses.
         (A)   Request to establish compliance requirement. The city council
may request that the board of adjustment consider imposing a compliance
requirement for a nonconforming use. A request under this subsection must
include estimates of the amounts determined in Section
51A-4.704 (a)(1)(D)(i)(aa)-(bb). Upon receiving such a request, the city's
chief financial officer must determine if there are sufficient funds available
in the nonconforming use fund established under this subsection to cover
potential costs that may be incurred by the city if the board imposes a
compliance requirement. If sufficient funds are not available, the application
shall be deemed incomplete for lack of funding. If the chief financial officer
determines that sufficient funds are available, the board shall hold a public
hearing to determine whether continued operation of the nonconforming use will
have an adverse effect on nearby properties. If, based on the evidence
presented at the public hearing, the board determines that continued operation
of the use will have an adverse effect on nearby properties, it shall proceed
to impose a compliance requirement for the nonconforming use; otherwise, it
shall not.
         (B)   Factors to be considered. The board shall consider the following
factors when determining whether continued operation of the nonconforming use
will have an adverse effect on nearby properties:
            (i)   The character of the surrounding neighborhood.
            (ii)   The degree of incompatibility of the use with the zoning
district in which it is located.
            (iii)   The manner in which the use is being conducted.
            (iv)   The hours of operation of the use.
            (v)   The extent to which continued operation of the use may
threaten public health or safety.
            (vi)   The environmental impacts of the use’s operation, including
but not limited to the impacts of noise, glare, dust, and odor.
            (vii)   The extent to which public disturbances may be created or
perpetuated by continued operation of the use.
            (viii)   The extent to which traffic or parking problems may be
created or perpetuated by continued operation of the use.
            (ix)   Any other factors relevant to the issue of whether continued
operation of the use will adversely affect nearby properties.
         (C)   Finality of decision. A decision by the board to grant a request
to impose a compliance requirement is not a final decision and cannot be
immediately appealed. A decision by the board to deny a request to impose a
compliance requirement is final unless appealed to state court within 10 days
in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code.
         (D)   Determination of remedies.
            (i)   If the board determines that continued operation of the
nonconforming use will have an adverse effect on nearby properties, the
director shall, in accordance with the law, determine:
               (aa)   the costs incurred by the owner or lessee of the property
that are directly attributable to ceasing the nonconforming use of the
property, including expenses related to demolition, relocation, termination of
a lease, or discharge of a mortgage; and
               (bb)   an amount equal to the greater of, as determined by the
director, the diminution in the market value of the property, computed by
subtracting the current market value of the property after the imposition of
the requirement to stop the nonconforming use of the property from:
                  (11)    the market value of the property on the day before
the date notice was given under Section
51A-4.701(a)(1.1); or
                  (22)    the market value of the property on the day before a
request to impose a compliance date is accepted under this section.
            (ii)   The property owner or lessee may choose to:
               (aa)    receive a payment from the city for the amount
calculated in Romanette (i); or
               (bb)    continue operating the nonconforming use until the owner
or lessee recovers the amount calculated in Romanette (i) through the owner’s
or lessee’s continued business activities according to generally accepted
accounting principles.
            (iii)   For purposes of this subparagraph, MARKET VALUE means the
price the sale of the property would bring in an arms-length transaction when
offered for sale by one who wishes, but is not obliged, to sell and when bought
by one who is under no necessity of buying it.
         (E)   Notice of board action. Not later than the 10th day after the
board imposes a requirement to stop operating a nonconforming use, the director
shall give written notice to each owner or lessee of the property, as indicated
by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, who is required to stop a
nonconforming use of the property of the requirement and of the remedies to
which an owner or lessee of the property is entitled under Subparagraph (D).
         (F)   Notice of choice of remedy. An owner or lessee of property who
receives a notice to stop operating a nonconforming use under Subparagraph (E)
shall, not later than the 30th day after the date the director gives the
notice, respond in writing to the director indicating the remedy chosen under
Subparagraph (D) by the owner or lessee of the property. If there is a conflict
in the choice of remedy by the owner and a lessee of the property, the owner’s
choice of remedy controls. If there is a conflict in the choice of remedy by
the owners of a property that has more than one owner, the choice of remedy
made by the owner or owners holding the greater ownership interest in the
property controls. The director may choose the remedy if the owner or lessee
does not provide notice of its choice of remedy by the 30-day deadline.
         (G)   Compliance date.
            (i)   A property owner or lessee receiving a payment in accordance
with Section
51A-4.704(a)(1)(D)(ii)(aa) must stop operating the nonconforming use no later
than the 10th day after the date of the payment. If more than one person seeks
a payment from the city under this section, the director shall apportion the
payment between each person based on the market value of the person's interest
in the property. The apportionment determination may be appealed to the board
in accordance with Subparagraph (H).
            (ii)   A property owner or lessee who continues operating the
nonconforming use in accordance with Section
51A-4.704(a)(1)(D)(ii)(bb) must stop operating the nonconforming use
immediately upon the recovery of the amount determined under Subparagraph (D).
         (H)   Appeal of remedy.
            (i)   A person entitled to a remedy under this section may appeal
the director’s determination under Subparagraph (D) to the board of adjustment
not later than the 20th day after the determination is made. The director has
the burden of proof to establish the correctness of the director’s
determination.
            (ii)   A person seeking to continue operation of a nonconforming
use under Subparagraph (D) who appeals the decision of the director under
Subparagraph (D) may continue to operate the property in the same manner
pending the appeal unless the building official shows cause to stay the
nonconforming use by certifying in writing to the board facts supporting the
building official’s opinion that continued operation of the nonconforming use
would cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon a showing of cause the
board may, after notice to the building official, grant a restraining order to
stay continued operation of the nonconforming use.
            (iii)   If the board of adjustment determines that an owner or
lessee is entitled to:
               (aa)   a payment under this section in an amount different than
the amount determined by the director under Subparagraph (D), the board shall
order, as applicable:
                  (11)    additional payment to the owner or lessee; or
                  (22)    the owner or lessee to reimburse the city; or
               (bb)   an amount of time to operate the nonconforming use that
is different than the amount of time initially received under Subparagraph (D),
the board shall order the director to allow the owner or lessee to operate the
nonconforming use for additional or less time.
            (iv)    The board’s decision is final unless appealed to the
district court within 20 days in accordance with Section 211.019 of the Texas
Local Government Code.
      (2)   The right to operate a nonconforming use ceases if the
nonconforming use is discontinued for six months or more. The board may grant a
special exception to this provision only if the owner can show that there was a
clear intent not to abandon the use even though the use was discontinued for
six months or more.
      (3)   Nonconforming use fund.
         (A)   In general.
            (i)   There is hereby established a special fund for property
owners and lessees who have chosen to receive a payment from the city under
Section
51A-4.704(a)(1)(D)(ii).
            (ii)   With the approval and adoption of the city’s budget, city
council may allocate funds to the nonconforming use fund for the payment of
property owners and lessees of nonconforming uses for which the board has
established a compliance requirement during the current fiscal year.
         (B)   Expenditures. The nonconforming use fund may only be used for
making a payment to a property owner or lessee calculated in accordance with
Section
51A-4.704 (a)(1)(D)(i)
      (4)   The right to operate a nonconforming use ceases when the use
becomes a conforming use. The issuance of an SUP does not confer any
nonconforming rights. No use authorized by the issuance of an SUP may operate
after the SUP expires.
      (5)   The right to operate a nonconforming use ceases when the structure
housing the use is destroyed by the intentional act of the owner or his agent.
If a structure housing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed other than
by the intentional act of the owner or his agent, a person may restore or
reconstruct the structure without board approval. The structure must be
restored or reconstructed so as to have the same approximate height, floor
area, and location that it had immediately prior to the damage or destruction.
A restoration or reconstruction in violation of this paragraph immediately
terminates the right to operate the nonconforming use.
      (6)   The nonconformity of a use as to parking, loading, or an
“additional provision” (except for a requirement that a use be located a
minimum distance from a structure, use, or zoning district) in Division
51A-4.200 does not render that use subject to the regulations in this
subsection.
   (b)   Changes to nonconforming uses.
      (1)   Changing from one nonconforming use to another. The board may allow
a change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use when, in the
opinion of the board, the change is to a new use that:
         (A)   does not prolong the life of the nonconforming use;
         (B)   would have been permitted under the zoning regulations that
existed when the current use was originally established by right;
         (C)   is similar in nature to the current use; and
         (D)   will not have an adverse effect on the surrounding area.
      (2)   Remodeling a structure housing a nonconforming use. A person may
renovate, remodel, or repair a structure housing a nonconforming use if the
work does not enlarge the nonconforming use. A person may renovate, remodel, or
repair a structure housing a nonconforming tower/antenna for cellular
communication use if the modification does not substantially change the
physical dimensions of the structure housing the nonconforming tower/antenna
for cellular communication use. A modification substantially changes the
physical dimensions if it meets the criteria listed in 47 C.F.R. §1.40001(b)
(7), as amended.
      (3)   Accessory structure for a nonconforming residential use. An
accessory structure for a nonconforming residential use may be constructed,
enlarged, or remodeled in accordance with the requirements of Sections
51A-4.209(b)(6)(E)(vii) and
51A-4.217(a) without board approval.
      (4)   Nonconformity as to parking or loading.
         (A)   Increased requirements. A person shall not change a use that is
nonconforming as to parking or loading to another use requiring more off-street
parking or loading unless the additional required off-street parking and
loading spaces are provided.
         (B)   Delta theory. In calculating required off-street parking or
loading, the number of nonconforming parking or loading spaces for a use may be
carried forward when the use is converted or expanded. Nonconforming rights as
to parking or loading are defined in the following manner:
            Required parking or loading for existing use
             -   Number of existing parking or loading spaces for existing use
   Nonconforming rights as to parking or loading.
         (C)   Decreased requirements. When a use is converted to a new use
having a lesser parking or loading requirement, the rights to any portion of
the nonconforming parking or loading that are not needed to meet the new
requirements are lost.
      (5)   Enlargement of a nonconforming use.
         (A)   In this subsection, enlargement of a nonconforming use means any
enlargement of the physical aspects of a nonconforming use, including any
increase in height, floor area, number of dwelling units, or the area in which
the nonconforming use operates.
         (B)   The board may allow the enlargement of a nonconforming use when,
in the opinion of the board, the enlargement:
            (i)   does not prolong the life of the nonconforming use;
            (ii)   would have been permitted under the zoning regulations that
existed when the nonconforming use was originally established by right; and
            (iii)   will not have an adverse effect on the surrounding area.
         (C)   Structures housing a nonconforming single family or duplex use
may be enlarged without board approval.
         (D)   A nonconforming tower/antenna for cellular communication use may
be enlarged without board approval if the modification enlarging the
nonconforming tower/antenna for cellular communication does not substantially
change the physical dimensions of the nonconforming tower/ antenna for cellular
communication use. A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions
if it meets the criteria listed in 47 C.F.R. §1.40001(b)(7), as amended.
   (c)   Nonconforming structures.
      (1)   Except as provided in Subsection (c)(2), a person may renovate,
remodel, repair, rebuild, or enlarge a nonconforming structure if the work does
not cause the structure to become more nonconforming as to the yard, lot, and
space regulations.
      (2)   The right to rebuild a nonconforming structure ceases if the
structure is destroyed by the intentional act of the owner or the owner’s
agent.
      (3)   A person may, without board approval, cause a structure to become
nonconforming as to the yard, lot, and space regulations by converting the use
of the structure, except that no person may convert its use to a residential
use or to one of the nonresidential uses listed below:
         --   Airport or landing field.
         --   Animal production.
         --   Commercial amusement (inside).
         --   Commercial amusement (outside).
         --   Country club with private membership.
         --   Crop production.
         --   Drive-in theater.
         --   Dry cleaning or laundry store.
         --   General merchandise or food store 3,500 square feet or less.
         --    General merchandise or food store greater than 3,500 square
feet.
         --   Helicopter base.
         --   Heliport.
         --   Helistop.
         --   Nursery, garden shop, or plant sales.
         --   Personal service use.
         --   Private recreation center, club, or area.
         --   Public park, playground, or golf course.
         --   Restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service.
         --   Restaurant with drive-in or drive-through service.
         --   Sand, gravel, or earth sales and storage.
         --   Sanitary landfill.
         --   STOL (short takeoff or landing) port.
         --   Stone, sand, or gravel mining.
         --   Temporary construction or sales office.
         --   Theater.
         --   Transit passenger shelter.
The board may grant a special exception to this provision if the board finds
that the conversion would not adversely affect the surrounding properties.
      (4)   A person may renovate, remodel, repair, rebuild, or enlarge that
portion of a nonconforming structure supporting a tower/antenna for cellular
communication without board approval if the modification does not substantially
change the physical dimensions of the tower or base station. A modification
substantially changes the physical dimensions if it meets the criteria listed
in 47 C.F.R. §1.40001(b)(7), as amended. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20307; 20412;
21553; 22412; 25092; 26511; 29984; 33012)
SEC. 51A-4.705.   ANNEXED TERRITORY TEMPORARILY ZONED.
   (a)   All territory annexed to the city is temporarily classified as an
agricultural district until permanent zoning district designations are given to
the area by the city council.
   (b)   The procedure for establishing the permanent zoning for annexed
territory is the same as provided for zoning amendments.
   (c)   In an area temporarily classified as an agricultural district, the
building official may issue building permits and certificate of occupancy for
any use permitted in an agricultural district.
   (d)   Before permanent zoning is adopted, the building official may issue a
building permit and certificate of occupancy for a use other than those
permitted in the agricultural district in annexed territory upon approval of
the city council in accordance with the following procedure:
      (1)   The applicant must submit to the building official an application
including:
         (A)   a statement of the use contemplated;
         (B)   a plat showing the location and size of the lot or tract of land
proposed to be used; and
         (C)   a description of the location, size, and type of buildings
proposed to be constructed.
      (2)   The building official shall forward this application to the city
plan commission.
      (3)   The city plan commission shall make its recommendation concerning
the application to the city council after considering the land use plan for the
area in question. The recommendation of the commission is advisory only, and
the city council may grant or deny the application as the facts may justify.
      (4)   Upon approving an application for a use other than permitted in an
agricultural district, the city council shall by ordinance instruct the
building official to issue building permits and certificates of occupancy for
those uses authorized. (Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-4.706.   RESERVED.
(Ord. 19455)
Division 51A-4.800. Development Impact Review.
SEC. 51A-4.801.   PURPOSE.
   The general objectives of this division are to promote and protect the
health, safety, and general welfare of the public through the establishment of
an administrative review procedure for certain proposed development considered
likely to significantly impact surrounding land uses and infrastructure needs
and demands. Development impact review should occur before the developer has
completed a full set of working drawings for submission as part of an
application for a building permit. As part of the review procedure, the
developer may be required to submit a site plan indicating building siting and
layout, buffering, landscaping, usable open space, access, lighting, loading,
and other specific data. Site plan review is not intended to mandate aesthetics
of design, nor is it intended to alter basic development standards such as
floor area ratio, density requirements, height, setbacks, and coverage. (Ord.
19455)
SEC. 51A-4.802.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   BUILDING ENVELOPE means the three dimensional form within which the
horizontal and vertical elements of a building are contained.
      (2)   CALIPER means the diameter of the trunk measured six inches above
ground level up to and including four inch caliper size, and measured 12 inches
above ground level if the measurement taken at six inches above ground level
exceeds four inches. If a tree is of a multi-trunk variety, the caliper of the
tree is the average caliper of all of its trunks.
      (3)   DIR means development impact review.
      (4)   ESTIMATED TRIP GENERATION means the total number of vehicle trips
generated by one or more uses on the lot derived from calculations based
exclusively on trip generation assumptions contained in Section
51A-4.803.
      (5)   RAR means residential adjacency review.
      (6)   RESTORATION means the act of putting back into a former or original
state. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.803.   SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (a)   When a site plan is required.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsections (a)(3) and (a)(4), a
site plan must be submitted in accordance with the requirements of this section
before the issuance of a permit for work on a lot in a district or subdistrict
listed in Subsection (a)(2) and:
         (A)   the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot
collectively is equal to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per
day per acre (See Table 1 to calculate estimated trip generation);
         (B)   the lot contains a use for which DIR is required in the use
regulations (See Division
51A-4.200); or
         (C)   the lot has a residential adjacency as defined in Subsection (d)
(3) and contains a use for which RAR is required in the use regulations (See
Division
51A-4.200).
      (2)   The districts and subdistricts listed for purposes of Subsection
(a)(1) are:
         (A)   all multifamily districts;
         (B)   all nonresidential zoning districts except central area
districts; and
         (C)   SC, GR, LC, HC, O-2, and industrial subdistricts in the Oak Lawn
Special Purpose District (Planned Development District No. 193).
TABLE 1
TRIP GENERATION ASSUMPTIONS
USE TRIPS PER DAY
TABLE 1
TRIP GENERATION ASSUMPTIONS
USE                                     TRIPS PER DAY
INDUSTRIAL USES                         6.97 per 1,000 gsf
LODGING USES                            10.50 per room
OFFICE USES                              
Financial institution without drive-in  140.61 per 1,000 gsf
Financial institution with drive-in     265.21 per 1,000 gsf
Other by floor area:                     
   10,000 gsf or less                24.60 per 1,000 gsf
   over 10,000 to 50,000 gsf         16.58 per 1,000 gsf
   over 50,000 to 100,000 gsf        14.03 per 1,000 gsf
   over 100,000 to 150,000 gsf       12.71 per 1,000 gsf
   over 150,000 to 200,000 gsf       11.85 per 1,000 gsf
RESIDENTIAL USES                         
Single Family                           9.55
Other                                   6.59/dwelling unit
RETAIL AND PERSONAL SERVICE USES         
General merchandise over 3,500 sq. ft.  177.59 per 1,000 gsf
General merchandise under 3,500 sq. ft. 737.99 per 1,000 gsf
Restaurant without drive-in             205.36 per 1,000 gsf
Restaurant with drive-in                786.22 per 1,000 gsf
Other:                                   
   10,000 gsf or less                167.59 per 1,000 gsf
   over 10,000 to 50,000 gsf         91.65 per 1,000 gsf
   over 50,000 to 100,000 gsf        70.67 per 1,000 gsf
   over 100,000 to 150,000 gsf       62.59 per 1,000 gsf
   over 150,000 to 200,000 gsf       54.50 per 1,000 gsf
WHOLESALE, DISTRIBUTION, AND STORAGE USES
Mini-warehouse                          2.61 per 1,000 gsf
Warehouse                               4.88 per 1,000 gsf
‘gsf’ means gross square feet. These rates are based on the ITE Trip
Generation Report, 5th edition, January, 1991. Rates for uses and floor areas
not listed shall be based on the ITE Trip Generation Report. Rates for uses
and floor areas not listed in the ITE Trip Generation Report shall be
determined by the director based on a survey of similar existing uses.
 
      (3)   A site plan is not required under Subsection (a)(1) if the permit
is only needed for:
         (A)   restoration of a building that has been damaged or destroyed by
fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the public enemy, or accident of
any kind; or
         (B)   construction work that does not change the use or increase the
existing building height, floor area ratio, or nonpermeable coverage of the
lot.
      (4)   If a site plan is included as part of an ordinance establishing the
zoning classification of a lot, or if a site plan is approved by official
action of the board of adjustment as a condition to the granting of a variance
or special exception on the lot, then no site plan is required to be submitted
or approved under this section if the record also reflects that:
         (A)   traffic signals, turn lanes, additional lanes, or other public
infrastructure improvements were, or are required to be, constructed or paid
for by the owner in connection with the passage of the ordinance or the
granting of the variance or special exception; and
         (B)   if the lot would otherwise be subject to the residential
adjacency standards of this section, the approving body considered the impact
of the development on surrounding land uses.
      (5)   The building official shall not issue a permit authorizing work for
which a site plan is required under Subsection (a)(1) unless the site plan has
been approved by:
         (A)   the director; or
         (B)   the city plan commission as part of the appeal process.
   (b)   Application for review. An application for review of a site plan
required under this section must be filed with the director on a form furnished
by the city for that purpose. The application must contain the following:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number, and signature of the
applicant. If the applicant is not the owner of the lot, he must submit a
letter from the owner authorizing him to act on the owner’s behalf.
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the lot. If
there is more than one owner, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of
all owners must be provided.
      (3)   The street address and complete legal description of the lot.
      (4)   A brief description of all existing and proposed uses on the lot.
      (5)   Any other reasonable and pertinent information that the director
determines to be necessary for site plan review.
   (c)   Reserved.
   (d)   Site plan requisites.
      (1)   In general. If the site plan is required due to estimated trip
generation or a requirement for DIR in the use regulations, it must:
         (A)   include a location diagram showing the position of the lot in
relation to surrounding streets in the city's major street network;
         (B)   contain title block and reference information pertaining to the
lot and plan, including the name of the project, the names of the persons
responsible for preparing the plan, the zoning classification of the lot, the
scale of the plan (both numeric and graphic), and the date of submission, with
provisions for dating revisions;
         (C)   show the dimensions of the lot, and indicate lot area in both
square feet and acres;
         (D)   show or describe the building envelope for each existing and
proposed building on the lot;
         (E)   show the location of all existing streets, alleys, easements for
street purposes, utility and other easements, floodway management areas, and
the one-percent annual chance flood plain, if applicable;
         (F)   show all areas proposed for dedication or reservation;
         (G)   show zoning setback and building lines for each existing and
proposed building on the lot;
         (H)   show all existing and proposed points of ingress and egress and
estimated peak hour turning movements to and from existing and proposed public
and private streets and alleys;
         (I)   show all existing and proposed median cuts and driveways located
within 250 feet of the lot;
         (J)   show all existing and proposed off-street parking and loading
areas, indicating the general dimensions of parking bays, aisles, and
driveways, and the number of cars to be accommodated in each row of parking
spaces;
         (K)   show all existing and proposed provisions for pedestrian
circulation on the lot, including sidewalks, walkways, crosswalks, and
pedestrian plazas;
         (L)   indicate average daily traffic counts on adjacent streets and
illustrate estimated peak hour turning movements at intersections located
within 250 feet of the lot;
         (M)   show the location and indicate the type of any special traffic
regulation facilities proposed or required;
         (N)   show the existing and proposed topography of the lot using
contours at intervals of two feet or less. Existing contours must be shown with
dashed lines; proposed contours must be shown with solid lines;
         (O)   show the existing and proposed locations for municipal solid
waste containers and receptacles;
         (P)   show surrounding properties and the approximate location of
buildings within a distance of 250 feet of the lot, indicating their zoning
district classification. Surrounding properties may be drawn at a smaller scale
than that required under Subsection (c);
         (Q)   show locations, calipers, and names (both common and scientific)
of all trees near proposed construction activity (trees in close proximity that
all have a caliper of less than eight inches may be designated as a "group of
trees" with only the number noted); and
         (R)   contain any other reasonable and pertinent information that the
director determines to be necessary for site plan review.
      (2)   Residential adjacency items. If the lot has a residential adjacency
as defined in Subsection (d)(3) and is not in the Oak Lawn Special Purpose
District (Planned Development District No. 193), the site plan must:
         (A)   satisfy the requirements of Subparagraphs (A) through (G), (J),
and (N) through (Q) in Subsection (d)(1);
         (B)   show all existing and proposed points of ingress and egress;
         (C)   show the existing and proposed locations for all building
entrances, exits, service areas, and windows;
         (D)   show the location and indicate the type, size, and height of
perimeter fencing, screening, and buffering elements proposed or required;
         (E)   show all provisions to be made to direct and detain storm water
and to mitigate erosion both during and following the completion of
construction;
         (F)   show the location and indicate the type, orientation, size, and
height of light standards which will illuminate any portion of a required yard;
         (G)   show the location of existing and proposed signs;
         (H)   show the existing and proposed locations of all exterior
loudspeakers and sound amplifiers;
         (I)   show the existing and proposed locations for all mechanical
equipment capable of producing high levels of noise; and
         (J)   contain any other reasonable and pertinent information that the
director determines to be necessary for site plan review.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, a lot has a residential adjacency if:
         (A)   the lot is adjacent to or directly across:
            (i)   a street 64 feet or less in width; or
            (ii)   an alley from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH
district; or
         (B)   an existing or proposed building or structure on the lot is
within 330 feet of a lot in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district.
      (4)   Reserved.
      (5)   The following information, in addition to being shown graphically,
must be separately tabulated in a conspicuous place on the plan for quick and
easy reference:
         (A)   Lot area in square feet and acres.
         (B)   Total building floor area and floor area for each use on the lot
in square feet.
         (C)   Floor area ratio of the lot.
         (D)   Square footage and percentages of building coverage and
nonpermeable coverage of the lot.
         (E)   Number of parking spaces required and number of parking spaces
provided.
         (F)   Zoning classification of the lot.
   (e)   Review by the director.
      (1)   Upon the filing of a complete application for review of a site plan
and a complete site plan submission, the director of development services shall
promptly forward one copy of each to all affected divisions of the department
and to the director of code compliance for review and comments. The director of
code compliance shall review the application and submission and return a
written recommendation to the director of development services within 15
calendar days of the filing date.
      (2)   The director shall make a decision regarding the application and
submission within 30 calendar days of the filing date. The decision must be
accompanied by an itemized list of required changes or corrections to the site
plan. That decision must take one of three forms:
         (A)   Approval, no conditions.
         (B)   Approval, subject to conditions noted.
         (C)   Denial.
      (3)   If the director fails to make a decision regarding the application
and submission within 30 calendar days of the filing date, the application and
submission are considered to be approved subject to compliance with all
applicable city codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   The time periods in Subsections (e)(1), (e)(2), and (e)(3) do not
begin to run until the applicant provides all of the information required in
Subsections (b), (c), and (d). In cases where the director requests additional
information within 10 calendar days of the filing date, the time periods in
Subsections (e)(1), (e)(2), and (e)(3) do not begin to run until the applicant
provides the additional information.
      (5)   If the director denies an application or submission, he shall state
in writing the specific reasons for denial. If he approves an application or
submission subject to conditions, he shall state in writing the specific
requirements to be met before issuance of a permit to authorize work on the
lot.
   (f)   Grounds for denial.
      (1)   In general. The director shall deny a site plan application or
submission under this section if:
         (A)   it does not contain sufficient information to allow for site
plan review; or
         (B)   the site plan does not comply with all applicable city codes,
ordinances, rules, or regulations.
      (2)   Vehicular circulation and infrastructure standards.
         (A)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (g), the director
shall deny a site plan under this section if:
            (i)   the provisions for vehicular loading and unloading or
parking, or for vehicular or pedestrian circulation, will create hazards to
safety, substandard circulation of all modes of transportation, or will impose
a significant burden upon public facilities which can be avoided or
substantially mitigated by reasonable modifications in the plan;
            (ii)   the site plan is required due to estimated trip generation
and the owner of the lot refuses to comply with one or more of the following
development-related infrastructure requirements:
               (aa)   The owner shall construct traffic control improvements,
including, if applicable, traffic signal upgrades, at intersections adjacent to
the lot if the traffic engineer determines that such improvements are
necessitated by and wholly attributable to the proposed new development.
               (bb)   The owner shall construct right and left turn lanes,
stacking lanes, and bus turnouts in right-of-way adjacent to the lot if the
traffic engineer determines that such improvements are necessitated by and
wholly attributable to the proposed new development.
               (cc)   The owner shall dedicate right-of-way or easements to the
city to allow for those right and left turn lanes, stacking lanes, and bus
turnouts that the director determines are necessitated by and wholly
attributable to the proposed new development.
         (B)   To construct the improvements required under Subparagraph (A),
the owner shall enter into a private development contract satisfactory to the
city. The contract must be made according to terms and conditions stated on a
form provided by the director and approved by the city attorney. The contract
must include performance and payment bonds equivalent to those which the city
uses and requires in its standard specifications, and the city must be a named
obligee in the bonds.
         (C)   In lieu of constructing the improvements required under
Subparagraph (A), the owner may voluntarily pay the city an amount equal to the
estimated cost of constructing the improvements before issuance of a building
permit to authorize work on the lot. For purposes of this subparagraph, the
estimated cost of constructing the improvements shall be determined by the
director on a case by case basis. Such payments, being voluntarily tendered to
the city as an optional alternative to the performance of construction work,
shall not be “impact fees” as defined by state law, but shall constitute
compensation for the city’s construction of the required improvements. All
payments made pursuant to this subparagraph must be credited to separate
interest-bearing accounts and used only for financing construction of the
specified improvements. Any payments made that are not spent on the specified
improvements within five years after the date of payment must be refunded
together with interest accrued at the city’s investment rate during the five-
year period, less administrative costs. Refunds shall be made to the owner of
record shown on the last approved city ad valorem tax roll at the time the
refund is paid, except that payments made by a political subdivision or
governmental entity shall be refunded to that political subdivision or
governmental entity.
      (3)   Residential adjacency standards. If the lot has a residential
adjacency as defined in Subsection (d)(3) and is not in the Oak Lawn Special
Purpose District (Planned Development District No. 193), the director shall
review the site plan for compliance with this paragraph and, except as
otherwise provided in Subsection (g), shall deny the site plan if:
         (A)   the location of existing or proposed buildings, structures, or
equipment on the lot will be detrimental or injurious to each other or to
surrounding development, or will impose an undue burden on public facilities,
and the detrimental or injurious results or undue burden can be avoided or
substantially mitigated by reasonable modifications in the plan;
         (B)   development of the lot will create a soil or drainage problem
which can be avoided or substantially mitigated by reasonable modifications in
the plan;
         (C)   the proposed on-site fencing, screening, or buffering elements
do not provide adequate protection to adjacent property, and adequate
protection can be provided by reasonable modifications in the plan; or
         (D)   the exterior lighting to be provided on the lot will create a
hazard to motorists on an adjacent public or private street or alley, or will
damage or diminish the value or usability of adjacent property.
      (4)   If the director denies a site plan under this section, he shall
state in writing the specific reasons for denial.
   (g)   Approval subject to conditions noted. As an alternative to denial of a
site plan under Subsection (f), the director may approve the site plan subject
to conditions noted if compliance with all conditions will eliminate what would
otherwise constitute grounds for denial. If the director approves the site plan
subject to conditions noted, he shall state in writing the specific
requirements to be met before issuance of a permit to authorize work on the
lot.
   (h)   Approval, no conditions. If there are no grounds for denial of a site
plan under Subsection (f), the director shall approve the site plan with no
conditions.
   (i)   Appeals.
      (1)   The applicant may appeal the following decisions made by the
director:
         (A)   Denial of an application or site plan submission.
         (B)   Approval of an application or site plan submission subject to
conditions noted.
      (2)   An appeal must be made within 10 days after notice is given to the
applicant of the director’s decision.
      (3)   An appeal is made by filing a written request with the director for
review by the city plan commission.
      (4)   Decisions of the commission are final as to available
administrative remedies and are binding on all parties.
      (5)   If the commission fails to make a decision on the appeal within 30
calendar days of the date that the written request is filed with the director,
the application and submission are considered to be approved subject to
compliance with all other applicable city codes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations.
   (j)   Validity of approved site plan. An approved site plan is valid for a
period of two years. If a permit to authorize work on the lot has not been
obtained upon expiration of the two-year period, a new site plan submission is
required.
   (k)   Effect of approved site plan. The approval of a site plan by the
director or commission does not result in the vesting of development rights,
nor does it permit the violation of any city ordinance or state law, nor does
it preclude the building official from refusing to issue a permit if he
determines that plans and specifications do not comply with applicable laws and
ordinances, or that the work described in the application for the permit does
not conform to the requirements of the construction codes. (Ord. Nos. 19455;
19786; 19929; 20037; 20730; 21760; 22053; 22026; 25047; 27697; 28073; 28424;
28553; 31314; 32002; 33112)
Division 51A-4.900. Affordable Housing.
SEC. 51A-4.901.   PURPOSE.
   This division is adopted to comply with Section 3.5 of the Consent Decree
entered on September 24, 1990, in the United States District Court for the
Northern District of Texas in the case of Debra Walker et al. v. U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development et al. and to further the following
related and more specific purposes:
   (a)   to encourage the provision of dwelling units affordable to families of
low income throughout the city;
   (b)   to ensure that these dwelling units are safe, sanitary, decent, and
otherwise substantially equivalent to public housing in the city;
   (c)   to ensure that these dwelling units are available in a variety of
sizes to the same extent as throughout the city; and
   (d)   to otherwise promote the general welfare of the city and its
residents. (Ord. 21663)
SEC. 51A-4.902.   DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   (a)   DENSITY BONUS means an increase in the number of dwelling units
otherwise allowed for any particular lot.
   (b)   DWELLING UNIT OF ADEQUATE SIZE means:
      (1)   an efficiency or larger unit for a family consisting of one person;
      (2)   a one-bedroom or larger unit for a family consisting of two
persons;
      (3)   a two-bedroom or larger unit for a family consisting of three or
four persons; and
      (4)   a three-bedroom or larger unit for a family consisting of more than
four persons.
   (c)   HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development or its successor.
   (d)   IN-LIEU PAYMENT means a fee paid as an alternative to the provision of
an SAH unit.
   (e)   LOWER INCOME FAMILY means a family whose income does not exceed 50
percent of the median income for a family in the Dallas Primary Statistical
Area, as determined by the Secretary of HUD, with adjustments for family size
in accordance with Section 3(b)(2) of the United States Housing Act of 1937, as
amended [42 U.S.C.A. 1437a, Subsection (b)(2)].
   (f)   MINORITY CONCENTRATED AREA means a census tract where, according to
the most recent decennial census of population conducted by the U.S. Bureau of
the Census, more than 50 percent of the population is Black and/or of Spanish/
Hispanic origin or descent.
   (i)   NON-MINORITY CONCENTRATED AREA means a census tract that, according to
the most recent decennial census of population conducted by the U.S. Bureau of
the Census, is not a minority concentrated area.
   (j)   SAH DISTRICT means the MF-1(SAH), MF- 2(SAH), MU-1(SAH), MU-2(SAH),
and MU-3(SAH) districts established under this chapter.
   (k)   SAH RENTAL RATE means a monthly payment equal to or less than 30
percent of the tenant’s gross annual family income divided by 12.
   (l)   SAH UNIT means a standard affordable housing dwelling unit.
   (m)   STANDARD AFFORDABLE HOUSING DWELLING UNIT means a dwelling unit of
adequate size:
      (1)   leased or offered for lease to a lower income family for an amount
equal to or less than the SAH rental rate; or
      (2)   that satisfies all necessary criteria, as determined by the
appropriate federal or state governmental authority, for low income family
occupancy to qualify a project for federal or state tax relief or other housing
or financial assistance under a program established by and administered in
accordance with federal or state law for the purpose of aiding low income
families in obtaining a decent place to live. (Ord. 21663)
SEC. 51A-4.903.   APPLICATION OF DIVISION.
   (a)   This division only becomes applicable to a lot in an SAH district when
an application is made for a building permit that would increase the dwelling
unit density permitted in that district above the number permitted by right.
   (b)   The city council may impose an SAH requirement in a planned
development district that allows 15 or more multifamily dwelling units in the
district. The requirement, if imposed, must be reasonably consistent with the
standards and purposes of this division and must be a part of the ordinance
establishing or increasing the size of the district. (Ord. 21663)
SEC. 51A-4.904.   SPECIAL EXCEPTION.
   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize a
reduction in the number of SAH units required under this division if the board
finds, after a public hearing, that:
   (a)   the units have remained vacant for six months or more; and
   (b)   good faith efforts to lease the units to lower income families were
made during their vacancy.
In granting a special exception under this section, the board shall establish a
termination date for the special exception, which may not be more than one year
after the date of the board’s decision. This provision does not preclude the
granting of additional special exceptions in accordance with this section. The
two year limitation on a request for a property in Section
51A-4.703(e) does not apply to this section. (Ord. 21663)
SEC. 51A-4.905.   PROCEDURES TO OBTAIN A DENSITY BONUS.
   (a)   In general. Regulations for SAH districts in
Article IV specify the dwelling unit density permitted by right. A density
bonus may be obtained in these districts if one or more SAH units or an in-lieu
payment is provided in accordance with this division. Prior to the issuance of
a building permit that would increase the dwelling unit density in a SAH
district above the number permitted by right, an application for a density
bonus must be submitted to and approved by the director.
   (b)   Application. An application for a density bonus must be filed with the
director on a form provided by the city. The application must include the
following:
      (1)   the date, names, addresses, and telephone numbers of both the
property owner and the person preparing the plan;
      (2)   lot and block description, the zoning classification, and the
census tract of the lot for which the density bonus is requested;
      (3)   the dwelling unit density proposed for the lot and the dwelling
unit density permitted by right;
      (4)   the number of SAH units required as a result of receiving the
density bonus;
      (5)   if applicable, where the SAH units will be provided, including the
lot and block description, the zoning classification, and the census tract of
the lot where the SAH units will be located;
      (6)   if applicable, the amount of the in-lieu payment that will be
provided;
      (7)   any other reasonable and pertinent information that the director
determines to be necessary for review. (Ord. 21663)
SEC. 51A-4.906.   REVIEW BY THE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The director shall approve an application for a density bonus that
complies with the standards in Subsection (b).
   (b)   Standards.
      (1)   An SAH unit provided to qualify a lot for the density bonus must
be:
         (A)   within three miles of the lot receiving the density bonus;
         (B)   on a lot where no more than 30 percent of the dwelling units are
SAH units;
         (C)   in a non-minority concentrated area; and
         (D)   in compliance with all city ordinances.
      (2)   An SAH unit provided to qualify a lot for a density bonus may not
be used to qualify another lot for a density bonus.
      (3)   The design of SAH units must be equivalent to the design of other
units located on the same lot. It is recommended that the materials of SAH
units be equivalent to the materials of other units located on the same lot.
The size of bedrooms in SAH units must be consistent with the size of bedrooms
in other units located on the same lot.
      (4)   Of the SAH units provided, 21 percent must have one bedroom, 45
percent must have two bedrooms, 28 percent must have three bedrooms, and five
percent must have four bedrooms. In determining the number of units to be
provided, fractional units are counted to the nearest whole number, with one-
half counted as an additional unit. (Ord. Nos. 21663; 31607)
SEC. 51A-4.907.   DECISION BY THE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   Timing. The director shall make a decision regarding the application
for a density bonus within 10 working days after a complete application is
filed. An application will not be considered complete until all the information
required by Section
51A-4.905 is provided.
   (b)   Failure to act. If the director fails to make a decision regarding the
application within the 10-day period, it is approved subject to compliance with
all applicable city ordinances.
   (c)   Form of decision. The decision of the director must take one of the
following three forms:
      (1)   Approval, no conditions.
      (2)   Approval, subject to conditions noted.
      (3)   Denial.
   (d)   Approval with no conditions. If there are no grounds for denying or
modifying the application, the director shall approve it with no conditions.
   (e)   Approval subject to conditions noted. As an alternative to denial of
the application, the director may approve it subject to conditions noted if
compliance with all conditions will eliminate what would otherwise constitute
grounds for denial. If the director approves it subject to conditions noted, he
or she shall state in writing the specific requirements to be met before it is
approved.
   (f)   Denial.
      (1)   Grounds for denial. The director shall deny the application if:
         (A)   it does not contain all required information; or
         (B)   an SAH unit required to be provided in order to obtain a certain
density bonus in accordance with this division is not provided.
      (2)   Statement of reasons. If the director denies the application, he or
she shall state in writing the specific reasons for denial.
   (g)   Notice of decision. The director shall give written notice to the
applicant of his or her decision regarding the application. Notice is given
either by hand delivery or by depositing the notice properly addressed and
postage paid in the United States mail. If the notice is mailed, it must be
sent to the address shown on the application. (Ord. 21663)
SEC. 51A-4.908.   AFFORDABLE HOUSING INSTRUMENT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Requisites of instrument. If the application for a density bonus is
approved, an affordable housing instrument must be executed and filed in
accordance with this section on a form provided by the city. The instrument
must:
      (1)   be signed by all owners of the lot(s) affected;
      (2)   be signed by all lienholders, other than taxing entities, that have
either an interest in the lot(s) affected or an improvement on one or more of
those lot(s);
      (3)   contain a lot and block description of the lot(s) on which the SAH
unit(s) will be located;
      (4)   specify the number of the SAH units;
      (5)   be a covenant running with the land;
      (6)   state that all signatories agree to defend, indemnify, and hold
harmless the city of Dallas from and against all claims or liabilities arising
out of or in connection with the instrument;
      (7)   state that it may only be amended or terminated by a subsequent
written instrument that is:
         (A)   signed by the owner(s) of the lot(s) affected by the affordable
housing instrument and by all lienholders, other than taxing entities, that
have an interest in lot(s) or an improvement on the lot(s);
         (B)   approved by the director of housing and community empowerment;
         (C)   approved as to form by the city attorney; and
         (D)   filed and made a part of the deed records of the county or
counties in which the lots are located;
      (8)   state that the owner agrees to comply with all the requirements of
this division, including the submission of an annual report and full
cooperation with audits of the affordable housing program conducted by the
city;
      (9)   state that it may be enforced by the city of Dallas;
      (10)   state that it shall be governed by the laws of the State of Texas;
and
      (11)   be approved by the director of housing and community empowerment
and approved as to form by city attorney.
   (b)   Instrument must be filed. A true and correct copy of the approved
affordable housing instrument must be filed in the deed records of the county
or counties in which the lots affected are located. The instrument shall not be
considered effective until it is filed in the deed records in accordance with
this section. After the instrument is filed in the deed records, two file-
marked copies of the instrument must be filed with the director of housing and
community empowerment.
   (c)   Termination or amendment of instrument. A recorded affordable housing
instrument may be terminated or amended to reduce the number of SAH units on a
lot if a corresponding number of SAH units are provided on one or more other
lots. An instrument terminating or amending a recorded affordable housing
instrument must be:
      (1)   signed by the owner of the lot(s) affected by the affordable
housing instrument and by all lienholders, other than taxing entities, that
have an interest in the lot(s) or of an improvement on the lot(s);
      (2)   approved by the director of housing and community empowerment as to
compliance with this division;
      (3)   approved as to form by the city attorney; and
      (4)   filed and made a part of the deed records of the county or counties
in which the lot(s) are located by the owner of the lot(s).
   The director of housing and community empowerment shall not approve a
termination or amendment that would cause the total number of SAH units to be
reduced below the number required under this division, or that would otherwise
cause this division to be violated. (Ord. Nos. 21663; 32864; 33233)
SEC. 51A-4.909.   OPERATION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM.
   (a)   A certificate of occupancy may not be issued for a dwelling unit
permitted because of an SAH unit approved by the director until a certificate
of occupancy has been issued for the SAH unit; however, these certificates of
occupancy may be issued simultaneously.
   (b)   An SAH unit originally leased to a qualified lower income family shall
automatically lose its status as an SAH unit if the family no longer qualifies
as a lower income family at the end of the primary term of the lease. When this
occurs, the next vacated dwelling unit must be offered for lease as an SAH unit
until the required number of SAH units are provided. This provision may not be
used as grounds for evicting a previously qualified lower income family from a
unit if the family wishes to pay the market rate for that unit.
   (c)   A lease for an SAH unit may not exceed a term of one year.
   (d)   The director of housing and community empowerment shall randomly,
regularly, and periodically select a sample of families occupying SAH units for
the purpose of income verification. Any information received pursuant to this
subsection shall remain confidential and shall be used only for the purpose of
verifying income in order to determine eligibility for occupation of the SAH
units. All prospective tenants of an SAH unit must agree to provide or to allow
the director to obtain sufficient information to enable income verification as
contemplated in this subsection as a condition to leasing the unit. A person
commits an offense if he or she, with the intent to lease or occupy an SAH
unit, misrepresents the gross annual family income of its tenant or prospective
tenant to the lessor or the city of Dallas with knowledge of its falsity. A
person who commits the offense described in this subsection shall be guilty of
a separate offense for each day or portion of a day that the unit is leased or
occupied based on the misrepresentation.
   (e)   Annual report. Each owner of property subject to an approved
affordable housing instrument shall submit a written report on June 30 of each
year to the director that demonstrates compliance with the affordable housing
instrument and this division. Each report must include:
      (1)   a list of SAH units currently leased, including the names and
annual family incomes of the tenants;
      (2)   a list of the SAH units currently offered for lease;
      (3)   the total number of dwelling units (SAH or otherwise) currently
offered for lease;
      (4)   a list of all lower income families currently seeking to lease one
or more dwelling units on the property; and
      (5)   any other reasonable and pertinent information the director
determines to be necessary to demonstrate compliance with the affordable
housing instrument and this division.
   (f)   Family equivalence. The families that reside in SAH units must have
similar numbers and ages of members as the other families on that lot. (Ord.
Nos. 21663; 32864; 33233)
SEC. 51A-4.910.   ALTERNATIVE WAYS TO SATISFY SAH UNIT OBLIGATION.
   (a)   In-lieu payment.
      (1)   In general. A property owner may reduce the number of SAH units
required to obtain a density bonus by making an in-lieu payment into a special
city account, to be known as the Housing Production Trust Fund, for development
of SAH units in non-minority concentrated areas of the city. The amount of the
payment required is calculated by multiplying the cost of constructing the
multifamily dwelling unit [See Paragraph (2) below] required by the number of
units of that size that will not be required by reason of the payment. The
entire payment must be made to the director before issuance of any required
permit.
      (2)   Cost of constructing multifamily dwelling units. Until January 2,
1995, the cost of constructing a multifamily dwelling unit is as shown:
 
NUMBER OF BEDROOMS IN UNIT COST PER UNIT
1                          $35,000
2                          45,000
3                          55,000
4                          60,000
 
On January 2, 1995, and on January 2 of each odd-numbered year thereafter, the
director shall determine the new costs of constructing multifamily dwelling
units by using the following formula:
 
Cost of                                   Historical Cost   Cost of
Constructing Type   X Dallas Cost Index X Index for Year  X Constructing Type
of Multifamily Unit                       Historical Cost   of Multifamily Unit
                                          Index for 1993    In Year X
 
Both the Dallas Cost Index and the Historical Cost Indexes must be derived from
the most recent issue of Building Construction Cost Data, published by the
Robert Snow Means Company, Inc., of Kingston, Massachusetts, unless another
publication is designated by the director.
   (b)   Provision of single family uses. It is assumed that all SAH units
provided will be multifamily uses. A property owner may, however, reduce the
number of SAH units required to obtain a density bonus by providing one or more
single family uses as SAH units in accordance with this subsection and Sections
51A-4.901 through
51A-4.909. The provision of a single family use reduces the number of
multifamily bedrooms required as shown:
 
NUMBER OF BEDROOMS IN THE SINGLE FAMILY REDUCTION IN NUMBER OF MULTIFAMILY
USE PROVIDED (“SIZE”)               BEDROOMS REQUIRED
1                                       2
2                                       3
3                                       4
4                                       5
 
The number of multifamily bedrooms required to obtain a density bonus if a
person provides one or more single family uses is calculated as follows. First,
determine the number of each size of single family use provided. (For example,
a person may provide two two-bedroom and three four-bedroom single family uses
as SAH units.) Then, multiply the number of each size of single family use
provided by the number of multifamily bedrooms that will not be required by
reason of the provision of those single family uses. Next, add these numbers to
determine the total number of multifamily bedrooms that will not be required.
(In the above example, 21 multifamily bedrooms would not be required because of
the provision of the single family uses.) This number is then subtracted from
the total number of bedrooms of SAH units that would otherwise be required by
Section
51A-4.906(b)(4) to obtain the density bonus. The result is then broken down
into the number of different sizes of SAH units required by Section
51A-4.906(b)(4) to obtain the density bonus. (Ord. 21663)
Division 51A-4.1000. Park Land Dedication.
SEC. 51A-4.1001.   PURPOSE.
   Dedication of park land provides new residents and visitors with
recreational amenities and green infrastructure consistent with the current
level of park services for existing residents. (Ord. 30934, eff. 7/1/19)
SEC. 51A-4.1002.   APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this section, park land dedication
requirements apply to:
      (1)   a single family or duplex residential plat or building permit for
new construction; and
      (2)   a development plan or building permit that includes multifamily
residential units or a hotel or motel use.
   (b)   Exceptions. These regulations do not apply to:
      (1)   plats, replats, or issuance of building permits for new
construction on land owned by a governmental unit; and
      (2)   developments in planned development districts, existing on July 1,
2019, with open space or park land requirements.
   (c)   Waivers. Only developments that are enrolled in a program administered
by the office of housing and community empowerment and authorized by the city
council, that furthers the public purposes of the city’s housing policy may be
eligible to have some or all of these requirements waived. (Ord. Nos. 30934;
32864; 33233)
SEC. 51A-4.1003.   DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   (a)   Definitions. In this division:
      (1)   COMMUNITY PARK means a park that is larger than a neighborhood park
and serves several neighborhoods.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of the park and recreation department.
      (3)   HOTEL AND MOTEL USE means a hotel or motel use, extended stay hotel
or motel use, lodging or boarding house use, or residential hotel.
      (4)   MULTIFAMILY USE means a college dormitory, fraternity, or sorority
house, group residential facility, multifamily use, or retirement housing.
      (5)   NEIGHBORHOOD PARK means a park that serves a variety of age groups
within a limited area or neighborhood.
      (6)   PARK DEDICATION ZONE means an area as illustrated on the park land
dedication map created by the park and recreation department defining the area
where dedication may occur.
      (7)   PRIVATE PARK LAND means privately owned park land, common area, or
green spaces provided on-site that is accessible to the residents of a
development.
      (8)   SINGLE FAMILY OR DUPLEX USE means a duplex use, handicapped group
dwelling unit, or single family use.
   (b)   Interpretations. For uses or terms found in Chapter 51 the regulations
in Section
51A-4.702(a)(6)(C) apply in this division. (Ord. 30934, eff. 7/1/19)
SEC. 51A-4.1004.   DEDICATION.
   (a)    General. Dedication may be accomplished by dedication to and
acceptance of suitable land by the city or by payment of a fee-in-lieu of
dedication.
   (b)   On-site dedication. For single family or duplex residential
subdivisions, on-site dedication must be shown on the preliminary and final
plat. For multifamily or hotel and motel uses, on-site dedication must be shown
on the development plan or other plan submitted with a building permit
application.
   (c)   Off-site dedication. Off-site dedication must be evidenced by a deed
to the city that has been accepted by the director.
   (d)   Deferral. Payment of the fee-in-lieu may be deferred from the time of
platting to the time of issuance of building permits.
   (e)   Dedication calculation. The following formula applies to determine the
amount of land required to be dedicated.
      (1)   For a single family or duplex residential development:
      One acre per 100 dwelling units. Less than 100 dwelling units on a pro
rata basis.
      (2)    For a multi-family development:
      One acre per 255 single bedroom dwelling units. Less than 255 dwelling
units on a pro rata basis.
      One acre per 127 two bedroom or greater dwelling units. Less than 127
dwelling units on a pro rata basis.
      For a college dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house, one acre for 255
sleeping rooms. Less than 255 sleeping rooms on a pro rata basis.
      (3)   For a hotel or motel use development:
      One acre per 233 guest rooms. Less than 233 guest rooms on a pro rata
basis.
   (f)   Single family and duplex development. For single family or duplex
developments, park land dedication may occur at either the subdivision or
permitting phase. Dedication is only required once.
      (1)   Residential subdivision.
         (A)   Unless dedication has been deferred to the permitting phase,
final approval of a single family or duplex residential subdivision plat
requires at least one of the following to satisfy the requirements of
Subsection (e) of this section including any credits or off-sets authorized
pursuant to Section
51A-4.1007
            (i)   For park land dedicated within the subdivision, a fee simple
dedication on the subdivision plat of the required park land approved by the
director.
            (ii)   For park land dedicated outside the subdivision, evidence of
recording in the appropriate real property records of a general warranty deed
of the required park land approved and accepted by the director.
            (iii)   For land platted as a private park, the land must be
identified on the plat.
            (iv)   Confirmation of deposit into the park land dedication fund
of the fee-in-lieu of dedication in the amount established pursuant to Section
51A-4.1005.
         (B)   Land established as a private park for the purposes of this
section may not be replatted to change the designation without the approval of
the city plan commission. The city plan commission shall not approve a replat
that would change the designation unless it determines that:
            (i)   alternative private park land that satisfies the requirements
of this subsection is identified within the original subdivision that meets the
dedication requirement; or
            (ii)    park land dedication require ments are met with an off-site
dedication or fee-in-lieu meeting the requirements of this division.
         (C)   For phased plats, park land dedication plats may only be
accepted for the active phase.
      (2)   Residential building permit. Issuance of a building permit for a
single family or duplex development requires at least one of the following to
satisfy the requirements of Subsection (e) of this section including any
credits or off-sets authorized pursuant to Section
51A-4.1007:
         (A)   For dedicated park land, evidence of recording in the
appropriate real property records of a general warranty deed for the required
park land approved and accepted by the director; or
         (B)   Confirmation of deposit into the park land dedication fund of
the fee-in-lieu of dedication in the amount established pursuant to Section
51A-4.1005.
         (C)    For private park land and publicly accessible private park
land, the final plat must be filed or an instrument acceptable to the city
attorney must be filed in deed records.
   (g)   Multifamily and hotel or motel use developments. Issuance of a
building permit for a multifamily or hotel or motel use development requires at
least one of the following to satisfy the requirements of Subsection (e) of
this section including any credits or off-sets authorized pursuant to Section
51A-4.1007:
      (1)   For dedicated park land, evidence of recording in the appropriate
real property records of a general warranty deed for the required park land
approved and accepted by the director;
      (2)   Identification of the required amount of private park on the
preliminary and final plats or development plan if applicable; or
      (3)   Confirmation of deposit into the park land dedication fund of the
fee-in-lieu of dedication in the amount established pursuant to Section
51A-4.1005.
   (h)   Minimum size. If the calculation in Subsection (e) of this section
results in less than one acre, the director may require the developer to pay
the fee-in-lieu of land dedication as provided in Section
51A-4.1005. The director may approve the dedication of less than one acre of
property if the proposed park meets or addresses a need in the park system or
presents an opportunity to enhance the city parks system as recommended by the
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 30934, eff. 7/1/19)
SEC. 51A-4.1005.   FEE-IN-LIEU.
   (a)   The owner of property for which dedication is required may pay a fee-
in-lieu of dedication in the amount determined in Subsection (c) of this
section, and the director shall not refuse any payment of a fee- in-lieu of
dedication.
      (1)   In some instances, the director may require the developer to pay
fees-in-lieu of dedicating land. In making this determination, the director
shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   Whether sufficient park land and open space exists in the area
of the proposed development; and
         (B)   Whether recreation potential for an area would be better served
by expanding or improving existing parks, by adding land or additional
recreational amenities.
      (2)   The director shall notify the developer in writing of the
director's decision to require a fee-in- lieu of dedication and the reason for
the decision. The developer may appeal the decision to the park and recreation
board by filing a written notice with the director within 15 days after the
date of the decision.
   (b)   Payment of the fee-in-lieu is required at the time of approval of the
final plat or issuance of building permits. Cash payments may be used only for
acquisition or improvement of park land and facilities located within the same
park dedication zone as the development. Fees may be applied to any type of
park site or improvement within the park dedication zone in accordance with
park and recreation department prioritization.
   (c)    For developments in more than one park dedication zone, or that abut
another park dedication zone, fees-in-lieu may be spent in either park
dedication zone.
   (d)   For Park Dedication Zone Seven (the Downtown/Uptown Zone) as shown on
the parkland dedication zone map, fees-in-lieu may be used to increase
connectivity in the city's trail system for the recreational benefit of the
residents of that area. (Ord. 30934, eff. 7/1/19)
SEC. 51A-4.1006.   PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE.
   (a)   In general. To provide recreational amenities on existing park land
for new residents and visitors, a park development fee is required to be paid
at the time of dedication or payment of fee-in-lieu. Except as provided in this
section, park development fees must be applied to parks within the park
dedication zone in accordance with park and recreation department
prioritization.
      (1)   Credit may be provided on a dollar for dollar basis for capital
improvements on adjacent park land if the capital improvements:
         (A)   meet minimum park and recreation standards;
         (B)   are needed and are appropriate for the park land; and
         (C)   are accepted by the director.
      (2)   Credit may be provided on a dollar for dollar basis for capital
improvements on publicly accessible private park land if the capital
improvements:
         (A)   meet minimum park and recreation standards;
         (B)   are needed and are appropriate for the park land; and
         (C)   are accepted by the director.
      (3)   A maximum credit of 50 percent of the total requirement may be
provided for capital improvements on non-publicly accessible private park land
if the capital improvements:
         (A)   meet minimum park and recreation standards;
         (B)   are needed and are appropriate for the park land; and
         (C)   are accepted by the director.
   (b)   Location. For developments in more than one park dedication zone, or
that abut another park dedication zone, park development fees may be spent in
either park dedication zone.
   (c)   Timing. Park development fees must be paid at the time all other
dedications or payments are made. (Ord. 30934, eff. 7/1/19)
SEC. 51A-4.1007.   CALCULATIONS, DEDUCTIONS, AND CREDITS.
   (a)   Initial calculations. The director shall determine the amount of land
required to be dedicated, or fees-in-lieu of dedication to be paid, in
accordance with Sections
51A-1.105(z),
51A-4.1004,
51A-4.1005, and this section.
      (1)   The director shall first calculate the amount of park dedication
required in Section
51A-4.1004;
      (2)   If the owner of the subdivision or development elects to pay a fee-
in-lieu of dedication, or the director requires the payment of a fee-in-lieu of
dedication, the director shall calculate the fee according Section
51A-4.105(z);
      (3)   If the owner of the subdivision or development chooses to satisfy
the requirements of this division by a combination of dedication of land and
payment of a fee-in-lieu of dedication, the director shall:
         
         (A)   First, calculate the total park dedication requirement;
         (B)   Second, subtract from the total park land dedication requirement
the amount of park land to be dedicated;
         (C)   Third, calculate amount of fee-in-lieu for the remaining amount
of park land dedication required by multiplying the remaining land area by the
fee-in-lieu per square foot cost factor.
   (b)   Deductions and credits.
      (1)   The number of dwelling units, guest rooms, or sleeping rooms
requiring dedication is based on a total increase in dwelling units, guest
rooms, or sleeping rooms. The director shall deduct from the initial
calculation the number of dwelling units, guest rooms, or sleeping rooms in
existence within five years of the approval of the preliminary plat or the
issuance of the first building permit for the proposed new development. The
burden is on the applicant to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director
that the dwelling units, guest rooms, or sleeping rooms existed before the
application for the subdivision plat or building permits generating the
dedication require ment;
      (2)   The director shall reduce the dedication requirement of Section
51A-4.1004 or the fee-in-lieu of dedication requirement of Section
51A-4.1005, as applicable, by one or more of the following credits:
         (A)   The director shall grant a maximum credit of 100 percent of the
total dedication requirement for publicly accessible private park land provided
within the subdivision or development generating the dedication requirement
that meets the requirements of this paragraph.
            (i)   To be eligible for credit, publicly accessible private park
land must be:
               (aa)   made accessible to the public on an instrument approved
by the city attorney;
               (bb)   of a size approved by the director to appropriately meet
the needs of the development;
               (cc)   provide landscaping and recreational amenities approved
by the director; and
               (dd)   be open to the public during all times it is accessible
to the residents of the development.
            (ii)   Equipment in a private park must comply with city standards
applicable to the type of equipment.
            (iii)   A publicly accessible private park land instrument must:
               (aa)   contain a legal description of the development and the
publicly accessible private park land;
               (bb)   be signed by all owners and lienholders of the
development property and is binding on lienholders by a subordination clause;
               (cc)   be approved by the director;
               (dd)   be approved as to form by the city attorney;
               (ee)   create a covenant running with the land;
               (ff)    provide that the owners of the property development are
responsible for all general park maintenance at a level consistent with minimum
park and recreation standards;
               (gg)   provide necessary easements for access to the publicly
accessible private park land;
               (hh)   give the city the right, but not the obligation, to take
any action needed to make necessary repairs or improvements within the publicly
accessible private park land, and to place a lien on all lots within the
development until the city has received full compensation for that action;
               (ii)    provide that the owners of property in the development
agree to defend and indemnify the city, and to hold the city harmless from and
against all claims or liabilities arising out of or in connection with publicly
accessible private park land or publicly accessible private park land
instrument;
               (jj)   provide that it is governed by the laws of the State of
Texas; and
               (kk)   provide that it may only be amended or terminated:
                  (I)   with the consent of all the owners and lienholders of
property in the development;
                  (II)   upon the dedication of any park land or payment of a
fee-in-lieu necessary to meet the requirements of this section; and
                  (III)   after approval as to form by the city attorney, and
approval by the director.
         (B)   A maximum credit of 50 percent of the total requirement will be
given for non-publicly accessible private park land provided within the
subdivision or development generating the dedication requirement that meets the
requirement of this subparagraph. Private park land eligible for credit must:
            (i)   be of a size approved by the director to appropriately meet
the needs of the development;
            (ii)   be maintained at a level consistent with minimum park and
recreation maintenance standards;
            (iii)   provide landscaping and recreational amenities approved by
the director;
            (iv)   have equipment that complies with city standards applicable
to the type of equipment; and
            (v)   not be an interior common area.
         (C)   Developments located within a community unit development with
open space meeting the requirements of Subparagraph (A) or Subparagraph (B) may
receive credit for park land dedication as provided in this section.
      (3)   Credits are cumulative, up to a maximum of 100 percent of the
required dedication and are only applicable to the original property being
developed. (Ord. 30934, eff. 7/1/19)
SEC. 51A-4.1008.   PARK LAND DEDICATION STANDARDS.
   (a)   Park land location standards. It is the purpose of this section to
ensure that parks are easy to access, can be linked with nearby park and
recreational facilities, and are generally open to public view or accessible by
easement to benefit area development, enhance the visual character of the city,
protect public safety, and minimize conflict with adjacent land uses. Land
proposed to be dedicated for parks must meet the following location standards:
      (1)   Where physically feasible, parks should be bound by streets or by
other public uses (e.g., school, library, recreation center) to facilitate
access and possible joint use.
      (2)   Where residential lots directly abut a park, consideration should
be given to future owners' access to the facility and protection from future
park uses, such as lighting and noise.
      (3)   Dedicated park land must be in a location that is accessible by the
public.
      (4)    The director may accept dedication of property within the park
dedication zone that provides for access to parks other than community and
neighborhood parks.
      (5)   The land must comply with current park standards.
   (b)   Park land acceptance standards.
      (1)   The city may accept or reject an offer of dedication, after
consideration of the recommendation of the director, and require the payment of
fees in lieu of dedication as provided in Section
51A-4.1005.
      (2)   Land dedicated for park and recreational areas must be of such
size, dimensions, topography and general character as is reasonably required by
the city for the type of use necessary to meet the current park system
requirements.
      (3)   Land proposed to be dedicated for parks must generally meet the
following requirements. The director may recommend the acceptance of the
dedication of property that does not meet these criteria if the property is
adjacent to an existing park or other public space, provides access to a park,
or otherwise presents an opportunity to enhance the city parks system
consistent with the park and recreation department's comprehensive plan update.
         (A)   Minimum size and configuration standards.
            (i)   Unless determined otherwise by the director pursuant to
Subsection
51A-4.1004(h), the minimum size of land dedicated for a park is one acre.
            (ii)   Land dedicated for a park must be a contiguous piece of
property that can physically accommodate improvements associated with a
neighborhood or community park.
         (B)   Location and access standards.
            (i)   The land must meet the applicable location requirements of
Paragraph (4).
            (ii)   The land must have connectivity to a public street
appropriate for the size and use of the park.
         (C)   Physical characteristics standards.
            (i)   Unless otherwise approved by the director, land must be
vacant and cleared of nonvegetative material.
            (ii)   The land must be in full compliance with all ordinances,
rules, and regulations of the city.
            (iii)   Except when approved by the director, the land must not
have severe slopes or unusual topography that would not allow the park to be
used for its intended purpose without recontouring the property.
         (D)   Minimum environmental conditions standards. Unless provided
otherwise in rules promulgated by the director, the land must be reasonably
free of recognized environmental conditions.
            (i)   If land is proposed to be dedicated by plat, before submittal
of a final plat, the applicant shall submit either a phase I environmental
assessment that shows no environmental conditions exist on the property or a
phase II environmental assessment that shows no remediation is required.
            (ii)   If land is proposed to be dedicated by separate instrument,
before acceptance the applicant shall submit either a phase I environmental
assessment that shows no environmental conditions exist on the property or a
phase II environmental assessment that shows no remediation is required.
      (4)   Land in a federally designated floodplain or floodway may be
dedicated as park land if the land otherwise meets the acceptance standards for
park land in this section and all other ordinances, rules, and regulations of
the city. Floodplain and floodway areas may only be used to meet a maximum of
50 percent of the dedication requirements. Stormwater detention/ retention
areas and associated access easements do not meet the standards for acceptance
of park land.
      (5)    For developments in more than one park dedication zone, property
may be dedicated in either park dedication zone. (Ord. 30934)
SEC. 51A-4.1009.   PARK LAND DEDICATION FUND.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   There is hereby established a special fund for the deposit of all
sums paid in lieu of land dedication under this section. The fund will be known
as the "Park Land Dedication Fund." Except as provided in this section and
Section
51A-4.1005, funds will only be released from the Park Land Dedication Fund to
buy, build, or enhance a park within the park dedication zone, from which the
funds originated.
      (2)   Fees paid into the park land dedication fund must be spent by the
city within 10 years after the payment of the required fees. If the funds
cannot be spent within the 10 year period, the owners of the property on the
last day of the 10 year period will be entitled to a refund of the unexpended
sum upon request. The owners of the property, as shown on the current tax roll
or proven by other instrument, must request a refund within one year of the
expiration of the 10 year period. The request must be made in writing to the
director.
      (3)   Where funds have been paid or a dedication for a phased development
has been made in accordance with this section, and the original developer does
not complete all phases of the entire development, credit for any prior
dedication or payment will be applied to subsequent replats or development
plans for the same land on a pro-rata basis by dwelling unit for a period of 10
years. Increased density requires the dedication of additional park land or
payment of additional fees.
   (b)   Expenditures. The park land dedication fund must be used for the
acquisition and improvement of parks and may not be used for park maintenance
or city staff overhead expenses. Indirect costs reasonably incurred in
connection with park acquisition and improvement, such as appraisal fees,
environmental assessment costs, legal expenses, and engineering and design
costs, are limited to a maximum of 10 percent of total acquisition or
improvement costs. (Ord. 30934)
SEC. 51A-4.1010.   TREE MITIGATION.
   (a)   In general. Trees on dedicated park land may be used to meet tree
mitigation requirements in accordance with Article X.
   (b)   Tree mitigation credits. To be eligible for Article X tree mitigation
credits, dedicated park land and private park land must meet the conservation
easement standards in Sections
51A-10.135(f)(1),
51A-10.135(f)(3), and
51A-10.135(f)(5).
   (c)   Conservation easements. Park land dedica tion requirements may be met
on an acre for acre basis for any land dedicated as a conservation easement
under Article X that meets the conservation easement standards in Article X and
the requirements for publicly accessible private park land in Section
51A-4.1007 (b)(2)(A)(i) and is accepted by the director. (Ord. 30934)
SEC. 51A-4.1011.   APPEALS.
   Except for appeals of apportionment of exactions, all appeals of the
director's decisions are appealable to the park and recreation board following
the same procedure as an appeal of an administrative official's decision to the
board of adjustment. Notice of appeal must be made within 15 days of the date
of that decision. (Ord. 30934)
SEC. 51A-4.1012.   REVIEW.
   The director shall review this ordinance every five years from the effective
date. (Ord. 30934)
Division 51A-4.1100. Mixed-Income Housing.
SEC. 51A-4.1101.   PURPOSE.
   This division is adopted to implement the provisions and goals of the
comprehensive housing policy, affirmatively further fair housing, create and
maintain available and affordable housing throughout Dallas, promote greater
fair housing choices, and overcome patterns of segregation and concentrations
of poverty. (Ord. 31152)
SEC. 51A-4.1102.    APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   In general. Development bonuses apply to qualifying developments as
follows:
      (1)   Type One developments are located in:
         (A)   MF-1(A), MF-2(A), and MF-3(A) Multifamily Districts.
         (B)   MU-1, MU-2, and MU-3 Mixed Use Districts.
         (C)   MF-1(A), MF-2(A), and MF-3(A) Multifamily Districts with public
deed restrictions. If there is a conflict between a public deed restriction
that modifies development standards and this division, the more restrictive
standard controls.
         (D)   MU-1, MU-2, and MU-3 Mixed Use Districts with public deed
restrictions. If there is a conflict between a public deed restriction that
modifies development standards and this division, the more restrictive standard
controls.
         (E)   Planned development districts that default to MF-1(A), MF-2(A),
MF-3(A), MU-1, MU-2, and MU-3 Districts as base zoning and do not alter the
yard, lot, and space or parking regulations. If there is a conflict between the
planned development district regulations and this division, the more
restrictive standard controls.
      (2)   Type Two developments are located in planned development districts
that specify mixed- income development bonuses or that reference compliance
with this division.
      (3)   Type Three developments are located in planned development
districts that reference compliance with this division and expressly reference
compliance with Section
51A-4.1106(f). If there is a conflict between the standards in a planned
development district and this division, the planned development district
conditions control.
   (b)   Market value analysis. Specific development bonus applicability is
further determined based on the location of the development in a specific
market value analysis category.
   (c)   Residential uses. To be eligible for development bonuses under this
division, developments must include multifamily or retirement housing uses.
(Ord. Nos. 31152; 32210)
SEC. 51A-4.1103.   DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   (a)   Definitions. In this division:
      (1)   AFFORDABLE RENT means affordable rent as defined in Section 20A- 24
(2).
      (2)   AFFIRMATIVE FAIR HOUSING MARKETING means a marketing strategy
designed to attract renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless of
race, color, national origin, religion, sex, age, disability, or other
protected class under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and all
related regulations, executive orders, and directives.
      (3)   AREA MEDIAN FAMILY INCOME (“AMFI”) means the median income for the
Dallas Area Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, adjusted for family size,
as determined annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
      (4)   ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLDS means households with an income within the
required income band or voucher holders regardless of income.
      (5)   EXISTING BUILDING means a building constructed on or before
December 31, 2021.
      (6)   INCOME means income as defined by 24 CFR §5.609.
      (7)   INCOME BAND means the range of household incomes between a pre-
determined upper limit and a pre-determined lower limit generally stated in
terms of a percentage of area median family income adjusted for family size
(income bands descriptions are located in
Chapter 20A).
      (8)   MARKET VALUE ANALYSIS ("MVA") means the official study that was
commissioned by and prepared for the City of Dallas to assist residents and
policy-makers in understanding the elements of their local residential real
estate markets.
      (9)   MIXED INCOME HOUSING DEVELOPMENT BONUS program (MIHDB) means the
Mixed Income Housing Development Bonus program as described in the
Comprehensive Housing Policy.
      (10)   MIXED-INCOME RESTRICTIVE COVENANT means a covenant running with
the land that meets the requirements of this division and Chapter 20A.
      (11)   OWNER means the entity or person using the development bonus as
well as all other owners or operators of the development during the rental
affordability period.
      (12)   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE means a space that is reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. A
passenger loading zone is not a taxicab stand for purposes of Section 28-101,
"Restricted Use of Bus Stops and Taxicab Stands."
      (13)   PEDESTRIAN SCALE LIGHTING means lighting that emanates from a
source that is no more than 14 feet above the grade of the sidewalk or an
equivalent pedestrian light fixture approved by the director of transportation
and public works.
      (14)   RENTAL AFFORDABILITY PERIOD means the 20 year period that the
reserved dwelling units may only be leased to and occupied by eligible
households or voucher holders.
      (15)   RESERVED DWELLING UNIT means the rental units within a development
available to be occupied or currently occupied by eligible families or voucher
holders and are leased at affordable rents set according to this division.
      (16)   STOOP means a small porch leading to the entrance of a residence.
      (17)   TRANSIT PROXIMITY means development within one-half mile, measured
radially, of a transit station, including trolley stops, train stations,
transfer centers, transfer locations, transit centers, and any transit stop
with a climate-controlled waiting area. Transit agencies served include Dallas
Area Rapid Transit, Trinity Railway Express, and trolley service.
      (18)   VOUCHER HOLDER means a holder of a housing voucher, including
vouchers directly or indirectly funded by the federal government.
   (b)   Interpretations. For uses or terms found in Chapter 51 the regulations
in Section
51A-4.702 (a)(6)(C) apply in this division. (Ord. Nos. 31152; 32210; 32864)
SEC. 51A-4.1104.    DEVELOPMENT BONUS PERIOD.
   (a)   Any development bonus provided in this division is only applicable to
structures built during the rental affordability period or according to the
terms of the mixed-income restrictive covenant.
   (b)   Structures built during the term of the mixed-income restrictive
covenant may retain their bonuses until they are destroyed by an intentional
act of the owner.
   (c)   Structures built during the term of the mixed-income restrictive
covenant may retain their bonuses and be rebuilt if they are destroyed by other
than an intentional act of the owner, or owner's agent, if the development
continues to meet the requirements of this division. (Ord. 31152)
SEC. 51A-4.1105.   PROCEDURES TO OBTAIN A DEVELOPMENT BONUS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   The owner must comply with the requirements of
Chapter 20A, as amended.
      (2)   Before applying for a permit for construction in accordance with
this division, and Section
20A-25 owners shall:
         (A)   obtain a certified verification of the building site's MVA
category;
         (B)   sign a reserved dwelling unit verification; and
         (C)   obtain certified verification of participation in the mixed
income housing development bonus program.
   (b)   Building permit application. An application for a building permit
using a development bonus must include the following:
      (1)   the date, names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant
and all property owners;
      (2)   the legal description, the current zoning classification, the
market value analysis category, and the census tract of the building site for
which the development bonus is requested;
      (3)   the total number of dwelling units proposed, the number of reserved
dwelling units provided, and the number of reserved dwelling units required as
a result of receiving the development bonus;
      (4)   the total number of one-bedroom dwelling units, two-bedroom
dwelling units, etc. being proposed;
      (5)   the certified verification of the building site's MVA category, the
reserved dwelling unit verification, and the certified verification of
participation in the mixed income housing development bonus program;
      (6)   the total floor area as defined by Chapter
51A-2.102(38) and the floor area devoted to residential uses as defined in
Section
51A-4.209; and
      (7)   any other reasonable and pertinent information that the building
official determines to be necessary for review.
   (c)   Building permit issuance. Before the issuance of a building permit,
the mixed-income restrictive covenant must be recorded in the county in which
the building site is located, and an official copy of the executed and recorded
mixed-income restrictive covenant must be submitted to the building official.
   (d)   Minimum units required.
      (1)   A development using a development bonus in this division must
provide a minimum of one reserved dwelling unit regardless of the percentage of
total units required.
      (2)   In this division, calculations of the total number of required
reserved units that result in fractions of a required unit must be rounded up
to the next whole number.
      (3)   A development using a development bonus in this division must
reserve no more than 50 percent of the dwelling units in each development for
households at or below 80 percent of area median family income. This maximum
percentage of reserved dwelling units may be waived for developments that are
enrolled in a program administered by the office of housing and community
empowerment and authorized by the city council that furthers the public
purposes of the city's housing policy and affirmatively furthers fair housing.
   (e)   Phasing.
      (1)   To obtain a development bonus for a phased development, a project
plan must be submitted to the building official with the initial building
permit application.
      (2)   For a phased development:
         (A)   the first phase must independently qualify for the development
bonus;
         (B)   each subsequent phase combined with all previous phases already
completed or under construction must also qualify for the development bonus;
and
         (C)   the dispersal requirements in Section
51A-4.1106 only apply to buildings and phases with reserved units.
      (3)   A project taking advantage of a development bonus may consist of
two or more building sites if they are developed under a project plan. The
project plan must include a unit dispersal plan and must be:
         (A)   signed by all property owners; and
         (B)   approved by the building official.
   (f)   Certificate of occupancy. Before the issuance of a final certificate
of occupancy for a multifamily or retirement housing use, the owner must submit
to the building official any additional information needed to ensure compliance
with the terms of the building permit and the mixed-income restrictive
covenant, including:
      (1)   The approved affirmative fair housing marketing plan described in
Section
20A-31(g).
      (2)   A letter from the director of housing and community empowerment
certifying that the development complies with the mixed- income restrictive
covenant.
      (3)   A letter documenting that the development has registered with one
or more local providers of housing vouchers and has acknowledged that the
development must pass the provider’s required inspections. (Ord. Nos. 31152;
32210; 32864; 33233)
SEC. 51A-4.1106.   DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Reserved dwelling unit location requirements. Except as provided in
Section
51A-4.1105 (e) and in this section, all reserved dwelling units must be
provided on the same building site as the market rate units.
      (1)   Reserved dwelling units must be dispersed throughout the
residential floor area of each building.
      (2)   Reserved dwelling units must not be segregated or concentrated in
any one floor or area of any buildings but must be dispersed throughout all
residential buildings.
      (3)   Reserved dwelling units may float within each dwelling unit type.
      (4)   Reserved dwelling units must be of comparable finish-out and
materials as the market rate dwelling units and must be equally available to
eligible families or voucher holders as other market rate dwelling unit
tenants.
   (b)   Pro-rata dispersal of reserved dwelling units.
      (1)   In general. Except as provided in Section 20A-31(i) and this
subsection, reserved dwelling units must be dispersed substantially pro-rata
among the total unit types so that not all the reserved dwelling units are
efficiency or one-bedroom units. For example, if 10 percent of the total
dwelling units are reserved dwelling units, 10 percent of the efficiency units,
10 percent of the one-bedroom units, 10 percent of the two-bedroom units, 10
percent of the three-bedroom units (and so on, if applicable) must be reserved
dwelling units.
      (2)   Specialty units.
         (A)   A maximum 10 percent of the total units may be specialty units
including club suites and penthouse suites and are not required to be part of
the dispersal of reserved dwelling units by type; however, specialty units are
included in the total number of all units used to calculate the number of
reserved units.
         (B)   Units may not be designated as specialty units solely due to the
number of bedrooms in the unit.
   (c)   Common areas and amenities. Eligible families or voucher holders
occupying reserved units may not be restricted from common areas and amenities
unless the restrictions apply to all dwelling unit occupants.
   (d)   Type One developments. Type One developments are eligible to receive
the mixed income housing development bonuses in the specific district
regulations in accordance with Section 20A-23.l, as amended.
   (e)   Type Two developments. Type Two developments are eligible to receive
mixed income housing development bonuses in the planned development district
conditions in accordance with Section 20A-23.1, as amended.
   (f)   Type Three developments. Type Three developments with a minimum of 80
percent of floor area devoted to residential uses are eligible to receive the
following mixed income housing development bonuses according to this subsection
and in accordance with Section 20A-23.1, as amended. A minimum of one reserved
unit or the percentage of total units in a tier, whichever is greater, must be
provided.
      (1)   Dwelling unit bonus. The number of reserved units required is
calculated based on the total number of dwelling units, after the dwelling unit
bonus is determined.
 
             Tier 1 ( <= 50% of AMFI) Tier 2 (51 - 80% of  Tier 3 (81 - 100% of
MVA Category Minimum 3% of units      AMFI) Minimum 5% of  AMFI) Minimum 10% of
                                      units                units
MVA A-F      Greater of 50% or an     Greater of 30% or an Greater of 20% or an
             additional 80 units      additional 60 units  additional 40 units
MVA G-I      Greater of 60% or an     Greater of 40% or an Greater of 30% or an
             additional 80 units      additional 60 units  additional 40 units
 
      (2)   Floor area ratio bonus. This bonus applies only to residential
floor area ratio.
 
             Tier 1 (<= 50% of AMFI) Tier 2 (51 - 80% of  Tier 3 (81 - 100% of
MVA Category Minimum 3% of units     AMFI) Minimum 5% of  AMFI) Minimum 10% of
                                     units                units
MVA A-F      Greater of 25% or an    Greater of 15% or an Greater of 10% or an
             additional 1.5 FAR      additional 1.0 FAR   additional 0.5 FAR
MVA G-I      Greater of 45% or an    Greater of 35% or an Greater of 20% or an
             additional 2.5 FAR      additional 2.0 FAR   additional 1.0 FAR
 
      (3)   Height bonus. This bonus applies to all uses. Any height bonus
leading to a fraction of an additional story is rounded to the next higher
story. Except as provided in this subsection the following bonuses apply:
 
             Tier 1 (<= 50% of AMFI) Tier 2 (51 - 80% of  Tier 3 (81 - 100% of
MVA Category Minimum 3% of units     AMFI) Minimum 5% of  AMFI) Minimum 10% of
                                     units                units
MVA A-F      Greater of 25% or an    Greater of 15% or an Greater of 10% an
             additional 50 feet      additional 30 feet   additional 15 feet
MVA G-I      Greater of 45% or an    Greater of 35% or an Greater of 20% or an
             additional 50 feet      additional 30 feet   additional 15 feet
 
      (4)   Stories bonus. This bonus applies to all uses. Any story bonus
leading to a fraction of an additional story is rounded to the next higher
story. Except as provided in this subsection the following bonuses apply:
 
             Tier 1 ( <= 50% of   Tier 2 (51 - 80% of  Tier 3 (81 -100%
MVA Category AMFI) Minimum 3% of  AMFI) Minimum 5% of  ofAMFI) Minimum 10% of
             units                units                units
             Greater of 25% or an Greater of 15% or an Greater of 10% or an
MVA A-F      additional four      additional three     additional two stories
             stories              stories
             Greater of 45% or an Greater of 35% or an Greater of 2% or an
MVA G-I      additional four      additional three     additional two stories
             stories              stories
 
      (5)   Conflicts. In the case of a conflict between a height bonus and a
stories bonus the greater bonus applies.
      (6)   Parking reduction. This reduction only applies to the total number
of required off-street parking spaces for nonresidential uses except alcoholic
beverage establishments, commercial amusement (inside), commercial amusement
(outside), restaurant without drive-in or drive-through service, and restaurant
with drive-in or drive- through service.
 
             Tier 1 (<= 50% of AMFI) Tier 2 (51 - 80% of Tier 3 (81 - 100% of
MVA Category Minimum 3% of units     AMFI) Minimum 5% of AMFI) Minimum 10% of
                                     units               units
MVA A-F      100%                    50%                 20%
MVA G-I      100%                    70%                 40%
 
   (g)   Alternative methods. The requirements for on-site reserved units in
this division may be met by alternative methods as provided in Section
20A-23.1 , as amended. (Ord. Nos. 31152; 32210)
SEC. 51A-4.1107.   DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, to obtain a development bonus
under this division, a qualifying development must meet the requirements of
this section, where applicable.
      (2)   Except as provided in this section, the board of adjustment may not
grant a variance or special exception to the standards in this section.
      (3)   Except if the existing building is destroyed by the intentional act
of the owner or the owner's agent, the existing building may be renovated,
remodelled, repaired, rebuilt, or enlarged using the bonuses in this division
if the work does not cause the existing building to become more nonconforming
as to the requirements in this section and the applicable zoning district.
   (b)   Yard, lot, and space standards.
      (1)   Encroachments. The following additional items are permitted to be
located within the required front, side, and rear yards:
         (A)   Seat walls, retaining walls, stoops, porches, steps, unenclosed
balconies, ramps, handrails, safety railings, and benches all not exceeding
four feet in height and extending a maximum of five feet into the required
minimum yards.
         (B)   Landscape planters.
         (C)   Sculptures.
         (D)   Awnings
      (2)   Front yard fences. A maximum four-foot-high fence is allowed in a
front yard. A maximum four-foot-high handrail may be located on retaining walls
in a front yard.
      (3)   Height. Maximum height is controlled by the development bonus
provisions and must comply with residential proximity slope regulations if
applicable.
   (c)   Off-street parking and loading.
      (1)   In general. Except as provided in this section, consult the use
regulations in Division 51A-4.200 for the specific off-street parking and
loading requirements for each use.
      (2)   Multifamily parking. No parking is required.
      (3)   Reserved.
      (4)   Parking locations.
         (A)   In general. Except as provided in this paragraph, surface
parking is prohibited between the street-facing facade and the property line.
For buildings with more than one street frontage, only two street frontages are
subject to this requirement.
         (B)   Thoroughfare frontage. For buildings fronting on a thoroughfare,
surface parking is prohibited within the front setback.
         (C)   Surface parking. A maximum of 15 percent of the total on-site
parking may be provided as surface parking in a side yard.
         (D)   Parking structure. That portion of the ground-level floor facing
the street of any multi- floor parking facility must have an active use other
than parking, with a minimum depth of 25 feet, or must have an exterior facade
that is similar in materials, architecture, and appearance to the facade of the
main structure. Exterior parking structure facade openings must provide solid
screening a minimum 42 inches from the floor level within the parking structure
to screen vehicles and vehicle headlights.
         (E)   Assigned parking. For assigned parking spaces, those spaces
allotted for reserved dwelling units must be dispersed and distributed amongst
all other assigned parking for similar units.
      (5)   Passenger loading.
         (A)   Each building site must provide at least one off-street or on-
street passenger loading space. The board of adjustment may grant a variance to
this subparagraph.
         (B)   On-street passenger loading zones, if provided, must be
constructed in compliance with Architectural Barrier Act accessibility
standards and must be approved by the director and by the director of
transportation and public works.
      (6)   Screening of off-street loading spaces and service areas. Screening
must be at least six feet in height measured from the horizontal plane passing
through the nearest point of the off-street loading space and may be provided
by using any of the methods described in Section 51A-4.602(b)(3), except that
screening around service areas for trash collection must be screened by a
masonry wall with a solid gate.
      (7)   Review. This subsection must be reviewed by city council within two
years of May 11, 2022 and every two years, thereafter.
   (d)   Street and open space frontages.
      (1)   Frontages. All street-fronting facades and open-space fronting
facades must have at least one window and at least one common primary entrance
facing the street or open space at street-level. The entrance must access the
street or open space with an improved path connecting to the sidewalk. A
transparent surface is required for every 25 linear feet of continuous street-
fronting and open-space-fronting facade.
      (2)   Individual entries. Except as provided in this paragraph, a minimum
of 60 percent of the street-level dwelling units adjacent to a street in each
building must have individual entries that access the street with an improved
path connecting to the sidewalk. For at-grade open space, a minimum of 60
percent of the open-space fronting dwelling units in each building must have
individual entries that access the open space. EXCEPTION. This paragraph does
not apply to retirement housing.
   (e)   Sidewalk, lighting, and driveway standards.
      (1)   Sidewalks.
         (A)   A sidewalk with a minimum average width of six feet must be
provided along all street frontages.
            (i)   Except as provided in this subsection, all sidewalks must be
clear and unobstructed for a minimum of five feet in width.
            (ii)   Tree grates do not count toward the minimum unobstructed
sidewalk width.
            (iii)   If the building official determines that the location of a
local utility or protected tree, as defined in Article X, would prevent a five-
foot minimum width, the sidewalk may be reduced to four feet in width in that
location.
         (B)   Sidewalks must be located in an area parallel to and between two
feet and 15 feet of the back of the projected street curb.
         (C)   Except as provided in this paragraph, sidewalks must comply with
the Street Design Manual, be continuous and level across all driveways and curb
cuts, and be at the same grade as the existing sidewalk. A waiver of this
requirement is available subject to approval of the director.
      (2)   Lighting.
         (A)   Special lighting requirement. Exterior lighting sources, if
used, must be oriented down and onto the property they light and generally away
from adjacent residential properties.
         (B)   Pedestrian scale lighting. For a development greater than 20,000
square feet of floor area, pedestrian scale lighting that provides a minimum
maintained average illumination level of 1.5 foot candles must be provided
along public sidewalks and adjacent to public streets. The design and placement
of both the standards and fixtures must be approved by the director of
transportation and public works. Unless otherwise provided, the property owner
is responsible for the cost of installation, operation, and maintenance of the
lighting.
   (f)   Open space requirements.
      (1)   At least 10 percent of the building site must be reserved as open
space for activity such as active or passive recreation, playground activity,
groundwater recharge, or landscaping.
         (A)   No structures except for architectural elements; playground
equipment; structures that are not fully enclosed such as colonnades, pergolas,
and gazebos; and ordinary projections of window sills, bay windows, belt
courses, cornices, eaves, and other architectural features are allowed;
otherwise, open space must be open to the sky.
         (B)   Open space may contain primarily grass, vegetation, or open
water; be primarily used as a ground-water recharge area; or contain pedestrian
amenities such as fountains, benches, paths, or shade structures.
         (C)   Open space may also be provided at or below grade or aboveground
by an outside roof deck, rooftop garden, playground area, pool area, patio, or
similar type of outside common area.
         (D)   Private balconies, sidewalks, parking spaces, parking lots,
drive aisles, and areas primarily intended for vehicular use are not considered
open space and do not count towards the open space requirement.
         (E)   Operation or parking of vehicles within on-site open space is
prohibited. Emergency and grounds maintenance vehicles are exempt.
         (F)   Open spaces must be properly maintained in a state of good
repair and neat appearance, and plant materials must be maintained in a
healthy, growing condition.
      (2)   Landscape areas that fulfill the requirements of Article X may also
fulfill these requirements if all conditions of this section and Article X are
met.
   (g)   Non-required fences. Unless a use specifically requires screening, all
fences for uses along a street or trail must have a surface area that is a
minimum of 50 percent open, allowing visibility between three feet and six feet
above grade. The exceptions for multifamily districts in Sections
51A-4.602 (a)(2) and
51A-4.602 (a)(4) which provide that a fence exceeding four feet above grade may
be erected in a front yard in multifamily districts are not applicable. (Ord.
Nos. 31152; 32210; 32864; 33112)
SEC. 51A-4.1108   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT VARIANCES.
   A development that is eligible to receive the bonuses in this division may
either use the bonuses or go to the board of adjustment to seek a variance but
may not do both for the same yard, lot, and space regulations.  (Ord. Nos.
31152; 32210)
ARTICLE V.
FLOODPLAIN AND ESCARPMENT ZONE REGULATIONS.
Division 51A-5.100. Floodplain Regulations.
SEC. 51A-5.101.   DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS APPLICABLE TO THE FLOODPLAIN
REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Definitions. The following definitions are applicable to the
floodplain regulations in this article:
      (1)   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD means the land in the floodplain
within a community that is subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
      (2)   BASEMENT means any area of a building, including any sunken room or
sunken portion of a room, having its floor below ground level (subgrade) on all
sides.
      (3)   BASE FLOOD means the flood event having a one percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
      (4)   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION means the water surface elevation from a flood
event having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, which is shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1 - A30, AR, V1-
V30, or VE, or on the regulatory floodplain maps.
      (5)   DESIGN FLOOD (City's Design Standard) means the 100-year frequency
(one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year) flood
discharge as calculated for fully developed watershed conditions.
      (6)   DEVELOPMENT means any manmade change in improved and unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials unless approved by
the city on a temporary basis in connection with authorized construction
activities.
      (7)   ENVIRONMENTALLY SIGNIFICANT AREA means an area in the floodplain:
         (A)   containing endangered species of either flora or fauna;
         (B)   which is a geologically similar area, as defined in Division
51A-5.200, "Escarpment Regulations," of this article;
         (C)   identified as wetlands or waters of the United States; or
         (D)   determined to be an archaeological or historic site.
      (8)   EQUAL CONVEYANCE REDUCTION means the ability of the property on the
opposite side of the stream to construct a project that alters conveyance by
the same amount as the proposed fill permit or floodplain alteration permit
project.
      (9)   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots was
completed before March 16, 1983, the effective FIRM date.
      (10)   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) means the federal
agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP).
      (11)   FILL PERMIT means the process of reclaiming a portion of land in
the floodplain to create a developable area including but not limited to a
habitable structure or parking area, raising any area of land out of a
floodplain area on fill, or creating an area that can be developed in the
future. The fill permit process removes the floodplain (FP) designation and is
applicable in areas with an upstream drainage area greater than 100 acres, even
if the land has not been formally designated as an FP area.
      (12)   FIVE HUNDRED YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD (500-YEAR FLOOD) or 0.2 PERCENT
ANNUAL CHANCE EXCEEDANCE PROBABILITY FLOOD EVENT means the flood event having a
0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The 500-year
flood in Dallas is based upon fully developed land uses within the watershed as
defined by the current zoning designation.
      (13)   FLOOD OR FLOODING means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
      (14)   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) means an official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
delineated the areas of special flood hazards and the insurance risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
      (15)   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) means the official report provided by
FEMA containing flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, and
the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map.
      (16)   FLOODPLAIN (FP) means any land area susceptible to inundation by
the design flood, even if the land has not been formally designated as an FP
area on the Regulatory Floodplain Maps.
      (17)   FLOODPLAIN ALTERATION means the construction of uninhabitable
structures, alterations to existing structures within a floodplain area
complying with Section
51A-5.104(b), mining, dredging, filling, grading, or excavation in the
floodplain that does not remove or alter an FP designation. (Examples include,
but are not limited to, the construction of a tennis court, a playground, a
gazebo, a swimming pool, a fence, a deck, an erosion control wall, or the
installation of significant landscaping.)
      (18)   FLOODPLAIN OR FP ADMINISTRATOR means the director of water
utilities, who is responsible for administering the federal flood insurance
program, or the director's designated representative.
      (19)   FLOODPROOFING means any combination of structural and non-
structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents. If floodproofing is
utilized, the design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer.
      (20)   FLOODWAY (OR REGULATORY FLOODWAY) means the channel of a river or
other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the design flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.
      (21)   FLOODWAY EASEMENT means a drainage area dedicated to the city as
an easement to prevent obstructions of floodway capacity in a floodplain.
      (22)   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE means a use that cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. This term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and
shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage
or related manufacturing facilities.
      (23)   HABITABLE STRUCTURE means any structure with electric, heat, or
plumbing that can be used for living, sleeping, eating, or assembly purposes.
      (24)   HIGHER STANDARDS means community requirements that exceed the
minimum FEMA standards for participating in the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP).
      (25)   INTERIOR DRAINAGE AREAS means the geographical areas that act as a
watershed for the sumps.
      (26)   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC) means a letter that reflects an
official change in an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). LOMCs are
issued in response to a request to FEMA to revise or amend its effective flood
map to remove a property or reflect changed flooding conditions on the
effective map and can include Letter of Map Revisions (LOMRs), Letter of Map
Amendments (LOMAs), and Letter of Map Revisions based on Fill (LOMR-F's) as
amended by FEMA.
      (27)   LEVEE means a manmade structure (usually an earthen embankment)
designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to
contain, control, or divert the flow of water for protection from temporary
flooding.
      (28)   LEVEE SYSTEM means a flood protection system consisting of a levee
or levees and associated structures accredited by FEMA pursuant to 44 CFR 65,
as amended, such as closure and drainage devices constructed and operated in
accordance with sound engineering practices.
      (29)   LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER means a person who is duly licensed
and registered to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas
in accordance with state law.
      (30)   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE means the lowest point of the ground level
immediately next to a building.
      (31)   LOWEST FLOOR means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of
a building (including its basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure
that is useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in
an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest
floor.
      (32)   MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. In
this article only, the term "manufactured home" includes park trailers, travel
trailers, and similar vehicles placed on a site for more than 90 consecutive
days, but does not include recreational vehicles.
      (33)   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale.
      (34)   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP) means the federal program
administered by FEMA that enables property owners to purchase flood insurance
against damage to or loss of property resulting from a flood.
      (35)   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD (100-year flood) or ONE-PERCENT
ANNUAL CHANCE EXCEEDANCE PROBABILITY FLOOD EVENT means the flood event having a
one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The 100-year
flood in Dallas is based upon fully developed land uses within the watershed as
defined by the current zoning designation.
      (36)   POOL-RIFFLE SEQUENCES mean the alternating deep and shallow flow
conditions caused by a moving, nonuniform channel grade.
      (37)   REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN MAPS means the most updated floodplain maps
available, as accepted by the City of Dallas, regardless of adoption by FEMA.
These include, but are not limited to, maps resulting from floodplain update
studies, Letter of Map Revisions (LOMRs), and floodplain studies resulting from
current and proposed construction projects.
      (38)   SEEP means a location where natural groundwater makes its way in a
non-continuous flow to the surface, creating a wet soil condition.
      (39)   SPECIAL EXCEPTION means a grant of relief to a property owner
permitting reconstruction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this division.
      (40)   STANDARD PROJECT FLOOD means the flood caused by the most severe
combination of meteorological and hydrological conditions reasonably
characteristic of the region. The standard project flood is defined by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers for use in major flood control projects.
      (41)   STRUCTURE means, for purposes of this division, a walled and
roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally
above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
      (42)   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
      (43)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market or tax appraisal value of the structure,
whichever is greater, as determined by an independent appraiser or the last
official City tax roll, either before the improvement or repair is started, or,
if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. For the purpose of this definition "substantial improvement" occurs
when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project
for improvement of a structure for the sole purpose of complying with federal,
state, or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified in writing by the local code enforcement official as necessary to
assure safe living conditions prior to the start of the proposed improvement,
or any alteration of a historic structure as defined by FEMA. See Section
51A-5.104(b)(2) for city of Dallas limitations.
      (44)   SUMPS mean drainage features of levee systems that temporarily
store storm water runoff before it is conveyed to a river system by pumping
over or draining through a levee.
      (45)   SWALES mean low lying areas in the floodplain that convey flood
waters when flow exceeds channel capacity.
      (46)   VALLEY STORAGE means the measure of a stream's ability to store
water as it moves downstream.
      (47)   VARIANCE means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of
a floodplain management regulation.
      (48)   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION means the height, in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies
in the floodplain.
   (b)   Interpretations. The intent of this division is to equal or exceed the
minimum federal criteria for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program, located in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter I, Part 60.3, as
amended; and FEMA 480, as amended. All higher standards and FEMA minimum
standards apply. The City of Dallas must also enforce any more restrictive
state requirements. The City of Dallas has exceeded the minimum standards by
adopting more comprehensive floodplain management regulations. In some
instances, community officials may have access to information or knowledge of
conditions that require, particularly for human safety, higher standards than
the minimum NFIP criteria. Any floodplain management regulations adopted by a
state or community that are more restrictive than the criteria set forth in the
NFIP regulations take precedence. All FEMA minimum standards in the Code of
Federal Regulations also apply. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20360; 24085; 27318;
27572; 27697; 27893; 30994; 31314; 32039)
SEC. 51A-5.102.   DESIGNATION OR REMOVAL OF FP AREAS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   A floodplain designation is not a zoning classification, but refers
to a specific area subject to flooding.
      (2)   When an FP designation is noted by an "FP" prefix on the official
zoning district map, or on the FEMA effective maps, the area designated is
referred to in this article as an FP area.
      (3)   FP areas include those areas:
         (A)   identified as special flood hazards by FEMA in the:
            (i)   current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Dallas County," dated March 21, 2019, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps
(FIRM and/or FBFM) dated March 21, 2019, and any revisions thereto are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this paragraph,
            (ii)   current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Rockwall County," dated September 26, 2008,
with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps
(FIRM and/or FBFM) dated September 26, 2008, and any revisions thereto are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this paragraph,
            (iii)   current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Collin County," dated June 7, 2017, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps
(FIRM and/or FBFM) dated June 7, 2017, and any revisions thereto are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this paragraph,
            (iv)   current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Denton County," dated April 18, 2011, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps
(FIRM and/or FBFM) dated April 18, 2011, and any revisions thereto are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this paragraph, or
            (v)   current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Kaufman County," dated July 3, 2012, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps
(FIRM and/or FBFM) dated July 3, 2012, and any revisions thereto are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this paragraph, and
         (B)   other areas that the director of Dallas Water Utilities has
identified as flood risk areas.
      (4)   The floodplain administrator shall regulate according to both the
FEMA effective maps and the regulatory floodplain maps, regardless of adoption
by FEMA. The floodplain administrator shall notify the director of development
services of all map updates.
   (b)   Initiation. The addition to or removal from the official zoning
district map of an FP prefix may be initiated in the following ways:
      (1)   An owner of property located within an FP area may apply for the
review of an FP designation based upon evidence of a mapping error provided by
the owner.
      (2)   The director of water utilities may, upon his or her own
initiative, review the status of an FP designation.
      (3)   An owner of property located within an FP area may apply for a fill
permit and removal of the FP prefix by following the procedure outlined in
Section
51A-5.105.
   (c)   Engineering studies. Hydraulic and hydrologic engineering studies or a
field survey must support any changes to an FP designation. The engineering
study must be signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer. The
director may require geotechnical core borings as part of his or her
investigations under this subsection.
   (d)   Decision on designation. The director of water utilities shall make a
final decision on whether to add or remove an FP prefix on the official zoning
district map only after the director determines that engineering studies
support the change in the FP designation.
   (e)   Zoning map revision. The director of water utilities must notify the
director of development services in writing that an FP prefix is to be removed
from or added to the official zoning district map. The written notification
must contain a description of the property affected and the reasons why the FP
prefix is being changed.
   (f)   Letter of Map Change (LOMC). A letter of map change from FEMA is
required for removal of an FP prefix from the official zoning map if the area
is designated as a flood hazard area on the FIRM. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786;
21299; 22920; 24085; 25047; 25716; 27318; 27551; 27697; 27893; 28164; 28671;
29359; 30481; 30994; 31109; 32002; 32039)
SEC. 51A-5.103.   COMPLIANCE IN UNDESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   (a)   A person shall comply with the requirements of this article for FP
areas before developing land within the design flood line of a creek or stream
having a contributing drainage area of 100 acres or more, even if the land has
not been formally designated as an FP area.
   (b)   Except as provided in Subsection (c), alterations of the natural
floodplain in areas with less than 100 acres must comply with the Dallas
Development Code and city drainage standards but are not subject to the
engineering requirements for filling in Section
51A-5.105(g).
   (c)   If the proposed alteration includes moving, eliminating, or enclosing
the natural stream channel, then the engineering requirements for filling in
Section
51A-5.105(g) must be met, regardless of the upstream drainage area size. (Ord.
Nos. 19455; 19786; 24085; 27697; 30994; 32039)
SEC. 51A-5.103.1.   VEGETATION ALTERATION IN FLOODPLAIN PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, the urban forest conservation
requirements in Division
51A-10.130 apply. Protected trees removed in the floodplain are not subject to
exceptions to Article X.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he removes or injures any vegetation
within a floodplain.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) if the act is:
      (1)   authorized in advance in writing by the director of water
utilities;
      (2)   in conformance with a landscape plan approved by the director of
water utilities;
      (3)   routine maintenance of vegetation such as trimming or cutting
designed to maintain the healthy or attractive growth of the vegetation; or
      (4)   routine maintenance performed, required, or authorized by the city
in order to maintain the floodwater conveyance capacity of the floodplain.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 24085; 27697; 30994; 32039)
SEC. 51A-5.104.   USES AND IMPROVEMENTS PERMITTED.
   (a)   Uses permitted. To allow for the appropriate development of land that
is subject to flooding without unduly endangering life and property, the
following uses are permitted in an FP area provided they are permitted in the
underlying zoning district and comply with the requirements of Section
51A-5.105(g) and all applicable elevation requirements of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency:
      (1)   Farm or ranch (excluding habitable structures).
      (2)   Utility services, electrical substation, detention basin, water
reservoir or pumping station, and water treatment plant.
      (3)   Sanitary landfill and refuse transfer station.
      (4)   Public park or playground and golf course (excluding habitable
structures).
      (5)   Commercial amusement (outside) approved by specific use permit.
      (6)   Helistop approved by specific use permit.
      (7)   Radio, television, or microwave tower, amateur communications
tower, and tower/antenna for cellular communication.
   (b)   Improvements permitted.
      (1)   Structures. An uninhabitable structure customarily associated with
a use listed in Subsection (a) may be constructed within an FP area only if the
director of water utilities determines that the proposed structure meets the
same engineering requirements applicable to filling in Section
51A-5.105(g) and issues a floodplain alteration permit.
      (2)   Improvements. The owner of a structure in an FP area shall not make
any improvements to the structure without first obtaining approval from the
director of water utilities. The director of water utilities may approve
proposed improvements if the cumulative value of all improvements for the
previous five years is less than 50 percent of the market or tax appraisal
value of existing improvements on the property, whichever is greater. No
substantial improvements are permitted. Improvement values are calculated per
guidelines outlined in FEMA P-758 as revised. All improvements must comply with
the requirements of Section
51A-5.105(g), including additions. Substantially damaged structures are
considered substantial improvements.
      (3)   Completion of vested structures. The building official shall not
withhold a final inspection or certificate of occupancy for a structure in an
FP area if building permits for the structure were issued by the building
official before FEMA's FIRM becomes effective designating such areas as A or
AE, and the structure otherwise complies with all applicable requirements.
      (4)   Board of adjustment. The board of adjustment may only grant a
special exception to allow the reconstruction of a structure in an FP area if
the structure is a historical structure as defined by FEMA, or the property is
zoned for a functionally dependent use. The board may grant a special exception
upon a showing of good and sufficient cause and a determination that the
reconstruction will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats
to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with other local, state, or
federal laws. The reconstructed structure must be protected by methods that
minimize flood damage. The board may not grant a special exception to authorize
reconstruction within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result. Any special exception granted
must be the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
The reconstruction of a structure in an FP area may not increase the lot
coverage of the structure.
         (A)   The director of water utilities shall notify in writing the
owner of a structure in an FP area that:
            (i)   the granting of a special exception to reconstruct the
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance that will be commensurate with the increased risk; and
            (ii)   the construction below the base flood level increases risks
to life and property. The notification letter must be maintained with the
record of the board's action.
         (B)   The FP administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving applications for special exceptions and shall report special
exceptions to FEMA upon request.
      (5)   Parking.
         (A)   Surface parking. All surface parking spaces must be constructed
at a minimum elevation of two feet above the design flood elevation.
         (B)   Underground parking garages. The entrance elevation and any
openings on underground parking garages constructed within or adjacent to a
flood prone area may not be lower than two feet above the design flood
elevation.
         (C)   Parking on piers. Parking lots elevated on piers such that the
low chord is two feet above the design flood elevation are permitted if all
engineering requirements for filling in Section
51A-5.105(g) are met, and do not violate any other part of the Dallas
Development Code. A habitable structure may not be placed on piers.
         (D)   Parking in interior drainage (sump) areas. All surface parking
spaces within an interior drainage area must be constructed at a minimum
elevation of one foot above the design flood elevation.
      (6)   Storage in the floodplain is prohibited.
         (A)   A person shall not place, store, or maintain a shipping
container, trailer, boat, inoperable vehicle, recreational vehicle,
construction materials, waste materials, hazardous materials, or construction
equipment in the floodplain. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "vehicle"
includes but is not limited to automobiles, buses, and recreational vehicles.
It is a defense to prosecution that the placement, storage, or maintenance of
shipping containers, trailers, boats, inoperable vehicles, recreational
vehicles, construction materials, waste materials, hazardous materials, or
construction equipment is otherwise permitted by or in connection with a valid
federal, state, county, or city permit, or is otherwise authorized by those
entities.
         (B)   The director of water utilities shall give written notice and
allow persons in violation of Subparagraph (A) a period of 90 days to come into
compliance.
      (7)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes may not be placed within a
floodplain area. Recreational vehicle camping and parking locations are not
permitted within a floodplain area.
      (8)   Fences. Fences must comply with all applicable construction codes
at the time of construction.
         (A)   Fences are not permitted within floodway easement areas without
engineering analysis addressing Section
51A-5.105(g), regardless of fence type.
         (B)   Except as provided in this paragraph, fences in a floodplain
area not designated as a floodway easement must be:
            (i)    constructed of wrought iron;
            (ii)    constructed with a one-foot gap along the bottom if located
in areas where flooding is less than three feet of depth; or
            (iii)    constructed using flood vents, as outlined in the NFIP
Technical Bulletin 1, as amended, if located in areas where flooding is greater
than one foot and less than four feet of depth.
         (C)   Fences in a floodplain area not designated as a floodway
easement that do not comply with Subparagraph (B) must be analyzed as an
obstruction for compliance with Section
51A-5.105(g).
   (c)   Construction standards. All improvements and construction permitted in
an FP area must comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Structures must be:
         (A)   securely anchored to the foundation and otherwise designed to
prevent flotation and collapse during inundation; and
         (B)   designed to prevent damage to nonstructural elements during
inundation.
      (2)   Thermal insulation used below the first floor level must be of a
type that does not absorb water.
      (3)   Adhesives must have a bonding strength that is unaffected by
inundation.
      (4)   Doors and all wood trim must be sealed with a water-proof paint or
similar product.
      (5)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other mechanical service facilities must be designed and located
at least three feet above the design flood elevation to prevent water from
entering or accumulating in the components during flooding.
      (6)   Transportation systems such as elevators and escalators must be
protected from flooding, and enclosures must be safe from flooding and protect
life safety. See Code of Federal Regulations Title 44, Part 60.3 and the NFIP
Technical Bulletin 4 as amended for more information.
      (7)   Basements.
         (A)   Basements are permitted only in nonresidential construction and
only if they are designed to preclude inundation by the design flood level,
either by:
            (i)   locating any exterior opening at least three feet above the
level of the design flood elevation; or
            (ii)   using water-tight closures, such as bulkheads and flood
shields.
         (B)   All basements must be constructed so that any enclosure area,
including utilities and sanitary facilities below the flood-proofed design
level, is watertight with impermeable walls.
         (C)   Basement walls must be built with the capacity to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy resulting from
flooding to the flood-proofed design level so that minimal damage will occur
from floods that exceed the flood-proofed design level.
         (D)   The area surrounding the structure must be filled to or above
the elevation of the design flood. The fill must be compacted, and slopes must
be protected by vegetative cover.
         (E)   Basements must be designed by a licensed professional engineer.
         (F)   Basement ceilings must consist of a sufficient wet strength and
be installed to survive inundation.
      (8)   Plywood used at or below the first floor level must be of an
"exterior" or "marine" grade and of a water-resistant or waterproof variety.
      (9)   Wood flooring used at or below the first floor level must be
installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to
the flooring grain, without incurring structural damage to the building.
      (10)   Paints or other finishes used at or below the first floor level
must be capable of surviving inundation.
      (11)   All air ducts, large pipes, and storage tanks located at or below
the first floor level must be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
      (12)   Tanks must be vented at a location above the 100-year flood level.
   (d)    500-year frequency flood. All new construction located in a 500-year
frequency flood zone must comply with the following:
      (1)   Building pad site must be filled to an elevation of at least two
feet above the 100-year flood elevation.
      (2)   The lowest floor of any structure must be constructed at least
three feet above the 100-year flood elevation. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20360;
24085; 24543; 27697; 27893; 30994; 31314; 31707; 32039)
SEC. 51A-5.105.   FILLING IN THE FLOODPLAIN.
   (a)   Permit required.
      (1)   A person shall not deposit or store fill, place a structure,
excavate, or engage in any other development activities in an FP area without
first obtaining:
         (A)   a fill permit or a floodplain alteration permit from the
director of water utilities; and
         (B)   all other permits required by county, state, and federal
agencies.
      (2)   A fill permit allows the property to be developed at a specified
elevation in compliance with this section.
      (3)   The director of water utilities shall maintain a record of all fill
permits and floodplain alteration permits.
   (b)   Floodplain alteration permit process.
      (1)   The director of water utilities may issue a floodplain alteration
permit if he or she determines that:
         (A)   the alteration does not remove an FP designation; and
         (B)   the alteration complies with all applicable engineering
requirements in Subsection (g).
      (2)   The floodplain alteration permit may require hydrologic or
hydraulic modeling as determined by the director of water utilities. Examples
of situations that may require hydrologic or hydraulic modeling include, but
are not limited to:
         (A)   A pool, tennis court, patio, cook area, deck, or other outdoor
amenity above existing grade, but not above the base flood elevation.
         (B)   A fence that will block the flow of flood water during the 100-
year flood event.
         (C)   A retaining wall projecting into the channel as compared to the
existing grade.
         (D)   Elevated utilities that block the flow of flood water during the
100-year flood event.
         (E)   Additions to existing structures.
   (c)   Initiation of the fill permit process. An applicant for a fill permit
shall submit an application to the director of water utilities on a form
approved by the director and signed by all owners of the property.
   (d)   Preapplication conference.
      (1)   An applicant for a fill permit or a floodplain alteration permit
that will require hydrologic or hydraulic modeling shall request a
preapplication conference with representatives from the department of water
utilities.
      (2)   At the preapplication conference, the director of water utilities
shall determine what information is necessary for a complete evaluation of the
proposed fill project. The applicant may be required to submit all necessary
information, including, but not limited to the following:
         (A)   A vicinity map.
         (B)   The acreage figures for the entire tract, the area located in
the floodplain, and the area proposed to be filled.
         (C)   A description of existing and proposed hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis conducted.
         (D)   Plans that comply with the Landscape and Urban Forest
Conservation Regulations in Article X of the Dallas Development Code, as
amended.
         (E)   A table of values for analysis of the engineering criteria
listed in Subsections (h)(1), (h)(2), and (h)(5).
         (F)   A water surface profile.
         (G)   A plan view showing existing and proposed contours and grading.
         (H)   Plotted cross-sections.
         (I)   An overall map of the project area.
         (J)   Drainage area map.
   (e)   Filling to remove an FP designation.
      (1)   In general. This subsection applies to applications to remove an FP
designation from any regulatory floodplain.
      (2)   Review of application by departments.
         (A)   If the application is to remove an FP designation, the director
of water utilities shall forward copies of the application to the director of
development services, the chief planning officer, and the director of park and
recreation for review.
         (B)   The director of development services, the chief planning
officer, and the director of park and recreation shall review the application
and advise the director of water utilities of the environmental impacts of the
project, zoning concerns, or other concerns. If concerns are raised by one of
these departments, the concerns must be addressed by the property owner prior
to issuance of the fill permit. These departments shall also determine whether
the applicant's property should be considered for public acquisition due to its
ecological, scenic, historic, or recreational value.
      (3)   Neighborhood meeting. The water utilities department shall schedule
and conduct a virtual or in-person neighborhood meeting on each application.
The applicant or the applicant's representative must attend the neighborhood
meeting. The director shall send written notice of the meeting to the
applicant, to all owners of real property within 500 feet from the boundary of
the subject property, and to persons and organizations on the early
notification list on file with the department of development services.
Measurements include the streets and alleys. The notice must be given not less
than 10 days before the date set for the neighborhood meeting by depositing the
notice properly addressed and postage paid in the United States mail to the
property owners as evidenced by the last approved city tax roll. This notice
must be written in English and Spanish if the area of request is located wholly
or partly within a census tract in which 50 percent or more of the inhabitants
are persons of Spanish origin or descent according to the most recent federal
decennial census.
      (4)   Notice of public hearing and city council approval. If the city
council is required to approve a fill permit in accordance with this paragraph,
after the neighborhood meeting, the director of water utilities shall schedule
a public hearing on the application. The city secretary shall give notice of
the public hearing in the official newspaper of the city at least 15 days
before the date of the public hearing. The director shall also send written
notice of the public hearing to the applicant, to all owners of real property
within 500 feet from the boundary of the subject property, and to persons and
organizations on the early notification list on file with the department of
development services. Except as provided in this paragraph, the city council
may only deny an application if the application does not meet the requirements
of Sections 51A-5.105(f) or (g) or required state or federal permits have been
denied.
         (A)   Variance requested. If a variance to one of the engineering
criteria outlined in Subsection (g) is requested, the fill permit will require
city council approval. The city council may grant a variance to the
requirements of Subsection (g) if the variance will not violate any provision
of federal or state law or endanger life or property.
         (B)   Property acquisition. If the department of development services
or park and recreation recommend public acquisition of property due to its
ecological, scenic, historic, or recreational value, they must make a written
recommendation to city council, and the director of water utilities shall
provide a report to the city council on the application regarding environmental
impacts and public acquisition issues. Once the recommendation is made, the
city council may vote to approve a resolution authorizing the acquisition of
the property under the laws of eminent domain and deny the fill permit to
preserve the status quo until the property is acquired.
      (5)   Director approval.
         (A)   After the applicant has satisfied all requirements of
Subsections (f) and (g), and it is determined that city council approval is not
necessary under Paragraph (4), the director of water utilities shall approve or
deny the application for a fill permit. The director may only deny an
application if:
            (i)   the application does not meet the requirements of Sections
51A-5.105(f) or (g); or
            (ii)   required state or federal permits have been denied.
         (B)   The director of water utilities may postpone the approval of a
fill permit if:
            (i)   required state and federal permits have not been addressed or
obtained; or
            (ii)   concerns from the department of development services or the
park and recreation department have not been addressed.
      (6)   Zoning map revision. A letter of map revision must be obtained from
FEMA, if applicable, before an FP prefix may be removed from the official
zoning district map. A building permit may be issued for construction of
underground utilities; however, no building permit for construction of a
structure may be issued until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is
obtained. Upon approval and receipt of a letter of map revision, the director
of water utilities shall notify the director of development services, who shall
remove the FP designation for the subject area from the official zoning
district map.
   (f)   Filling operations. If a fill permit or floodplain alteration permit
is approved, the filling operations must comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Any excavation required by the specifications of the approved
application must be conducted before or at the same time as placing fill.
Excavated areas are required to maintain a minimum depth of one foot at the
deepest point.
      (2)   For fill permits, the entirety of the building pad site must be
filled to an elevation of at least two feet above the design flood elevation.
Habitable structures elevated on piers in floodplain areas are prohibited.
      (3)   For fill permits, tthe lowest floor of any structure must be
constructed at least three feet above the design flood elevation.
      (4)   For fill permits within interior drainage (sump) areas, the
building pad site must be filled to a minimum elevation of one foot above the
design flood elevation. Habitable structures elevated on piers in floodplain
areas are prohibited.
      (5)   Fill material must consist of natural material including but not
limited to soil, rock, gravel, or broken concrete. Decomposable matter,
including but not limited to lumber, sheetrock, trees, tires, refuse, or
hazardous, toxic material, is prohibited as fill material. Fill must be
compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density.
      (6)   Before construction, erosion and sediment control devices such as
straw hay bales, silt fences, or similar items must be installed to eliminate
any transportation of sediment downstream. The property owner is responsible
for removal of any sediment deposited by runoff as a result of filling.
      (7)   If compliance with a Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(TPDES) permit is required for construction activities, a copy of the Notice of
Intent (NOI) or the individual TPDES permit must be submitted to the director
of water utilities and the director of the office of environmental quality and
sustainability before beginning fill operations. The Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan required by TPDES must be implemented no later than two days
prior to commencement of construction activities.
      (8)   Fill shall be placed no more than five feet above the design flood
elevation, except where necessary to match the existing elevation of the
adjacent property as determined by the director of water utilities. In
determining when it is necessary to match the existing elevation, the director
shall consider the effects on local drainage and storm water management, the
access needs of the property, and other public health and safety concerns.
      (9)   A copy of the approved fill permit must be posted and maintained at
the fill site for inspection purposes until fill operations have been
completed.
      (10)   After filling operations have been completed, the applicant shall
submit a certification to the director of water utilities that proper fill
elevations in the form of signed and sealed as-built topographic survey,
compaction requirements, and all other specifications of the approved
application have been followed. In addition, a letter of map revision (LOMR)
submittal to FEMA and approval by FEMA is required.
      (11)   Encroachment into the floodway is prohibited unless FEMA issues a
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR).
   (g)   Engineering requirements for filling.
      (1)   Except for detention basins and ponds, alterations of the FP area
may not increase the water surface elevation of the design flood of the creek
upstream, downstream, or through the project area. Detention basins and ponds
may increase the water surface elevation of the design flood provided the
increase is within the detention basin's or pond's boundaries as approved by
the director of water utilities.
      (2)   Alterations of the FP area may not create or increase an erosive
water velocity on or off-site. The mean velocity of stream flow at the
downstream end of the site after fill may not exceed the mean velocity of the
stream flow under existing conditions.
      (3)   The effects of the existing and proposed public and private
improvements will be used in determining water surface elevations and
velocities. Any alteration of the FP area necessary to obtain a removal of an
FP prefix may not cause any additional expense in any current or projected
public improvements.
      (4)   The FP area may be altered only to the extent permitted by equal
conveyance reduction on both sides of the natural channel.
      (5)   FP areas governed by a city council-adopted management plan that
contains valley storage regulations must comply with the valley storage
regulations contained in the plan. For all other FP areas, a valley storage
maintenance agreement on a form provided by the city and approved as to form by
the city attorney's office is required, and the following requirements apply:
         (A)   no loss of valley storage is permitted along a stream in which
the upstream drainage area is three square miles or more;
         (B)   valley storage losses along streams in which the upstream
drainage area is between 100 acres and three square miles may not exceed 15
percent, as calculated on a site by site basis; and
         (C)   valley storage losses along streams in which the upstream
drainage area is less than 100 acres are not limited.
      (6)   An environmental impact study and a complete stream rehabilitation
program must be approved before relocation or alteration of the natural channel
or alteration of an environmentally significant area, or area deemed to house
threatened or endangered species. The net environmental impacts of the proposal
may not be negative. The environmental impact study must contain the following
items:
         (A)   A description of the existing conditions of the site, adjacent
properties, upstream and downstream creek sections for approximately 1,000 feet
(unless conditions require additional information in the opinion of the
director of water utilities), and creek and overbank areas. The description of
these conditions must include:
            (i)   the characterization of creek features such as bed quality
and material, pool-riffle sequences, natural ground water, springs, seeps,
magnitude and continuity of flow, water quality, bank quality and material,
vegetative cover and patterns, bank erosion, topographic relief, disturbances
to the natural character of the creek, animal and aquatic life, and the extent
and character of wetland areas; and
            (ii)   soil types and land uses of the site and surrounding area.
         (B)   A description of the proposed project. This description must
include:
            (i)   the intended ultimate use of the site, or if that is not
known, a description of the interim site plan, including construction access;
            (ii)   reasons why the creek or floodplain alteration is necessary;
and
            (iii)   a site plan showing the floodplain and construction access
necessary to perform the work.
         (C)   A description of at least three possible ways of handling the
creek and floodplain, including:
            (i)   an alternative that assumes the creek and floodplain are not
changed;
            (ii)   the applicant's proposed action; and
            (iii)    alternatives proposed by the director of water utilities.
         (D)   An identification of the impacts created by each alternative,
describing in detail all of the positive and negative impacts upon the existing
conditions described in Subparagraph (A), that would be created by each
alternative.
         (E)   A recommended course of action based upon evaluation of the
alternatives.
         (F)   Proposed strategies to mitigate adverse impacts. Examples of
strategies include tree wells, temporary construction and permanent erosion and
sedimentation controls, vegetative buffers, and replacement planting.
      (7)   The toe of any fill slope must parallel the natural channel to
prevent an unbalanced stream flow in the altered FP area.
      (8)   To insure maximum accessibility to the FP area for maintenance and
other purposes and to lessen the probability of slope erosion during periods of
high water, maximum slopes of the filled area may not exceed four to one for 50
percent of the length of the fill and six to one for the remaining length of
the fill. The slope of any excavated area may not exceed four to one unless the
excavation is in rock. Vertical walls, terracing, and other slope treatments
may be used provided no unbalancing of stream flow results and the slope
treatment is approved as a part of a landscaping plan for the property.
      (9)   The elevation of excavated areas in the FP area may not be lower
than one-third of the depth of the natural channel, as measured from the
adjacent bank, except for excavation of lakes. Excavation must be at least 50
feet from the bank of the natural channel, except as necessary to provide
proper drainage.
      (10)   A landscape and erosion control plan must be submitted and
approved. Landscaping must incorporate natural materials (such as earth and
stone) on cut and filled slopes when possible. The definitions of Section
51A-10.101 apply to this subsection. Except as otherwise provided, the
installation, removal, and maintenance requirements contained in the urban
forest conservation regulations, Division
51A-10.130 of the Dallas Development Code, apply. Each soil resource and
erosion control plan must comply with the following criteria:
         (A)   The size, type, and location of all proposed replacement trees
to mitigate the loss of existing trees must be shown. The tree types must be
selected in accordance with the provisions of Section
51A-10.134 and must be approved by the city arborist as suitable for use under
local climate and soil conditions.
         (B)   The specific plant materials proposed to protect fill and
excavated slopes must be indicated. Plant materials must be suitable for use
under local climate and soil conditions. In general, hydroseeding or sodding
native grasses is acceptable during the summer months (May 1st to August 30th).
Winter rye or fescue grass may be planted during times other than the summer
months as a temporary measure until such time as the permanent planting can be
accomplished.
         (C)   The proposed methods of erosion and sedimentation control, such
as hay bales and sedimentation basins, to be used during construction must be
shown in detail.
         (D)   The fill case applicant, current owners, and subsequent owners
must maintain and assure the survival of all planted material until the
property is developed and a permanent maintenance plan of record is
established. Maintenance responsibility must be reflected in the submitted
plans or supporting documents.
   (h)   Term of permit validity and extension procedures.
         (A)   A fill permit or floodway alteration permit is valid for a five-
year time period from the date of issuance. The fill permit or floodway
alteration permit automatically terminates if the filling operations have not
been completed within the five-year time period.
         (B)   New permit required upon expiration. When a fill permit
terminates, the applicant must apply for a new permit before filling the
property. The new application must comply with the floodplain regulations that
are in effect at the time that the request is considered by the director.
         (C)   New permit required with site plan change. If the applicant
wishes to make changes to a site plan that will change the hydraulic model or
acreage of fill placed on the fill permit application after a fill permit has
been approved, a new permit must be obtained.
         (D)   Presumption of completion. Filling operations are deemed
completed when the applicant:
            (i)   submits a certification in the form of a signed and sealed
topographic survey to the director of water utilities that proper fill
elevations have been achieved and the specifications of the approved
application have been followed;
            (ii)   submits compaction test results indicating the site was
compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density; and
            (iii)   obtains a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA, if
applicable. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 21299; 22920; 24085; 25047; 27697; 27893;
28424; 29478; 30994; 31314; 32002; 32039)
SEC. 51A-5.106.   SETBACK FROM NATURAL CHANNEL REQUIRED.
   (a)   For purposes of this section:
      (1)   NATURAL CHANNEL SETBACK LINE means that setback line described
below located the farther beyond the crest:
         (A)   That line formed by the intersection of the surface of the land
and the vertical plane located a horizontal distance of 20 feet beyond the
crest.
         (B)   That line formed by the intersection of the surface of the land
beyond the crest and a plane passing through the toe and extending upward and
outward from the channel at the designated slope. For purposes of this
paragraph, the designated slope is:
            (i)   four to one if the channel contains clay or shale soil; and
            (ii)   three to one in all other cases.
      (2)   CREST means that line at the top of the bank where the slope
becomes less than four to one.
      (3)   TOE means that line at the bottom of the bank where the slope
becomes less than four to one.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (c), all development must
be located behind the natural channel setback line.
   (c)   A structurally engineered retention system approved by the director
may be substituted for the setback required in Subsection (b). (Ord. Nos.
19786; 24085; 25047; 28073; 32039)
SEC. 51A-5.107.   TRINITY RIVER CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT CERTIFICATE PROCESS.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT CERTIFICATE (CDC) MANUAL means the manual by
that title dated January 31, 1992, or its latest revision.
      (2)   FLOODPLAIN ALTERATION means any construction of buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, or excavation in the
floodplain.
      (3)   TRINITY RIVER CORRIDOR means the portion of the floodplain of the
West Fork, Elm Fork, and mainstem segments of the Trinity River floodplain
within the Dallas city limits, as delineated on the latest CDC Regulatory Map.
   (b)   Certificate required. A person commits an offense if he makes any
floodplain alteration within the Trinity River Corridor without first obtaining
a corridor development certificate (CDC) from the director of water utilities.
It is a defense to prosecution that an exemption or variance has been obtained
in accordance with CDC criteria.
   (c)   Application. An application for a corridor development certificate
must be filed with the director of water utilities on a form furnished by the
department of water utilities.
   (d)   Review. The director of water utilities shall deny an application for
a certificate unless it complies with the standards contained in the CDC Manual
or unless an exemption from or a variance to those standards is obtained in
accordance with Subsection (e).
   (e)   Exemptions and variances.
      (1)   Exemptions.
         (A)   An exemption from the requirements of this section may be
obtained if the floodplain alteration involves the following activities:
            (i)   Ordinary maintenance of and repair to flood control
structures.
            (ii)   The construction of outfall structures and associated intake
structures if the outfall has been permitted under state or federal law.
            (iii)   Discharge of material for backfill or bedding for utility
lines, provided there is no significant change in pre-existing bottom contours
and excess materials are removed to an upland disposal area.
            (iv)   Bank stabilization.
            (v)   Any project listed in the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers March
1990 Reconnaissance Report, which is attached as Appendix A to the CDC Manual,
or any project approved under the provisions of this division, provided the
approval, permit, or authorization has not expired and no significant changes
have occurred since the approval, permit, or authorization was issued.
         (B)   Application for an exemption must be made to the director of
water utilities on a form provided by the department of water utilities.
         (C)   If the director of water utilities determines that an
application for an exemption falls within one of the categories listed in
Paragraph (1), the director shall issue a written exemption from the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   Variances. If the director of water utilities determines that the
application for a corridor development certificate does not comply with all of
the standards contained in the CDC Manual, the applicant may apply for a
variance to any standard contained in the manual. An application for a variance
must be made to the director of water utilities, who shall schedule the
application for consideration by the city council. (Ord. Nos. 21636; 24085;
27697; 30994; 32039)
Division 51A-5.200. Escarpment Regulations.
SEC. 51A-5.201.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   (1)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES means schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent
or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. Best management
practices also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
   (2)   CHALK ZONE means the lower chalk member of the Austin chalk formation
overlying the Eagle Ford shale formation. The chalk zone consists primarily of
a chalk limestone with minor seams of shale and bentonite clays.
   (3)   CREST means that line above the escarpment line where the slope
becomes less than 4:1.
   (4)   ESCARPMENT AREA REVIEW COMMITTEE means the committee described in
Section
51A-5.209 of this chapter.
   (5)   ESCARPMENT FACE means that portion of the escarpment zone between the
crest and the toe.
   (6)   ESCARPMENT LINE means that line formed by the intersection of the
plane of the stratigraphic contact between the Austin chalk and the Eagle Ford
shale formations and the surface of the land.
   (7)   ESCARPMENT ZONE means that corridor of real property south of
Interstate Highway 30 between the following described vertical planes:
      (A)   On the crest side of the escarpment line and measuring horizontally
from that line, the vertical plane that is 125 feet from that line, or 35 feet
beyond the crest, whichever is farther from that line.
      (B)   On the toe side of the escarpment line and measuring horizontally
from that line, the vertical plane that is 85 feet from that line, or 10 feet
beyond the toe, whichever is farther from that line.
   (8)   FACTOR OF SAFETY means a combination of factors which, when considered
together, indicates whether the slope is stable at a slip surface location. The
factor of safety (Fs) is determined using the equation:
      Fs =   Shearing strength available along sliding surface
         Shearing stresses tending to produce failure along surface
   (9)   GEOLOGICALLY SIMILAR AREAS means:
      (A)   areas adjacent to and similar to the escarpment zone by virtue of
their slopes, soils, and geology; and
      (B)   the drainage basins containing the escarpment zone, excluding those
portions of the basins which are:
         (i)   downstream from the areas described in Subparagraph (A) above;
or
         (ii)   north of Interstate Highway 30.
   (10)   GRADING means excavation or filling or any combination thereof.
   (11)   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER means a person who is duly licensed
and registered to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas
in accordance with state law.
   (12)   SHALE ZONE means the Arcadia Park/Kamp Ranch members of the Eagle
Ford shale formation which lie below the Austin chalk formation. The shale zone
consists primarily of clays and shale with minor layers of limestone or sand.
   (13)   SLOPE means the slope of the terrain. For example, a 5:1 slope means
a slope with an angle described by five feet horizontal to one foot vertical.
   (14)   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN means a plan required by either
a construction general permit or an industrial general permit, which plan
describes and ensures the implementation of practices to reduce pollutants in
storm water discharges associated with construction or industrial activity at a
site or facility.
   (15)   TOE means that line below the escarpment line where the slope becomes
flatter than 5:1. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 25047; 26000)
SEC. 51A-5.202.   DEVELOPMENT IN ESCARPMENT ZONE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, within the escarpment zone, he:
      (1)   removes or injures any tree or vegetation; or
      (2)   alters the physical condition of the land in any way. Examples of
alterations to the physical condition of the land include, but are not limited
to dumping, excavation, storage, and filling.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the act was:
      (1)   the construction of a public improvement authorized by the city and
performed in accordance with the requirements of this division; or
      (2)   the modification of a single family or duplex structure existing on
the date of passage of this ordinance, and the modification did not:
         (A)   change the use of the structure;
         (B)   cause the size of the structure to exceed by 50 percent or more
the size of the structure as it existed on the date of passage of this
ordinance; or
         (C)   cause the market value of the structure to exceed by 50 percent
or more the market value of the structure as it existed on the date of passage
of this ordinance.
   (c)   The construction of public improvements in the escarpment zone
requires an escarpment permit. The performance standards for development in a
geologically similar area apply to the construction of public improvements in
the escarpment zone. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 26000)
SEC. 51A-5.203.   PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT IN GEOLOGICALLY SIMILAR
AREAS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, in a geologically similar area and
without first obtaining an escarpment permit from the city expressly
authorizing the act, he:
      (1)   removes or injures any trees or vegetation; or
      (2)   alters the physical condition of the land in any way. Examples of
alterations to the physical condition of the land include, but are not limited
to dumping, excavation, storage, and filling.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) that the act was
the modification of a single family or duplex structure existing on the date of
passage of this ordinance, and the modification did not:
      (1)   change the use of the structure;
      (2)   cause the size of the structure to exceed by 50 percent or more the
size of the structure as it existed on the date of passage of this ordinance;
or
      (3)   cause the market value of the structure to exceed by 50 percent or
more the market value of the structure as it existed on the date of passage of
this ordinance. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 26000)
SEC. 51A-5.204.   ESCARPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION AND REVIEW.
   (a)   An applicant for an escarpment permit shall request a preapplication
conference with the escarpment area review committee. The purpose of the
conference is to determine what information must be submitted with the permit
application to allow a complete evaluation of the proposed project. After the
conference, the committee shall advise the director of its findings and
recommendations.
   (b)   After the preapplication conference, the applicant shall submit an
application for an escarpment permit to the director. The application must be
on a form approved by the director and be signed by the owner of the property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, the following items must be
provided as part of the application:
      (1)   The name and address of:
         (A)   the owner(s) of the property; and
         (B)   the person(s) who prepared the plans and drawings submitted.
      (2)   A general vicinity map of the proposed development site.
      (3)   A one inch = 100 feet scale site plan showing details of the
terrain and area drainage. This site plan must be a contour map with two-foot
contour intervals.
      (4)   A one inch = 50 feet scale cross section and plan review of any
proposed structures.
      (5)   Results of the slope stability analysis required under Section
51A-5.205.
      (6)   The soil erosion control plan required under Section
51A-5.206.
      (7)   The grading plan required under Section
51A-5.207.
      (8)   The vegetation plan required under Section
51A-5.208.
      (9)   Financial assurance in the form of a letter of credit, a
performance bond, or other instrument payable to the city of Dallas for all
improvements related to the required soil erosion control, grading, and
vegetation plans to insure that funds are available to the city to implement
those plans if the developer fails to implement them.
      (10)   A performance and maintenance bond for each private development
contract for the construction of public infrastructure improvements.
      (11)   One inch = 100 feet scale transparent overlay drawings of the
required soil erosion control, grading, and vegetation plans such that a
composite map can be created by combining the overlay drawings and the site
plan required under Subsection (b)(3).
      (12)   Cost estimates and timetables for implementation and completion of
work specified in the required soil erosion control, grading, and vegetation
plans.
      (13)   Any other information that the director determines to be necessary
to allow for a complete evaluation of the proposed project.
   (c)   If the director determines that one or more of the items listed in
Subsection (b) is not necessary to allow for a complete review of the proposed
project, he shall waive the requirement that the item or items be provided.
   (d)   All plans, drawings, and specifications submitted as part of an
application for an escarpment permit must comply with the requirements of this
chapter and all applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city of
Dallas.
   (e)   Upon submission by the applicant of a complete application for an
escarpment permit, the director shall forward copies of all materials submitted
to the escarpment area review committee for consideration. Upon review of all
materials submitted, the committee shall furnish the director a written report
containing its recommendations and comments concerning the proposed project.
The director shall consider the committee’s report before making a decision to
grant or deny the escarpment permit.
   (f)   If the application and other materials submitted show that the
proposed project complies with the requirements of this chapter and all
applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city of Dallas, the
director shall issue an escarpment permit and forward the application to the
building official for further action. Otherwise, the director shall deny the
escarpment permit.
   (g)   The building official shall not issue a building permit for any
project for which an escarpment permit is required unless the director has
first issued an escarpment permit authorizing the work.
   (h)   The director may not authorize any disturbance of the land for
development purposes until both the required soil erosion control and grading
plans have been submitted and approved. After the approval of both of these
plans, the director may issue a limited permit to authorize clearing and
grubbing.
   (i)   A decision made by the director to grant or deny an escarpment permit
may be appealed to the board of adjustment in the same manner that appeals are
made from decisions of the building official.
   (j)   An inspector from the department shall monitor all development for
which an escarpment permit is required to ensure compliance with the approved
plans, the requirements of this chapter, and all applicable ordinances, rules,
and regulations of the city of Dallas. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 25047; 26000; 28073)
SEC. 51A-5.205.   SLOPE STABILITY ANALYSIS.
   (a)   For all proposed development within a geologically similar area, field
and laboratory tests must be performed on samples taken from representative
locations within the development site to ascertain the existing geotechnical
conditions.
   (b)   A slope stability analysis must be performed for each new structure to
be erected within a geologically similar area. No structure may be erected
where the slope stability factor of safety is less than 1.5.
   (c)   Except for items that are expressly waived by the director, the slope
stability analysis data submitted must include the following:
      (1)   A description of the boring location(s).
      (2)   Drillers logs of borings delineating the stratigraphy of the soil
and bedrock.
      (3)   The locations and methods used to determine groundwater conditions
and elevations.
      (4)   A table of field and laboratory engineering tests including, but
not limited to shear strength tests, atterberg limits, and shrink/swell tests.
      (5)   Calculations for the slope stability analysis, including the
criteria and parameters used, indicating the slope and location of slip
surfaces and corresponding factors of safety.
   (d)   All analyses, designs, tests, and calculations for new development
within a geologically similar area must be certified by a registered
professional engineer. A registered professional engineer must also certify
that structural foundations for all new development are designed to meet the
requirements of the building code and all other applicable codes. (Ord. Nos.
19455; 26000)
SEC. 51A-5.206.   SOIL EROSION CONTROL PLAN.
   (a)   A soil erosion control plan must be submitted for all proposed
development within a geologically similar area. Except for items that are
expressly waived by the director, the plan must:
      (1)   show the type of soil cover as mapped by the Soil Conservation
Service and confirmed by representative field tests and samples;
      (2)   indicate the susceptibility to erosion of the mapped soils as
confirmed by representative field tests and samples;
      (3)   show the location of existing and proposed development;
      (4)   include a timing schedule indicating starting and completion dates
of the development activities sequence and the time of exposure of each area
prior to completion of control measures;
      (5)   contain a complete description of all measures to be taken to
prevent or control erosion and sedimentation of soils during and after
construction;
      (6)   comply with best management practices standards for storm water
pollution prevention plans; and
      (7)   be certified by a registered professional engineer.
   (b)   Development within a geologically similar area must conform to the
following performance standards:
      (1)   Development must be fitted to the topography and soils to minimize
cut and fill sections.
      (2)   Grading is not permitted within the one-percent annual chance flood
plain boundaries of watercourses unless it is:
         (A)    in conjunction with the construction of approved drainage
facilities; or
         (B)   authorized by a city council approved fill permit. All grading
must comply with Section
51A-5.207 of this division.
      (3)   Indigenous vegetation must be retained and protected except in
immediate areas of development so that a minimal amount of vegetation is
removed or replaced. If vegetation is removed, it must be replaced with new
vegetation of the same variety unless the building official approves an
alternative variety as being less susceptible to disease or better suited for
urban development.
      (4)   Development must be accomplished in a manner which assures that as
small an area as possible is exposed to erosion at any one time. When land is
exposed during development, the exposure must be kept to the shortest practical
period of time not to exceed six months. In extraordinary cases, an extension
of the six month time period may be granted in writing by the director. In such
cases the director shall seek and consider the recommendation of the escarpment
area review committee before making his decision.
      (5)   Areas where construction activities have ceased for more than 21
days must be stabilized by the developer to minimize erosion through the use of
temporary or permanent vegetation, mulching, sod, geotextiles, or similar
measures. In cases where permanent measures are not installed, the developer
must maintain the temporary measures until the site is either fully developed
or permanent vegetation with a density of at least 70 percent of the native
background vegetative cover for the area has been installed.
      (6)   Sediment basins or other installations approved by the director
must be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters
accumulating on land undergoing development. These installations should be
returned to natural conditions upon the substantial completion of improvements
or when the director determines that the installations are no longer needed. In
any event, the owner shall cause these installations to be returned to natural
conditions within 90 days after written notice to do so is given by the
director.
      (7)   Runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development, both above and below the escarpment zone, must be controlled
on each development site within approved drainage facilities so that the runoff
velocity leaving the site is maintained at or below predevelopment rates. Site-
specific erosion control is required below the escarpment zone where the
erosion control plan shows detrimental erosion caused by runoff velocities.
      (8)   When additional storm water runoff is being discharged onto the
face of the escarpment, the property owner’s engineer shall provide an analysis
of whether the additional storm water runoff has a negative effect on the
escarpment. If the additional storm water runoff has a negative effect, then
detention is required.
      (9)   Stormwater drainage may not be discharged over the escarpment face
at eroding velocities as those velocities are defined in the soil evaluation
reports. In no event may the discharge exceed a velocity greater than three
feet per second. Stormwater drainage discharge must comply with Section
51A-5.207 of this division.
      (10)   Temporary vegetation and mulching must be used to protect areas
exposed during development. Permanent vegetation must be established on
disturbed areas following development in accordance with the vegetation plan
required under Section
51A-5.208 of this division.
      (11)   Channel velocities may not exceed five feet per second, except
that velocities higher than five feet per second may be maintained at up to
predevelopment rates in the escarpment and chalk zones if the developer
establishes to the satisfaction of the director that these velocities do not
produce detrimental erosion. If damaging erosion is occurring, site-specific
erosion control measures are required. Energy dissipators, if required, must be
approved by the director to maintain channel velocities at acceptable levels.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 26000; 30893; 31314)
SEC. 51A-5.207.   GRADING PLAN.
   (a)   A grading plan must be submitted for all proposed development within a
geologically similar area. Except for items that are expressly waived by the
director, the following items must be included as part of the plan:
      (1)   A soil engineering report. This report must include data regarding
the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions and
recommendations for grading procedures, design criteria for corrective measures
when necessary, and opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of the site
to be developed. The report must be signed by a registered professional
engineer.
      (2)   An engineering geology report. This report must include an adequate
description of the geology of the site, conclusions and recommendations
regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and
opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of the site to be developed.
The report must be signed by a registered professional engineer.
      (3)   Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved
by grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction.
      (4)   Detailed plans for all surface and subsurface drainage devices,
walls, cribbing, dams, and other protective devices to be constructed with or
as a part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area
and the estimated runoff of the area.
   (b)   Development within a geologically similar area must conform to the
following performance standards:
      (1)   Grading must be planned so as to have the least disturbance on the
area’s natural topography, watercourses, vegetation, and wildlife. This may
preclude all development in certain areas. No cleared, graded, or otherwise
disturbed land may be left without temporary protective stabilizing cover. (See
Section
51A-5.206.)
      (2)   The maximum slopes permitted in geologically similar areas shall be
determined by the director based on the results of the geotechnical
investigations of the site materials and other factors analyzed in this
division.
      (3)   Topsoil must be stockpiled and redistributed on areas where
vegetation will be grown after the grading is completed. Methods to insure
maintenance of these areas until vegetation is established must be detailed.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 26000)
SEC. 51A-5.208.   VEGETATION PLAN.
   (a)   A vegetation plan must be submitted for all proposed development in a
geologically similar area. Except for items that are expressly waived by the
director, the plan must:
      (1)   show the location and type of landscape features and plant
materials in the areas of proposed development; and
      (2)   specify all proposed vegetation removal and replacement.
   (b)   Development in a geologically similar area must conform to the
following performance standards:
      (1)   Indigenous vegetation must be retained and protected except in
immediate areas of development so that a minimal amount of vegetation is
removed or replaced. If vegetation is removed, it must be replaced with new
vegetation of the same variety unless the building official approves an
alternative variety as being less susceptible to disease or better suited for
urban development.
      (2)   Shrub borders must be maintained around woodlands where
practicable.
      (3)   Landscaping must consist of ecologically suitable plant species.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 26000; 30893)
SEC. 51A-5.209.   ESCARPMENT AREA REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (a)   In order to assist the director and the board of adjustment in the
administration and interpretation of these escarpment regulations, and to
establish an efficient forum for city input and review of proposed developments
in geologically similar areas, an escarpment area review committee ("the
committee") shall be established. The committee shall be advisory in nature and
be comprised of at least one representative from the departments of development
services, parks and recreation, planning and urban design, and transportation
and public works. Members of the committee shall be appointed by the heads of
the departments they represent. At least two representatives must be present to
constitute a quorum.
   (b)   The committee shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To thoroughly familiarize itself with the structures, land, areas,
geology, hydrology, and indigenous plant life in the escarpment zone and in
geologically similar areas.
      (2)   To thoroughly familiarize itself with the escarpment regulations.
      (3)   To identify criteria to be used in evaluating proposed development
in the escarpment zone and in geologically similar areas.
      (4)   To identify guidelines to be used in determining whether a proposed
development complies with the spirit and intent of the escarpment regulations.
      (5)   To meet with each prospective developer of a project for which an
escarpment permit is required and make recommendations to the director as to
what information may be waived or what additional information is required to
allow a complete evaluation of the proposed project.
      (6)   To review applications for escarpment permits for compliance with
the escarpment regulations, and to make recommendations to the director as to
whether the applications should be approved or denied.
      (7)   To give advice and provide staff assistance to the board of
adjustment and the city plan commission in the exercise of their
responsibilities.
      (8)   To initiate amendments to the escarpment regulations when, in the
opinion of the committee, the amendments are necessary to further the spirit
and intent of the escarpment regulations.
   (c)   The committee shall meet at least once each month, with additional
meetings to be held upon the call of the director, or upon petition of a simple
majority of the members of the committee.
   (d)   The provisions of
Chapter 8, “Boards and Commissions,” of the Dallas City Code, as amended, do
not apply to the committee.
   (e)   Actions taken or recommendations made by the committee are not binding
upon the director, the board of adjustment, the city plan commission, and the
city council, and these persons and public bodies may decide a matter contrary
to the recommendations of the committee. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 25047; 26000; 28073;
28424; 29478; 29882; 30239; 30654; 32002; 32864)
SEC. 51A-5.210.   PLATTING IN THE ESCARPMENT ZONE AND IN THE GEOLOGICALLY
SIMILAR AREA.
   When property in the escarpment zone or in the geologically similar area is
platted:
      (1)   the escarpment zone or the geologically similar area must be shown
on the plat;
      (2)   the plat must provide any dedications necessary for maintenance,
drainage, or compliance with this division; and
      (3)   the property owner is encouraged, but not required, to dedicate the
escarpment zone or geologically similar area to the city as park. (Ord. 26000)
ARTICLE VI.
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
SEC. 51A-6.101.   DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO THE ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.
   The following definitions are applicable to the environmental performance
standards in this article:
   (1)   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL means the sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighing network. The level so read
is designated dB(A) or dBA.
   (2)   BACKGROUND NOISE means noise from all sources other than that under
specific consideration including traffic operating on public streets, and is
established by measuring the noise level over an eight minute period of time.
   (3)   BOUNDING LOT LINE means the far side of any street, alley, stream or
other permanently dedicated open space from the stationary source when such
open space exists between the lot line of the stationary source and adjacent
property. When no such open space exists the common line between two parcels of
property shall be interpreted as the bounding lot line.
   (4)   CONSTRUCTION means any phase of the on-site erection, including
excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building or structure
which is designed to be used on that site.
   (5)   DAYTIME means the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any given
day.
   (6)   DECIBEL (dB) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal
to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
Micronewtons per square meter).
   (7)   EQUIVALENT SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL (Leg) means the time weighted, mean
square, A- weighted sound pressure level.
   (7.1)   LEGAL HOLIDAY means New Year's Day (January 1), Memorial Day
(observed date), Fourth of July (July 4), Labor Day (observed date),
Thanksgiving Day (observed date), and Christmas Day (December 25).
   (8)   MOBILE SOURCE means sound pressure created by motorized vehicles
designed to operate on public rights-of-way, including, but not limited to,
automobiles and aircraft.
   (9)   NOISE means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes
or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   (10)   NOISE DISTURBANCE means any sound which (a) endangers or injures the
safety or health of humans or animals, or (b) annoys or disturbs a reasonable
person of normal sensitivities, or (c) endangers or injures personal or real
property.
   (11)   PERMISSIBLE SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL means the equivalent sound pressure
level (Leg) averaged over an eight minute period of time.
   (12)   PERSON means any individual, association, partnership, or
corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or
instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state.
   (13)   PROPERTY means all contiguous land and any fixed or moveable object
on such land, under common ownership, irrespective of leasehold or other
interest.
   (14)   Reserved.
   (15)   SOUND means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of
a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B, or C as
specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound
level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971, or the latest approved revision thereof). If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
   (16)   SOUND LEVEL METER means an instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.
   (17)   SOUND PRESSURE means the instantaneous difference between the actual
pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as
produced by sound energy.
   (18)   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of
the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20
micropascals (20 x 10-6 N/m2). The sound pressure level is denoted Lp or SPL
and is expressed in decibels.
   (19)   SPECIAL EVENTS means all public and private school related activities
and all events where a special events permit is issued by the city of Dallas.
   (20)   STATIONARY SOURCE means the point of origin of any noise emitted from
a property. Multiple sources on a property shall be treated as a single source.
   (21)   TIME WEIGHTED means an established period of time during which the
sound pressure levels are averaged. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19995; 21186; 29424)
SEC. 51A-6.102.   NOISE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   A person may not conduct a use that creates a noise level that
exceeds the levels established in Subsections (b) through (e) or that exceeds
the background level by five dB(A), whichever is greater.
      (2)   A sound level meter that meets the standards of the American
Standards Association must be used to determine whether the level of noise
violates this section. The instrument must be maintained in good working order.
A calibration check should be made prior to and following any noise
investigation.
      (3)   Traffic, aircraft, and other background noises are not considered
in measuring noise levels except when the background noise level is being
determined.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, any identifiable portion of a planned
development (PD) district governed by a distinct set of use regulations is
considered to be a separate zoning district. If the PD district or a portion of
the district is limited to uses permitted in an expressly stated zoning
district, the PD district or portion of the district is considered to be that
zoning district; otherwise it is considered to be:
         (A)   an MF-3(A) zoning district if it is restricted to residential
uses and those nonresidential uses permitted in a residential district;
otherwise
         (B)   an IM zoning district if it allows one or more uses that are
only permitted in that district; otherwise
         (C)   an IR zoning district if it allows one or more uses that are
only permitted in a CS, LI, or IR district; otherwise
         (D)   if it does not fit into one of the above categories, an MU-
3 district.
      (5)   The requirements of this section do not apply to:
         (A)   mobile sources;
         (B)    construction/demolition activities regulated by
Chapter 30;
         (C)   special events for which a special events permit is issued under
Chapter 42A;
         (D)   sound generating equipment or apparatus to warn the public of an
emergency or for public safety;
         (E)   noise from use-related loading/ unloading operations that impact
residential areas when conducted during daytime hours; or
         (F)   the following activities, as long as they are conducted between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays as a
normal function of a permitted use and the equipment is maintained in proper
working condition:
            (i)   Lawn maintenance.
            (ii)   Repair of personal use vehicles.
            (iii)   Home repair of place of residence.
   (b)   Permissible sound pressure level in WR without a shopfront overlay and
residential districts.
      (1)   In a WR without a shopfront overlay or residential district, a
person may not conduct a use so as to create a sound pressure level on the
bounding lot line that exceeds the decibel limits contained in the following
table:
 
Maximum Permissible Daytime Decibel Limits at the Bounding Lot Line of a WR
without a Shopfront Overlay or Residential District
                         A Scale
Decibel Limit            56
(dBA re 0.0002 Microbar)
 
   (c)   Permissible sound pressure level in office, retail, mixed use,
multiple commercial, P(A), WR with a shopfront overlay, and WMU districts.
      (1)   In an office, retail, mixed use, multiple commercial, P(A), WR with
a shopfront overlay, or WMU district, a person may not conduct a use so as to
create a sound pressure level on the bounding lot line that exceeds the decibel
limits contained in the following table:
 
Maximum Permissible Daytime Decibel Limits at the Bounding Lot Line of an
Office, Retail, Mixed Use, Multiple Commercial, P(A), WR with a Shopfront
Overlay, or WMU District
                         A Scale
Decibel Limit            63
(dBA re 0.0002 Microbar)
 
      (2)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between a residential
district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51, and an office,
retail, mixed use, multiple commercial, P(A), WR with a shopfront overlay, or
WMU district may not exceed the decibel limits specified in Subsection (b)(1).
   (d)   Permissible sound pressure level in CS, LI, and IR districts.
      (1)   In a CS, LI, or IR district, a person may not conduct a use so as
to create a sound pressure level on the bounding lot line that exceeds the
decibel limits contained in the following table:
 
Maximum Permissible Daytime Decibel Limits at the Bounding Lot Line of a Use
in a CS, LI, or IR District
                         A Scale
Decibel Limit            65
(dBA re 0.0002 Microbar)
 
      (2)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between a residential
district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51, and a CS, LI, or
IR district may not exceed the decibel limits specified in Subsection (b)(1).
      (3)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between an office,
retail, mixed use, multiple commercial, or parking district, as defined both in
this chapter and in Chapter 51, and a CS, LI, or IR district may not exceed the
decibel limits specified in Subsection (c)(1).
   (e)   Permissible sound pressure level in an IM district.
      (1)   In an IM district, a person may not conduct a use so as to create a
sound pressure level on the bounding lot line that exceeds the decibel limits
contained in the following table:
 
Maximum Permissible Daytime Decibel Limits at the Bounding Lot Line of a Use
in the IM District
                         A Scale
Decibel Limit            70
(dBA re 0.0002 Microbar)
 
      (2)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between a residential
district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51, and an IM district
may not exceed the decibel limits specified in Subsection (b)(1).
      (3)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between an office,
retail, mixed use, multiple commercial, or parking district, as defined both in
this chapter and in Chapter 51, and an IM district may not exceed the decibel
limits specified in Subsection (c)(1).
      (4)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between an LC, CS,
LI, HC, I-1, I-2, or IR district and an IM district may not exceed the decibel
limits specified in Subsection (d)(1).
   (f)   Noise level adjustments.
      (1)   The maximum permissible noise levels contained in Subsections (b)
(1), (c)(1), (d)(1), and (e)(1) are subject to the following adjustments:
         Noise is present at nighttime   Subtract 7db
         Noise is impulsive (meter reading changes at a rate greater than 10
decibels per second    Subtract 7db
 
Noise Has An “On Time” Of No More And an “Off Time” Between Successive “On Times" Of At
Than:                                 Least:
0.5 Minutes                           ½    Hour /                                             Add 10
5.0 Minutes                           1    Hour /                                              Decibels
10.0 Minutes                          2    Hours /                                             to
                                                                                                  permitted
20.0 Minutes                          4    Hours /                                             level
 
      (2)   “Off-time” is when the level of the primary noise being measured
does not exceed that of the background noise by more than five dB(A). (Ord.
Nos. 19455; 19786; 19995; 27495; 29424; 30895)
SEC. 51A-6.103.   TOXIC AND NOXIOUS MATTER.
   These regulations are contained in
Chapters 5A and
19 of the Dallas City Code. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19995)
SEC. 51A-6.104.   GLARE.
   (a)   A person shall not conduct a use that has a visible source of
illumination that produces glare or direct illumination across a property line
of an intensity that creates a nuisance or detracts from the use or enjoyment
of adjacent property.
   (b)   Outside lights must be made up of a light source and reflector so that
acting together, the light beam is controlled and not directed across a
property line. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19995)
SEC. 51A-6.105.   VIBRATION.
   (a)   In an IR or IM district, a person may not conduct a use so as to
create earthborn vibrations on the bounding lot line that exceed the
displacement contained in the following table:
 
Allowable Displacement of Earthborn Vibrations in IR or IM Districts
Frequency in Cycles per Second Displacement In Inches
0 to 10                        0.0010
10 to 20                       0.0008
20 to 30                       0.0005
30 to 40                       0.0004
40 and over                    0.0003
 
   (b)   Reserved. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19995)
SEC. 51A-6.106.   ODORS, SMOKE, PARTICULATE MATTER AND OTHER AIR CONTAMINANTS.
   These regulations are contained in
Chapter 5A of the Dallas City Code. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19995)
SEC. 51A-6.107.   NONCONFORMANCE WITH THE ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   A use that is nonconforming with applicable environmental performance
standards may continue if it complies with any conditions imposed by the board,
the public health authority, or the environmental health officer for the
protection of the use and enjoyment of adjacent property or the public health.
   (b)   A use that is nonconforming with applicable environmental performance
standards may not be enlarged or remodeled if the enlargement or remodeling
would cause greater noncompliance with the environmental performance standards
than existed at the time the use became nonconforming. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19995)
SEC. 51A-6.108.   MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATION ORDINANCE.
   (a)   Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority provided
in:
      (1)   Subchapter W, “Municipal Setting Designations,” of Chapter 361,
“Solid Waste Disposal,” of the Texas Health and Safety Code;
      (2)   Paragraph (6) of Subsection (a) of Section 211.003, “Zoning
Regulations Generally,” of Chapter 211, “Municipal Zoning Authority,” of the
Texas Local Government Code;
      (3)   Subsection (a) of Section 212.003, “Extension of Rules to
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction,” of Chapter 212, “Municipal Regulation of
Subdivisions and Property Development,” of the Texas Local Government Code; and
      (4)   Section 401.005, “Restriction on Pumping, Extraction, and Use of
Groundwater,” of Chapter 401, “Water Control by Municipalities,” of the Texas
Local Government Code.
   (b)   Findings. The city council finds that:
      (1)   due to limited quantity and low quality, there are areas within the
city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction where the groundwater is not
valuable as a source for potable water;
      (2)   the city of Dallas does not utilize groundwater as a source for
public potable water;
      (3)   many properties in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction
are underlain with unused or unusable groundwater that has become contaminated
by historical on-site or off-site sources;
      (4)   municipal setting designation ordinances enable a state corrective
process for groundwater that protects human health and the environment while
also promoting the economic welfare of citizens;
      (5)   where the quality of the groundwater presents an actual or
potential threat to human health, and another source of potable water is
available, the use of designated groundwater beneath a designated property
should be prohibited to protect the public health, safety, and welfare;
      (6)   municipal setting designation ordinances should be considered only
after a process that allows for public notice and input; and
      (7)   the use of municipal setting designation ordinances within the city
of Dallas and its extraterritorial jurisdiction will encourage the economic
development of properties that have contaminated groundwater.
   (c)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   APPLICATION means the application submitted to the city for a
municipal setting designation ordinance.
      (2)   CONTAMINANT OF CONCERN means any contaminant that has the potential
to adversely affect ecological or human receptors due to its concentration,
distribution, or mode of toxicity.
      (3)   CRITICAL PROTECTIVE CONCEN- TRATION LEVEL means the lowest
protective concentration level for a contaminant of concern within a source
medium determined from all applicable human exposure pathways.
      (4)   DESIGNATED GROUNDWATER means groundwater that will be or is
prohibited from use as potable water by a municipal setting designation
ordinance.
      (5)   DESIGNATED PROPERTY means the property that will be or is subject
to a municipal setting designation ordinance. The designated property may cover
several platted lots or tracts of land.
      (6)   DIRECTOR means the managing director of the office of environmental
quality or the director's representative.
      (7)   GROUNDWATER means water below the surface of the earth.
      (8)   INGESTION PROTECTIVE CONCEN- TRATION LEVEL means the protective
concentration level for human ingestion for contaminants of concern in
groundwater established by the TCEQ under the Texas Risk Reduction Program,
determined as if there were no municipal setting designation ordinance.
      (9)   INGESTION PROTECTIVE CONCEN- TRATION LEVEL EXCEEDENCE ZONE means
the area where concentrations of contaminants of concern from sources on or
migrating from or through the designated property are greater than the
ingestion protective concentration level in groundwater, determined as if there
were no municipal setting designation ordinance.
      (10)   MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATION means a TCEQ designation authorized
by Subchapter W, “Municipal Setting Designations,” of Chapter 361, “Solid Waste
Disposal,” of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
      (11)   MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATION ORDINANCE means an ordinance adopted
pursuant to this section.
      (12)   NON-INGESTION PROTECTIVE CONCENTRATION LEVEL means the protective
concentration level for dermal contact or inhalation for contaminants of
concern in groundwater established by the TCEQ under the Texas Risk Reduction
Program.
      (13)   NON-INGESTION PROTECTIVE CONCENTRATION LEVEL EXCEEDENCE ZONE means
the area where concentrations of contaminants of concern from sources on or
migrating from or through the designated property are greater than the non-
ingestion protective concentration level in groundwater.
      (14)   POTABLE WATER means water that is used for irrigating crops
intended for human consumption, drinking, showering, bathing, or cooking
purposes.
      (15)   PROTECTIVE CONCENTRATION LEVEL means the non-site-specific
concentration of a contaminant of concern that the TCEQ has determined can
remain within the source medium and not result in a level that exceed the
applicable human health risk-based exposure limit or ecological protective
concentration level at the point of exposure for an exposure pathway.
      (16)   RESPONSE ACTION means the control, decontamination, or removal
from the environment of a hazardous substance or contaminant pursuant to
Subchapter W, “Municipal Setting Designations,” of Chapter 361, “Solid Waste
Disposal Act,” of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
      (17)   TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
      (18)   TCEQ APPLICATION means the application submitted to the TCEQ for
certification of a municipal setting designation.
      (19)   TO THE EXTENT KNOWN means information known by an applicant or
applicant’s agent after review of all public and private records and other
information sources available in the exercise of due diligence.
   (d)   Application.
      (1)   A person seeking a municipal setting designation ordinance shall
file 10 copies of an application and one copy of any supporting documentation
with the director.
      (2)   The application must be clear, complete, concise, correct, contain
only relevant information, and be organized to facilitate analysis. Maps must
be accurate and drawn to scale. Supporting documentation, if necessary, should
be submitted as a separate appendix to the application.
      (3)   A professional surveyor registered with the Texas Board of
Professional Surveying must certify that any property descriptions or maps with
metes and bounds descriptions are accurate.
      (4)   The application must be on the form required by the director and
contain the following information in the order listed:
         (A)   An executive summary of the application.
         (B)   The name, address, telephone number, and email of all
applicants, all property owners within the designated property, and any
representatives of the applicants or property owners.
         (C)   A legal description of the boundaries of the designated property
and a copy of the deed for the designated property.
         (D)   A site map showing:
            (i)   the location of the designated property;
            (ii)   the topography of the designated property as indicated on
publicly available sources;
            (iii)   the detected area of groundwater contamination;
            (iv)   the location of all soil sampling locations and all
groundwater monitoring wells;
            (v)   groundwater gradients, to the extent known, and direction of
groundwater flow;
            (vi)   the ingestion protective concentration level exceedence zone
for each contaminant of concern, to the extent known.
         (E)   A description of the current use, and, to the extent known, the
anticipated uses, of the designated property and properties within 500 feet of
the designated property.
         (F)   For each contaminant of concern within the ingestion protective
concentration level exceedence zone, to the extent known:
            (i)   A description of the ingestion protective concentration level
exceedence zone and the non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedence
zone, including a specification of the horizontal area and the minimum and
maximum depth below ground surface.
            (ii)   The level of contamination, the ingestion protective
concentration level, and the non-ingestion protective concentration level, all
expressed as mg/L units.
            (iii)   Its basic geochemical properties (for example, whether the
contaminant of concern migrates with groundwater, floats, or is soluble in
water).
         (G)   For each contaminant of concern within the designated
groundwater, to the extent known:
            (i)   A description of the ingestion protective concentration level
exceedence zone and the non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedence
zone, including a specification of the horizontal area and the minimum and
maximum depth below ground surface.
            (ii)   The level of contamination, the ingestion protective
concentration level, and the non-ingestion protective concentration level, all
expressed as mg/L units.
            (iii)   Its basic geochemical properties (for example, whether the
contaminant of concern migrates with groundwater, floats, or is soluble in
water).
         (H)   A table displaying the following information for each
contaminant of concern, to the extent known:
            (i)   the concentration level for soil and groundwater, the
ingestion protective concentration level, and the non-ingestion protective
concentration level, all expressed as mg/L units;
            (ii)   the critical protective concentration level without the
municipal setting designation, highlighting any exceedences;
            (iii)   the critical protective concentration level with the
municipal setting designation, highlighting any exceedences;
         (I)   A statement as to whether the plume of contamination is stable,
expanding, or contracting, with the basis for that statement. If this
information is not known, a statement of why the information is not known.
         (J)   A statement as to whether contamination on and off the
designated property without a municipal setting designation exceeds a
residential assessment level as defined in the Texas Risk Reduction Program, if
known, and the basis for that statement.
         (K)   A statement as to whether contamination on and off the
designated property with a municipal setting designation will exceed a
residential assessment level as defined in Texas Risk Reduction Program, if
known, and the basis for that statement.
         (L)   Identification of the points of origin of the contamination and
the persons responsible for the contamination, to the extent known;
         (M)   A description of any environmental regulatory actions that have
been taken within the past five years in connection with the designated
property, to the extent known.
         (N)   A listing of all existing state or U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency registrations, permits, and identification numbers that apply to the
designated property.
         (O)   A statement as to whether the designated property has been
submitted to the Texas Voluntary Cleanup Program (Section 361.601 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code) or similar state or federal program, and a description
of the designated property’s status in the program.
         (P)   A summary of any environmental site assessment reports filed
with the TCEQ regarding any site investigations or response actions that are
planned, ongoing, or completed related to the designated property.
         (Q)   A statement as to whether any public drinking water supply
system exists that satisfies the requirements of Chapter 341 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code and that supplies or is capable of supplying drinking
water to the designated property and property within one-half mile of the
designated property and the identity of each.
         (R)   The name and address of each owner of a state-registered private
water well within five miles of the designated property, along with:
            (i)   a map showing the location of each well and, to the extent
known, a notation of whether each well is used for potable water; and
            (ii)   a statement as to whether the applicant has provided notice
to each owner in compliance with Section 361.805 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code.
         (S)   The name and address of each retail public utility, as defined
in Section 13.002 of the Texas Water Code, that owns or operates a groundwater
supply well within five miles of the designated property, along with a
statement as to whether the applicant has provided notice as required by
Section 361.805 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
         (T)   A listing of each municipality, other than the city of Dallas,
with a boundary within one-half mile of the designated property, and a
statement as to whether the applicant has provided notice as required by
Section 361.805 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
         (U)   A listing of each municipality, other than the city of Dallas,
that owns or operates a groundwater supply well within five miles of the
designated property; and a statement as to whether the applicant has provided
notice as required by Section 361.805 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
         (V)   The following statement signed and sealed by a licensed
professional engineer or licensed professional geoscientist authorized to
practice in the state of Texas with expertise in environmental remediation:
To the best of my knowledge and belief, based upon a review of all public and
private records and other information sources available to me in the exercise
of due diligence, the opinions stated and conclusions made in this application
are supported by such information, and the technical and scientific information
submitted with the application is true, accurate, and complete. Based on such
review, the contaminants of concern from sources on the designated property or
migrating from or through the designated property more likely than not (do
exceed) or (do not exceed) a non-ingestion protective concentration level on
property beyond the boundaries of the designated property.
         (W)   If the licensed professional engineer or licensed professional
geoscientist determines that contaminants of concern from sources on the
designated property or migrating from or through the designated property more
likely than not do exceed a non-ingestion protective concentration level on
property beyond the boundaries of the designated property, then the applicant
must:
            (i)   Specify the name and address of the owner of each property.
            (ii)   Send a copy of the application to the owner of the property
with the notice of the public meeting.
            (iii)   Provide documentation that the designated property has been
included in a state or federal program that requires that the entire non-
ingestion protective concentration level exceedence zone be addressed to the
satisfaction of the agency administering the program, along with documentation
of the estimated time period in which it is to be addressed. An example of such
a program is the Texas Voluntary Cleanup Program (Section 361.601 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code).
            (iv)   Provide documentation upon completion of the state or
federal program showing that the non-ingestion protective concentration level
exceedences have been addressed to the satisfaction of the agency administering
the program.
         (X)   The following statement certified by the applicant and any
authorized representatives of the applicants listed in the application:
            I certify under penalty of law that this application and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in a manner
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gathered and evaluated the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the persons responsible for
gathering and evaluating the information, the information submitted is, to the
best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
         (Y)   A copy of the TCEQ application, if it has been filed, excluding
attachments.
         (Z)   The signature of the applicant and proof that the applicant has
the legal authority to restrict the use of the groundwater on the designated
property.
         (AA)   The initial filing fee.
         (BB)   Any other information that the director deems necessary.
      (5)   Within 30 days after submission of an application, the director
shall notify the applicant that the application is complete or notify the
applicant in writing of any deficiencies in the application and of any
additional documentation required. The applicant shall have 60 days from the
date of the deficiency letter to correct the deficiencies or submit additional
documentation. The director may, for good cause, extend the deadline to correct
or supplement the application. If the applicant fails to correct or supplement
the application within 60 days or the extended period, the application shall be
deemed withdrawn and the initial filing fee forfeited. No application shall be
deemed complete until all supporting documentation is supplied. The director
shall notify the applicant in writing when the application is deemed complete.
   (e)   Staff review.
      (1)   The director shall distribute a copy of the complete application to
the city attorney, the department of development services, the office of
management services, the park and recreation department, the department of
transportation and public works, and the Dallas water utilities department for
review and comment. The director shall also send a copy of the application to
the TCEQ.
      (2)   The city of Dallas is not responsible for conducting an
environmental risk assessment with respect to the application or the designated
property.
   (f)   Public meeting.
      (1)   The director shall conduct a public meeting within 45 days after
the application is deemed complete. The public meeting must be held at a
facility open to the public near the designated property.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the estimated cost of mailing notices and
advertising the public meeting, the director shall provide notification of the
public meeting in the following manner:
         (A)   The notice of the public meeting must include:
            (i)   the date, time, and location of the public meeting;
            (ii)   the identity of the applicant;
            (iii)   the location and legal description of the designated
property;
            (iv)   the purpose of a municipal setting designation; and
            (v)   the type of contamination identified in the designated
groundwater.
         (B)   The director shall publish notice of the public meeting in the
official newspaper of the city at least 15 days before the public meeting.
         (C)   The director shall mail notice of the public meeting at least 15
days before the date of the public meeting by depositing the notice properly
addressed and postage paid in the United States mail. The notice must be
written in English and Spanish. The applicant may not alter, change, amend, or
enlarge the application after notices for the public meeting have been mailed.
The director shall mail notice of the public meeting to:
            (i)   the applicant;
            (ii)   owners of real property within 2,500 feet of the designated
property as indicated by the most recent appraisal district records;
            (iii)   owners of state-registered private water wells within five
miles of the designated property, as indicated on the application, by certified
mail;
            (iv)   any retail public utility that owns or operates a
groundwater supply well within five miles of the designated property, as
indicated on the application, by certified mail;
            (v)   any municipality with a boundary within one-half mile of the
designated property, as indicated on the application, by certified mail;
            (vi)   any municipality that owns or operates a groundwater supply
well within five miles of the designated property, as indicated on the
application, by certified mail; and
            (vii)   the TCEQ.
         (D)   The director shall cause a copy of the application to be placed
on display at the public library closest to the designated property at least 15
days prior to the public meeting.
      (3)   The applicant, the licensed professional engineer or licensed
professional geoscientist who signed and sealed the application, or a licensed
professional engineer or licensed professional geoscientist who is familiar
with the application must be present at the public meeting. If the required
person is not present at the public meeting, the director may either deem the
application withdrawn and any fees forfeited or reschedule the public meeting
at the applicant’s expense.
      (4)   The purpose of the public meeting is to provide information to the
community about municipal setting designations in general and the application
in specific, allow the applicant to explain the application, allow proponents
and opponents to comment, and notify the community of the date of the city
council public hearing.
   (g)   City council public hearing.
      (1)   Prior to the public hearing, the director shall prepare a
recommendation as to whether the municipal setting designation ordinance should
be granted or denied, and listing any conditions that should be imposed.
         (A)   The director may recommend that the municipal setting
designation ordinance prohibit the use of the designated groundwater from
beneath public rights-of-way immediately adjacent to the designated property as
potable water.
         (B)   If the director, in his sole discretion, determines it is more
likely than not that a source of a contaminant of concern originated on the
designated property, and that the ingestion protective concentration level
exceedence zone or the non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedence
zone for that contaminant of concern extends to public rights-of-way
immediately adjacent to the designated property, the director may recommend
that the municipal setting designation ordinance include a condition that the
public rights-of-way immediately adjacent to the designated property be
included, at no additional cost to the city, in the TCEQ application.
         (C)   The director may recommend that the municipal setting
designation ordinance specify a time period for a state or federal program to
address the entire non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedence zone
originating from sources on the designated property or migrating from or
through the designated property.
      (2)   Upon payment of the additional processing fee, the director shall
provide notification of the public hearing in the following manner:
         (A)   The notice of the public hearing must include:
            (i)   the date, time, and location of the public hearing;
            (ii)   the identity of the applicant;
            (iii)   the location and legal description of the designated
property;
            (iv)   the purpose of a municipal setting designation; and
            (v)   the type of contamination identified in the designated
groundwater.
         (B)   The director shall publish notice of the public hearing in the
official newspaper of the city at least 15 days before the public hearing.
      (3)   The applicant, the licensed professional engineer or licensed
professional geoscientist who signed and sealed the application, or a licensed
professional engineer or licensed professional geoscientist who is familiar
with the application must be present at the public hearing. If the required
person is not present at the public hearing, the city council may either deny
the application or continue the public hearing.
      (4)   The city council shall deny the application if it finds that:
         (A)   the eligibility criteria of Section 361.803 of the Texas Health
and Safety Code have not been met;
         (B)   the municipal setting designation will have an adverse effect on
the current or future water resource needs or obligations of the city; or
         (C)   there is not a public drinking water supply system that
satisfies the requirements of Chapter 341 of the Texas Health and Safety Code
and that supplies or is capable of supplying drinking water to the designated
property and property within one-half mile of the designated property.
      (5)   In order to approve an application, the city council must adopt a
municipal setting designation ordinance that:
         (A)   states that the ordinance is necessary because the
concentrations of contaminants of concern exceed human ingestion protective
concentration levels;
         (B)   provides a legal description of the designated property;
         (C)   describes the designated groundwater, including the maximum
depth below ground surface of the designated groundwater (the maximum depth
shall not exceed 200 feet below ground surface unless the applicant
specifically requests and the ordinance specifically provides a greater depth);
         (D)   prohibits the use of the designated groundwater from beneath the
designated property as potable water;
         (E)   appropriately restricts other uses of or contact with the
designated groundwater;
         (F)   lists any reasonable and necessary conditions;
         (G)   indicates support of the applicant’s TCEQ application, with any
comments.
      (6)   The municipal setting designation ordinance may prohibit the use of
the designated groundwater from beneath public rights-of-way immediately
adjacent to the designated property as potable water.
      (7)   The municipal setting designation ordinance may include a condition
that the public rights-of-way immediately adjacent to the designated property
be included, at no additional cost to the city, in the TCEQ application.
      (8)   The municipal setting designation ordinance may specify a time
period for a state or federal program to address the entire non-ingestion
protective concentration level exceedence zone originating from sources on the
designated property or migrating from or through the designated property.
   (h)   Limitation on reapplication. If the applicant withdraws the
application, or if the city council denies the application, no further
applications may be accepted for that property for one year from the date of
the withdrawal or denial, unless the city council denies the application
without prejudice. The city council, by simple majority vote, may waive the one
year limitation if there are changed circumstances sufficient to warrant a new
application.
   (i)   Effect of municipal setting designation ordinance.
      (1)   The effect of a municipal setting designation ordinance is to
prohibit use of designated groundwater as potable water and thereby enable the
TCEQ to certify a municipal setting designation for the designated property. If
certified by the TCEQ, the municipal setting designation may limit the scope of
or eliminate the need for risk-based site investigations and response actions
pursuant to Section 361.808 of the Texas Health and Safety Code based on the
non-existence, elimination, or control of pathways for human ingestion of
contaminated groundwater.
      (2)   Any person owning, operating, or controlling the designated
property remains responsible for complying with all applicable federal and
state laws and regulations; all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city;
and all environmental regulations. The city council’s approval of a municipal
setting designation ordinance in itself does not change any environmental
assessment or cleanup requirements applicable to the designated property.
      (3)   Approval of a municipal setting designation ordinance shall not be
construed to subject the city of Dallas to any responsibility or liability for
any injury to persons or damages to property caused by any contaminant of
concern.
   (j)   Additional requirements following adoption of an ordinance.
      (1)   Within 30 days after adoption, the applicant shall provide the
director with an electronic file showing the location of the designated
property and the designated groundwater in a format compatible with the city’s
geographic information system.
      (2)   Within 60 days after adoption, the director shall file a certified
copy of the municipal setting designation ordinance in the deed records of the
county where the designated property is located.
      (3)   Within 60 days after adoption, the director shall send a certified
copy of the municipal setting designation ordinance to the applicant and the
TCEQ.
      (4)   The applicant shall provide the director with a copy of the
municipal setting designation certificate issued by the TCEQ pursuant to
Section 361.807 of the Texas Health and Safety Code within 30 days after
issuance of the certificate.
      (5)   The applicant shall provide the director with a copy of the
certificate of completion or other documentation issued by the TCEQ showing
that any site investigations and response actions required pursuant to Section
361.808 of the Texas Health and Safety Code have been completed to the
satisfaction of the TCEQ within the time period required. The director may, for
good cause, extend the time for submitting the documentation.
      (6)   Within the time period required in the municipal setting
designation ordinance for the state or federal program to address the entire
non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedence zone originating from
sources on the designated property or migrating from or through the designated
property, the applicant shall provide the director documentation that it has
been addressed to the satisfaction of the agency administering the program. If
it has not been addressed, the director may, for good cause, take any of the
following actions:
         (A)   allow additional time to address the non-ingestion protective
concentration level exceedence zone;
         (B)   request a review by the TCEQ or the agency administering the
program;
         (C)   recommend to the city council that the municipal setting
designation ordinance be repealed;
         (D)   request additional information or documentation from the
applicant; or
         (E)   pursue other actions that the director believes may be
warranted.
      (7)   The applicant shall notify the director in writing if the applicant
determines that notice is required to be sent to an owner of other property
beyond the boundaries of the designated property under Title 30 Texas
Administrative Code, Chapter 30, Section 350.55(b), providing the name of the
property owner, the property address, and a copy of the notice sent to the
property owner.
   (k)   Authority of the director. The director is authorized to:
      (1)   Enter public or private property to determine whether designated
groundwater is being used in violation of this section.
      (2)   Administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   (l)   Offenses. A person commits an offense if the person:
      (1)   uses designated groundwater as a potable water source or for a
purpose prohibited in the municipal setting designation ordinance;
      (2)   fails to provide the director with a copy of the municipal setting
designation certificate issued by the TCEQ pursuant to Section 361.807 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code within 30 days after issuance of the certificate;
      (3)   fails to provide the director with a copy of the certificate of
completion or other documentation issued by the TCEQ showing that any site
investigations and response actions required pursuant to Section 361.808 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code have been completed to the satisfaction of the
TCEQ within the time period required.
      (4)   fails to notify and provide documentation to the director within
the time period required in the municipal setting designation ordinance that
the entire non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedence zone
originating from sources on the designated property or migrating from or
through the designated property has been addressed to the satisfaction of the
state or federal agency administering the program. (Ord. Nos. 26001; 27697;
28073; 28424; 30239; 30654; 30994; 32002; 32864)
ARTICLE VII.
SIGN REGULATIONS.
Division 51A-7.100. Purposes and Definitions.
SEC. 51A-7.101.   PURPOSE.
   Signs use private land and the sight lines created by the public rights-of-
way to inform and persuade the general public by publishing a message. Except
as provided in Section
51A-7.207, this article provides standards for the erection and maintenance of
private signs. All private signs not exempted as provided below shall be
erected and maintained in accordance with these standards. The general
objectives of these standards are to promote health, safety, welfare,
convenience and enjoyment of the public, and, in part to achieve the following:
   (a)   SAFETY: To promote the safety of persons and property by providing
that signs:
      (1)   do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or
abandonment;
      (2)   do not obstruct fire fighting or police surveillance; and
      (3)   do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting
motorists, or by impairing the driver’s ability to see pedestrians, obstacles,
or other vehicles, or to ready traffic signs.
   (b)   COMMUNICATIONS EFFICIENCY: To promote the efficient transfer of
information in sign messages by providing that:
      (1)   businesses and services may identify themselves;
      (2)   customers and other persons may locate a business or service;
      (3)   no person or group is arbitrarily denied the use of the sight lines
from the public right-of-way for communication purposes; and
      (4)   persons exposed to signs are not so overwhelmed by the number of
messages presented that they cannot find the information they seek, and are
able to observe or ignore messages, according to the observer’s purpose.
   (c)   LANDSCAPE QUALITY AND PRESERVATION: To protect the public welfare and
to enhance the appearance and economic value of the landscape, by providing
that signs:
      (1)   do not interfere with scenic views;
      (2)   do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-way;
      (3)   do not constitute a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent and
contiguous property by their brightness, size, height, or movement;
      (4)   are not detrimental to land or property values; and
      (5)   contribute to the special character of particular areas or
districts within the city, helping the observer to understand the city and
orient himself with it. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 22061)
SEC. 51A-7.102.   DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, for purposes of this
article, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section:
   (1)   ADVERTISE means to attract, or to attempt to attract, the attention of
any person to any business, accommodations, goods, services, property, or
commercial activity.
   (1.1)   ATHLETIC FIELD SIGN means a sign that is designed, intended, or used
to inform or advertise to the spectators of an athletic event.
   (2)   ATTACHED SIGN means any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by,
any part of a building (such as a wall, roof, window, canopy, awning, arcade,
or marquee) that encloses or covers usable space.
   (3)   BUILDING means a structure which has a roof supported by columns,
walls or air for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals or
chattel.
   (4)   BUSINESS ZONING DISTRICT means:
      (A)   for purposes of interpreting Chapter 51: any zoning district
designated by this chapter as SC, GR, LC, CA-1, CA-2, HC, I-1, I-2, or I-3. Any
PD district is also included in this list, unless specifically excluded by its
provisions; and
      (B)   for purposes of interpreting
Chapter 51A: any zoning district designated by this chapter as CR, RR, CS,
industrial, central area, mixed use, or multiple commercial. Any PD district is
also included in this list, unless specifically excluded by its provisions.
   (5)   CHARACTER means any letter of the alphabet or numeral.
   (6)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
   (7)   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE means a message placed or caused to be placed
before the public by a person or business enterprise directly involved in the
manufacture or sale of the products, property, accommodations, services,
attractions, or activities or possible substitutes for those things which are
the subject of the message and that:
      (A)   refers to the offer for sale or existence for sale of products,
property, accommodations, services, attractions, or activities; or
      (B)   attracts attention to a business or to products, property,
accommodations, services, attractions, or activities that are offered or exist
for sale or for hire.
   (8)   COMMISSION means the city plan commission of the city of Dallas.
   (9)   DETACHED SIGN means any sign connected to the ground that is not an
attached, portable, or vehicular sign.
   (10)   Reserved.
   (11)   EFFECTIVE AREA means the following:
      (A)   For a detached sign, the area within a minimum imaginary rectangle
of vertical and horizontal lines that fully contains all extremities of the
sign, excluding its supports. This rectangle is calculated from an orthographic
projection of the sign viewed horizontally. The viewpoint for this projection
that produces the largest rectangle must be used. If elements of the sign are
movable or flexible, such as a flag or a string of lights, the measurement is
taken when the elements are fully extended and parallel to the plane of view.
      (B)   For an attached sign, the sum of the areas within minimum imaginary
rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which fully contains a
word. If a design, outline, illustration, or interior illumination surrounds or
attracts attention to a word, then it is included in the calculation of
effective area.
   (12)   ERECT means to build, attach, hang, place, suspend, fasten, affix,
maintain, paint, draw, or otherwise construct.
   (12.1) ESCARPMENT ZONE means the escarpment zone as defined in Section
51A-5.201.
   (13)   EXPRESSWAY means:
      (A)   the Dallas North Tollway;
      (B)   Interstate Highway 20;
      (C)   Interstate Highway 30;
      (D)   Interstate Highway 35E;
      (E)   Interstate Highway 45;
      (F)   Interstate Highway 635;
      (G)   U.S. Highway 67;
      (H)   U.S. Highway 75;
      (I)   U.S. Highway 80 east of Interstate Highway 30 to the city limits;
      (J)   U.S. Highway 175;
      (K)   State Highway 114;
      (L)   State Highway 183;
      (M)   Spur 408;
      (N)   Walton Walker Boulevard from Spur 408 north to the city limits, and
from Stemmons Freeway south to the city limits; and
      (O)   Woodall Rodgers Freeway.
   (13.1)   EXPRESSWAY SIGN means a sign that is wholly within 100 feet of an
expressway right-of-way and whose message is visible from the main traveled way
or that has been relocated adjacent to an expressway pursuant to Section
51A-7.307(f).
   (14)   FACADE means any separate face of a building, including parapet walls
and omitted wall lines, or any part of a building which encloses or covers
usable space. Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction, or in
the directions within 45¡ of one another, they are to be considered as part of
a single facade.
   (14.1)   GEOLOGICALLY SIMILAR AREAS means “geologically similar areas” as
defined in Section
51A-5.201.
   (15)   GOVERNMENT SIGN means a flag, insignia, legal notice, informational,
directional, traffic, or safe school zone sign which is legally required or
necessary to the essential functions of government agencies.
   (16)   HEIGHT, as applied to a sign, means the vertical distance between the
highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and
a level plane going through the nearest point of the vehicular traffic surface
of the adjacent improved public right-of-way, other than an alley. In the event
a sign is equidistant from more than one improved public right-of-way, none of
which are alleys, the highest point shall be used.
   (16.1)   HIGHWAY BEAUTIFICATION ACT (HBA) SIGN means a non-premise sign that
is within 660 feet of an expressway or new expressway right-of-way and whose
message is visible from the main traveled way.
   (17)   ILLUMINATED SIGN means any sign that is directly lighted by any
electrical light source, internal or external. This definition does not include
signs that are illuminated by street lights or other light sources owned by any
public agency or light sources that are specifically operated for the purpose
of lighting the area in which the sign is located rather than the sign itself.
   (18)   INTERSECTION means the junctions of the centerlines of any two public
rights-of-way, other than alleyways, crossing at grade, or, where the crossing
is separated at grade, the intersection is the point where expressway travel
pavements converge or diverge, or the point where any expressway interchange
ramp intersects the expressway travel pavement. For purposes of this
definition, the term “expressway” includes “new expressway.”
   (19)   LUMINANCE means the brightness of a sign or a portion thereof
expressed in terms of footlamberts. For purposes of this article, luminance is
determined by the use of an exposure meter calibrated to standards established
by the National Bureau of Standards and equipped with a footlambert scale.
   (20)   MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGN means a sign that directs vehicular or
pedestrian movement within or onto the premise on which the movement control
sign is located.
   (20.1)   NEW EXPRESSWAY means a divided highway with full control of access
whose original mainlanes in the city of Dallas were not entirely open to the
public as of July 1, 1999. The President George Bush Turnpike (State Highway
190) is a new expressway under this definition.
   (21)   NON-BUSINESS ZONING DISTRICT means any zoning district not designated
as a business district as defined in this section. Any parking district may be
specifically designated a business zoning district for the purposes of this
article.
   (22)   NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE means any message that is not a commercial
message.
   (23)   NON-PREMISE SIGN means any sign that is not a premise sign.
   (24)   OCCUPANCY means the purpose for which a building is used or intended
to be used. The term also includes the building or room housing such use.
   (25)   ONE SIGN means any number of detached signs structurally connected
above grade.
   (26)   PORTABLE SIGN means any sign that is not securely connected to the
ground in such a way that it cannot easily be moved from one location to
another and that is not an attached sign, vehicular sign, or a sign that refers
solely to the sale or lease of the premises.
   (27)   PREMISE means a lot or unplatted tract that is reflected in the plat
books of the building inspection division of the city. Refer to Section
51A-7.208 of this article.
   (28)   PREMISE SIGN means any sign the content of which relates to the
premises on which it is located, referring exclusively to the following:
      (A)   the name of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the
identification of the premises;
      (B)   accommodations, services, or activities offered or conducted on the
premises;
      (C)   products sold, other than incidentally, on the premises if no more
than 70 percent of the sign is devoted to the advertisement of products by
brand name or symbol; or
      (D)   the sale, lease, or construction of the premises.
   (29)   PRIVATE PROPERTY means any property not dedicated to public use,
except that “private property” does not include the following:
      (A)   A private street or alley.
      (B)   For purposes of interpreting Chapter 51, property on which a
utility and services use, post office, refuse transfer station, or sanitary
landfill is being conducted as a main use. For purposes of interpreting
Chapter 51A, property on which a utility and public service use listed in
Section
51A-4.212 is being conducted as a main use.
      (C)   A railroad right-of-way.
      (D)   A cemetery or mausoleum.
   (30)   PROTECTIVE SIGN means any sign that is commonly associated with
safeguarding the permitted uses of the occupancy, including, but not limited to
“bad dog,” “no trespassing,” and “no solicitors.”
   (30.1)   RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT means:
      (A)   an A(A), R(A), D(A), TH(A), CH, MF(A), or MH(A) zoning district; or
      (B)   any identifiable portion of a special purpose, conservation, or
planned development district (such as a subarea or subdistrict) that allows
single family, duplex, manufactured home, multifamily (multiple family), or
retirement housing uses.
   (30.2)   SAFE SCHOOL ZONE SIGN means a government sign:
      (A)   to be placed in the public right-of-way at the direction of a
school district;
      (B)   indicating a safe school hotline number, or an alcohol-free, gun-
free, or drug-free zone for a school; and
      (C)   erected to give notice of these zones in order to aid in the
enforcement of state or federal laws involving violation of certain crimes in
proximity of a school.
   (31)   SETBACK means the distance between a sign and the nearest public
right-of-way line. An alley is not considered to be public right-of-way for the
purpose of calculating a setback. Where a public way crosses a railroad right-
of-way, the setback is measured from the public right-of-way line extended
across the railroad right-of-way.
   (32)   SIGN means any device, flag, light, figure, picture, letter, word,
message, symbol, plaque, poster, display, design, painting, drawing, billboard,
wind device, or other thing visible from outside the premise on which it is
located and that is designed, intended, or used to inform or advertise to
persons not on that premise. This definition does not include:
      (A)   searchlights and landscape features that display no words or
symbols;
      (B)   works of art that are not designed, intended or used to advertise;
or
      (C)   temporary holiday decorations.
   (33)   SIGN SUPPORT means any pole, post, strut, cable, or other structural
fixture or framework necessary to hold and secure a sign, providing that said
fixture or framework is not imprinted with any picture, symbol or word using
characters in excess of one inch in height, nor is internally or decoratively
illuminated.
   (34)   SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGN means a sign temporarily supplementing the
permanent signs on a premise.
   (34.1) SUBDIVISION SIGN means a sign that identifies a single family,
duplex, or townhouse residential neighborhood or a business park.
   (35)   VEHICULAR SIGN means any sign on a vehicle moving along the ground or
on any vehicle parked temporarily, incidental to its principal use for
transportation. This definition does not include signs that are being
transported to a site of permanent erection.
   (36)   WIND DEVICE means any flag, banner, pennant, streamer, or similar
device that moves freely in the wind. All wind devices are considered to be
signs, and are regulated and classified as attached or detached, by the same
rules as other signs.
   (37)   WORD: For purposes of this article, each of the following is
considered to be one word:
         (A)   Any word in any language found in any standard unabridged
dictionary or dictionary of slang.
         (B)   Any proper noun or any initial or series of initials.
         (C)   Any separate character, symbol, or abbreviation, such as “&”,
“$”, “%”, and “Inc.”.
         (D)   Any telephone number, street number, or commonly used,
combination of numerals and/or symbols such as “$5.00", or “50%”.
         (E)   Any symbol or logo that is a registered trademark, but which
itself contains no word or character. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20343; 20379;
20927; 21186; 21401; 22061; 22392; 24232; 25047; 25455; 27516)
Division 51A-7.200. Provisions For All Zoning Districts.
SEC. 51A-7.201.   APPLICATION OF DIVISION.
   The provisions of this division shall apply to all signs in the city,
without regard to zoning. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20359)
SEC. 51A-7.202.   IMITATION OF TRAFFIC AND EMERGENCY SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall cause to be erected or maintained any sign using any
combination of forms, words, colors, or lights, which imitate standard public
traffic regulatory, emergency signs, or signals. (Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-7.203.   ROOF AND RIGHT-OF- WAY SIGNS.
   (a)   No sign shall be located on a roof or project over a building, except
as provided in Section
51A-7.305.
   (b)   No sign shall be located within or project over any public right-of-
way, or across the public right-of-way line extended across a railroad right-
of-way, except:
      (1)   Signs attached to and projecting no more than 18 inches from a
building wall legally located at or near the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Subdivision signs that comply with the requirements of Section
51A-7.303, “General Provisions Applicable to Signs in Business Zoning
Districts,” or Section
51A-7.402, “General Provisions Applicable to Signs in Non-Business Zoning
Districts.”
   (c)   Whenever any sign is located in violation of Subsection (b), it is
prima facie evidence that the person whose address or telephone number is
listed on the sign, or who is otherwise named, described, or identified on the
sign, is the person who committed the violation, either personally or through
an agent or employee.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the sign was
authorized or required by another city ordinance, state law, or federal law.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 20359; 20927; 25455; 26512)
SEC. 51A-7.204.   OTHER CODES NOT IN CONFLICT, APPLICABLE.
   All signs erected or maintained pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall be erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable state laws
and with the building code, electrical code, and other applicable ordinances of
the city. In the event of conflict between this article and other laws, the
most restrictive standard applies. (Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-7.205.   ATHLETIC FIELD SIGNS, PORTABLE SIGNS, SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGNS,
MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGNS, AND PROTECTIVE SIGNS.
   (a)   Non-premise athletic field signs.
      (1)   Non-premise athletic field signs are permitted only in special
provision sign districts.
      (2)   Non-premise athletic field signs must be on the same premise as the
athletic field and be attached to a scoreboard or the inside of a fence
surrounding the field. All signs must be oriented toward the field or its
seating areas.
      (3)   The cumulative effective area of all non-premise athletic field
signs attached to a scoreboard may not exceed 240 square feet.
   (b)   Portable signs. Portable signs, as that term is defined in Section
51A-7.102, are prohibited.
   (c)   Special purpose signs. Special purpose signs, whether attached or
detached, are prohibited in all business and non-business zoning districts
unless expressly authorized in a special provision sign district or a planned
development district.
   (d)   Reserved.
   (e)   Movement control signs. Movement control signs may be erected at any
occupancy or on any premise, other than a single-family or duplex premise, may
be attached or detached, and may be erected without limit as to number,
provided, that such signs shall comply with all other applicable requirements
of this article. No setback is required for a detached movement control sign
that does not exceed two feet in height. Unless granted a variance under the
provisions of Section
51A-7.703, the occupant of a premise may erect a movement control sign only if
the sign:
      (1)   does not exceed two square feet in effective area;
      (2)   conveys a message which directs vehicular or pedestrian movement
within or onto the premise on which the sign is located;
      (3)   contains no advertising or identification message; and
      (4)   has words that do not exceed four inches in height if the sign is
an attached sign.
   (f)   Protective signs. The occupant of a premise may erect not more than
two protective signs, in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Each sign must not exceed 100 square inches in effective area.
      (2)   Detached signs must not exceed two feet in height.
      (3)   Letters must not exceed four inches in height. (Ord. Nos. 19455;
20927; 21798; 21855; 21978; 24232; 27253; 33234)
SEC. 51A-7.206.   VEHICULAR SIGNS.
   Vehicular signs shall conform to the following restrictions:
   (a)   Vehicular signs shall contain no flashing or moving elements.
   (b)   Vehicular signs shall have no element with a luminance greater 200
footlamberts.
   (c)   Vehicular signs shall not project beyond the surface of a vehicle for
a distance in excess of 8 inches.
   (d)   Vehicular signs shall not be attached to a vehicle so that the
driver’s vision is obstructed from any angle.
   (e)   Signs, lights and signals used by authorized emergency vehicles shall
not be restricted.
   (f)   Vehicular signs shall conform to all the regulations for detached
signs if:
      (1)   the vehicular sign is so placed as to constitute a “sign” as
defined in Section
51A-7.102; and
      (2)   the vehicle upon which the sign is located is parked on other than
a temporary basis.
   (g)   The owner of the vehicle upon which a vehicular sign is placed is
responsible for ensuring that the provisions of this section are adhered to and
commits an offense if any vehicular sign on his vehicle violates this section.
If such a vehicleis found unattended or unoccupied, the registered owner of the
vehicle shall be presumed to be the actual owner. The records of the state
highway department or the county highway license department showing the name of
the registered owner of such vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence of
actual ownership by the named individual. (Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-7.207.   GOVERNMENT SIGNS.
   (a)   Except as provided by Subsection (b), nothing in this article shall be
construed to regulate the display of a government sign.
   (b)   Safe school zone signs must satisfy the following requirements.
      (1)   Safe school zone signs must be erected within 600 feet of a school.
      (2)   Safe school zone signs may not exceed five square feet in effective
area.
      (3)   No less than 80 percent of the effective area of a safe school zone
sign must be devoted to a governmental message.
      (4)   No more than 20 percent of the effective area of a safe school zone
sign may be devoted to the identification of a sponsor. (Ord. Nos. 19455;
20927; 22061; 22392)
SEC. 51A-7.208.   CREATION OF SITE.
   The building official shall not issue a permit for construction, erection,
placement, or maintenance of a sign until a site is established in one of the
following ways:
   (a)   A lot is part of a plat which is approved by the commission and filed
in the plat records of the appropriate county. All platted lots must have
frontage, through fee simple ownership, on a dedicated street.
   (b)   A lot was separately owned prior to September 11, 1929 or prior to
annexation or consolidation, and the lot has frontage, through fee simple
ownership, on a dedicated street.
   (c)   A lot is part of an industrial subdivision in which only streets,
easements, and blocks are delineated. The industrial subdivision must be
approved by the commission and filed in the plat records of the appropriate
county. No specific lot delineation is required, but yard, lot and space
requirements will be determined by property lines or lease lines.
   (d)   Tracts that are governed by a detached sign unity agreement in
accordance with Section
51A-7.213. (Ord. Nos. 19455, 21797)
SEC. 51A-7.209.   SIGNS DISPLAYING NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any sign that may
display a commercial message may also display a noncommercial message, either
in place of or in addition to the commercial message, so long as the sign
complies with other requirements of this article or other ordinances that do
not pertain to the content of the message displayed.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, or other
ordinance, any sign that may display one type of noncommercial message may also
display any other type of noncommercial message, so long as the sign complies
with other requirements of this article or other ordinances that do not pertain
to the content of the message displayed.
   (c)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate a sign that
contains primarily a political message for which a permit is not required under
Section
51A-7.602. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 25921)
SEC. 51A-7.210.   GENERAL MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Sign and sign supports must be maintained in a state of good repair
and neat appearance at all times.
   (b)   Revocation of permit.
      (1)   The building official shall revoke, in writing, the sign permit for
a sign if it has for a period of one year:
         (A)   displayed obsolete advertising matter;
         (B)   been without advertising matter; or
         (C)   been damaged in excess of 50 percent of the cost of replacement
of the sign.
      (2)   The owner of the sign is liable to the city for a civil penalty in
the amount of $200 a day for each calendar day that the sign is maintained
without a permit. The building official shall give written notice to the
property owner of the amount owed to the city in civil penalties, and shall
notify the city attorney of any unpaid civil penalty. The city attorney shall
collect unpaid civil penalties in a suit on the city’s behalf.
      (3)   The civil penalty provided for in Paragraph (2) is in addition to
any other enforcement remedy the city may have under city ordinances and state
law. (Ord. Nos. 20359; 24232)
SEC. 51A-7.211.   SIGNS ATTACHED TO STRUCTURES LOCATED ON BUILDINGS.
   (a)   Except as provided in Paragraph (b), no sign may be attached to the
following structures located on a building:
      (1)   Elevator penthouse or bulkhead.
      (2)   Mechanical equipment room.
      (3)   Cooling tower.
      (4)   Tank designed to hold liquid.
      (5)   Ornamental cupola or dome.
      (6)   Skylight.
      (7)   Clerestory.
      (8)   Visual screens which surround roof mounted mechanical equipment.
      (9)   Chimney and vent stacks.
      (10)   Amateur communications tower.
      (11)   Parapet wall over four feet.
      (12)   Storage facility.
   (b)   A sign may be attached to a structure located on a building if the
sign refers exclusively to:
      (1)   the identification of the premise; or
      (2)   a tenant that occupies in excess of 50 percent of the floor area of
the premise. (Ord. 20343)
SEC. 51A-7.212.   STREET CONSTRUCTION ALLEVIATION SIGNS.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
      (1)   CONSTRUCTION means major activity involving on-site excavation,
fabrication, erection, alteration, repair, or demolition that materially alters
or restricts access to a premise.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of transportation and public works of
the city or the director's designated representative, including but not limited
to the city's traffic engineer.
      (3)   ERECT means erect or maintain.
      (4)   OPERATOR means a person who causes a use or business to function or
puts or keeps a use or business in operation. A person need not have an
ownership interest in a use or business to be an “operator” of the use or
business for purposes of this section.
      (5)   OWNER includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
tenant in partnership, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, or lessee.
      (6)   SIGN means a sign authorized to be erected or maintained under this
section.
      (7)   STREET means a street more than 85 feet in width, including
frontage roads, if applicable. “Frontage Road” means a frontage, access, or
service road for a freeway or tollway.
   (b)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the city in order to lessen the congestion in
the streets; to improve communications efficiency by allowing businesses to
identify themselves and by helping customers to locate these businesses; to
promote the safety of persons and property by reducing the confusion created by
street construction; and to preserve landscape quality by imposing uniform
standards. This section is not intended to apply to temporary minor repairs to
streets.
   (c)   Authority to erect. In addition to any other signs permitted under
this chapter, up to two detached premise signs may be erected on a premise if:
      (1)   the premise contains at least one main use other than a single
family or duplex use;
      (2)   the premise has frontage along that portion of a street under
construction as defined in Subsection (a); and
      (3)   the director has given written notice in accordance with Subsection
(d).
   (d)   Notice required to be given by the director. Whenever the director
determines that construction of a street, as defined in this section, is
imminent, the director shall serve a written notice for the purpose of
authorizing the erection of signs in accordance with this section. The written
notice may be hand-delivered, sent by mail, or published in the official
newspaper of the city. In order to validly authorize a sign under this section,
the notice must:
      (1)   contain a reference to or copy of this section;
      (2)   describe with specificity the portion of the street that is or will
be under construction;
      (3)   contain estimated commencement and completion dates for the
construction; and
      (4)   contain a statement that no sign may be erected or maintained on a
premise:
         (A)   more than five days before the estimated construction
commencement date stated in the notice; or
         (B)   more than five days after the estimated construction completion
date stated in the notice.
   (e)   Time period when sign authorized. This section only authorizes signs
to be placed on property adjacent to that portion of a street described in the
notice given pursuant to Subsection (d) during the time period beginning five
days before the estimated construction commencement date stated in the notice
and ending five days after the estimated construction completion date stated in
the notice. No sign may be erected or maintained on a premise:
      (1)   more than five days before the estimated construction commencement
date stated in the notice; or
      (2)   more than five days after the estimated construction completion
date stated in the notice.
The director may change the time period for erecting and maintaining signs
under this section at any time by giving a new notice in accordance with
Subsection (d).
   (f)   Physical requirements for sign. All signs must comply with the
following paragraphs:
      (1)   No more than two signs may be erected on a premise. No more than
one sign may be erected at any motor vehicle entrance to a premise.
      (2)   No setback is required for a sign; however, no sign may be located
in a public right-of-way. If a sign is placed in a visibility triangle as
defined in Section
51A-4.602(d), it shall be a defense to prosecution under that section that the
sign does not constitute a traffic hazard.
      (3)   The sign must be visible from and oriented towards the street under
construction and have an arrow that directs motorists to a motor vehicle
entrance to the premise.
      (4)   The sign must be a square, with dimensions of four feet by four
feet. It must have a 3- inch border of white reflective sheeting or paint and a
reflective blue background. The text of the sign must consist of reflective
white characters. (Note: It is intended that the requirements of this paragraph
be strictly and precisely complied with.)
      (5)   No sign may exceed eight feet in height.
      (6)   No sign may be a portable sign unless the director determines that
the sign does not constitute a safety hazard.
   (g)   Criminal responsibility. If a sign violates this section and is not
otherwise authorized under the Dallas City Code, a person is criminally
responsible for a sign unlawfully erected or maintained if the person:
      (1)   erects or maintains the sign;
      (2)   is an owner or operator of a use or business to which the sign
refers; or
      (3)   owns part or all of the land on which the sign is located.
   (h)   City may remove signs. The City of Dallas may remove any sign without
liability if the director determines that the sign constitutes a safety hazard,
or if the sign does not comply with this section; however, the City shall not
be liable for failure to remove a sign. (Ord. Nos. 20728; 20927; 25047; 28424;
30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 51A-7.213.   DETACHED SIGN UNITY AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   The building official may authorize the dissolution of common boundary
lines between lots for the limited purpose of allowing those lots to be
considered one premise for the erection of detached signs, provided that a
written agreement is executed in accordance with this section on a form
provided by the city.
   (b)   The agreement must:
      (1)   contain legal descriptions of the properties sharing the common
boundary line(s);
      (2)   set forth adequate consideration between the parties;
      (3)   state that all parties agree that the properties sharing the common
boundary line(s) may be collectively treated as one lot for the limited purpose
of erecting detached signs;
      (4)   state that the dissolution of the common boundary line(s) described
in the agreement is only for the limited purpose of allowing the erection of
detached signs, and that actual lines of property ownership are not affected;
      (5)   state that it constitutes a covenant running with the land with
respect to all properties sharing the common boundary line(s);
      (6)   state that all parties agree to defend, indemnify, and hold
harmless the city of Dallas from and against all claims or liabilities arising
out of or in connection with the agreement;
      (7)   state that it shall be governed by the laws of the state of Texas;
      (8)   state that it may only be amended or terminated by a subsequent
written instrument that is:
         (A)   signed by an owner of property sharing the common boundary line
(s) or by a lienholder, other than a taxing entity, that has either an interest
in a property sharing the common boundary line(s) or an improvement on such a
property;
         (B)   approved by the building official;
         (C)   approved as to form by the city attorney; and
         (D)   filed and made a part of the deed records of the county or
counties in which the properties are located;
      (9)   be approved by the building official and be approved as to form by
the city attorney;
      (10)   be signed by all owners of the properties sharing the common
boundary line(s);
      (11)   be signed by all lienholders, other than taxing entities, that
have either an interest in the properties sharing the common boundary line(s)
or an improvement on those properties; and
      (12)   be filed and made a part of the deed records of the county or
counties in which the properties are located.
   (c)   The building official shall approve an agreement if all properties
governed by the agreement fully comply with the regulations in this article.
   (d)   An agreement shall not be considered effective until a true and
correct copy of the approved agreement is filed in the deed records in
accordance with this section and two file-marked copies of the agreement are
filed with the building official.
   (e)   An agreement may only be amended or terminated by a written instrument
that is executed in accordance with this subsection on a form provided by the
city. The instrument must be:
      (1)   signed by an owner of property sharing the common boundary line(s)
or by a lienholder, other than a taxing entity, that has either an interest in
a property sharing the common boundary line(s) or an improvement on such a
property;
      (2)   approved by the building official;
      (3)   approved as to form by the city attorney; and
      (4)   filed and made a part of the deed records of the county or counties
in which the properties are located.
The building official shall approve an instrument amending or terminating an
agreement if all properties governed by the agreement fully comply with the
regulations in this article. The amending or terminating instrument shall not
be considered effective until it is filed in the deed records in accordance
with this subsection and two file-marked copies are filed with the building
official.
   (f)   No detached non-premise sign may be erected or maintained on a
property that is described in an agreement executed in accordance with this
section. (Ord. 21797)
SEC. 51A-7.214.   CITY KIOSKS.
   (a)   In this section, CITY KIOSK means a multi-sided structure for the
display of premise signs, non-premise signs, informational signs, or way-
finding maps pursuant to a city-approved kiosk program.
   (b)   City kiosks may be located in any part of the city authorized by the
city-approved kiosk program, including all special provision sign districts,
except that city kiosks may not be located in the Victory Sign District
(including the “TXU tract” generally bounded by the Victory Sign District on
the north, east, and south and bounded by I-35 on the west) or the West Village
Sign District. City kiosks in special provision sign districts are not required
to comply with the provisions of the special provision sign district, but must
comply with the provisions of the city-approved kiosk program. Kiosks in
special provision sign districts that are not part of the city-approved kiosk
program remain subject to the provisions of the special provision sign
district.
   (c)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate the display of
signs on city kiosks, except that city kiosks must comply with the city-
approved kiosk program. (Ord. 26082)
SEC. 51A-7.215.   ANIMAL SHELTER SIGN.
   (a)   In this section, ANIMAL SHELTER SIGN means a sign located on the same
lot as a city-operated animal shelter and used for the display of premise and
non-premise messages.
   (b)   Except as provided in this section, an animal shelter sign must comply
with this article.
   (c)   The animal shelter sign:
      (1)   may not be a Highway Beautification Act (HBA) sign;
      (2)   may not exceed 50 feet in height measured from grade;
      (3)   must be located at least 1,500 feet from a residential district;
      (4)   may not have an effective area in excess of 936 square feet;
      (5)   must have at least one static panel with a minimum effective area
of 128 square feet that identifies the animal shelter; and
      (6)   must have a changeable message portion of the sign that uses LED/
LCD technology with a maximum effective area of 672 square feet. The message or
picture on the changeable message portion of the sign may not change more than
once every eight seconds. At least 15 percent of the advertising time during
each advertising cycle on the changeable message portion of the sign must
display photos of animals available for adoption at the animal shelter or
provide information about events being held or services being offered at the
animal shelter.
   (d)   An animal shelter sign may not be relocated to another premise. (Ord.
27097)
SEC. 51A-7.216.   DIGITAL DISPLAY ON CERTAIN PREMISE SIGNS.
   (a)   Effective area. The effective area of digital display may not exceed
50 square feet or 50 percent of the total effective area of the sign as allowed
in the provisions for the respective zoning district, whichever is greater.
   (b)   Display.
      (1)   All digital displays signs must automatically adjust the sign
brightness so that the brightness level of the sign is no more than 0.3
footcandles over ambient light conditions at a distance that is equal to the
square root of the effective area multiplied by 100 from the sign. A digital
display sign must be equipped with both a dimmer control and a photocell that
automatically adjusts the display's intensity according to natural ambient
light conditions.
      (2)   A digital display may not increase the light level on a lot in a
residential district over ambient conditions without the digital display,
measured in footcandles at the point closest to the sign that is five feet
inside the residential lot and five feet above the ground.
      (3)   Before the issuance of a digital display sign permit, the applicant
shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that:
         (A)   the light intensity has been factory programmed to comply with
the maximum brightness and dimming standards in this subsection; and
         (B)   the light intensity is protected from end-user manipulation.
   (c)   Change of message. Changes of message must comply with the following:
      (1)   Each message must be displayed for a minimum of 20 seconds in
business zoning districts and 20 minutes in non-business zoning districts.
      (2)   Changes of message must be accomplished within two seconds.
      (3)   Changes of message must occur simultaneously on the entire sign
face.
      (4)   No flashing, dimming, or brightening of message is permitted except
to accommodate changes of message.
   (d)   Compliance. All nonconforming digital display premise signs must come
into compliance with Paragraphs (b)(1)-(2) and Subsection (c) by August 26,
2016. The owner of a digital display premise sign may appeal to the board of
adjustment for a later compliance date at any time up to the compliance date in
this subsection if the owner will not be able to recover his investment in the
sign (up to the date of nonconformance) by the compliance date in this
subsection. The fee for the appeal of the compliance date is the same as the
fee for a nonresidential special exception before the board of adjustment as
set forth in Chapter 51A. (Ord. 29839)
Division 51A-7.300. Provisions For Business Zoning Districts.
SEC. 51A-7.301.   APPLICATION OF DIVISION.
   The provisions of this division apply to all signs in business zoning
districts, except that attached signs within 100 feet of either private
property in a non-business zoning district or a public park of more than one
acre shall be governed by the provisions of Division
51A-7.400 of this article. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20007; 20379; 25786)
SEC. 51A-7.302.   RESERVED.
(Ord. 25786)
SEC. 51A-7.303.   GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SIGNS IN BUSINESS ZONING
DISTRICTS.
   (a)   No illuminated sign which has an effective area of 400 square feet or
less shall have a luminance greater than 300 footlamberts, nor shall any such
sign have a luminance greater than 300 footlamberts for any portion of the sign
within a circle two feet in diameter. No illuminated sign which has an
effective area greater than 400 square feet shall have a luminance greater than
200 footlamberts, nor shall any such sign have a luminance greater than 200
footlamberts for any portion of the sign within a circle of two feet in
diameter. The restrictions of luminance in this section shall be determined
from any other premise or from any public right-of-way other than an alley.
   (b)   No illuminated sign nor any illuminated element of any sign, may turn
on or off, or change its brightness, if:
      (1)   the change of illumination produces an apparent motion of the
visual image, including but not limited to illusion of moving objects, moving
patterns or bands of light, expanding or contracting shapes, rotation or any
similar effect of animation;
      (2)   the change of message or picture occurs more often than once each
three seconds for those portions of a sign which convey time or temperature, or
once each 20 seconds for all other portions of a sign; or
      (3)   a portion of the sign, within a circle of two feet in diameter, has
a luminance greater than 200 footlamberts when all elements of the sign are
fully and steadily illuminated.
   (c)   No sign or any part of any sign may move or rotate at a rate more
often than once each 10 seconds, or change its message at a rate more often
than once each 20 seconds, with the exception of wind devices, the motion of
which is not restricted. No sign may move, rotate or change its message at any
rate if any of its elements or any illuminated portion within a two-foot circle
has a luminance greater than 200 footlamberts.
   (d)   Subdivision signs are subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   Subdivision signs are exempt from compliance with the provisions of
Section
51A-7.304, “Detached Signs,” of this article.
      (2)   The maximum effective area of each subdivision sign may not exceed
40 square feet.
      (3)   The maximum number of subdivision signs permitted is two signs per
street entrance into the business park.
      (4)   Subdivision signs may not project more than three inches from the
surface of the structure.
      (5)   Subdivision signs may not be internally illuminated.
      (6)   The highest part of a subdivision sign may not exceed six feet in
height.
      (7)   Subdivision signs must be landscape signs or monument signs. For
purposes of this subsection, “landscape sign” means a sign that is part of a
single landscape design that creates a base for the sign in conjunction with a
retaining wall or an open space created with the use of water or planting
material, and “monument sign” means a detached sign applied directly onto a
ground-level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation
between the sign and the ground.
      (8)   Subdivision signs may be located within the public right-of-way if
a license for use of the public right-of-way is obtained pursuant to the
requirements of the Dallas City Code.
      (9)   Subdivision signs may only contain the name of the business park.
      (10)   The application for a subdivision sign permit must be supported by
the owner of property abutting the proposed subdivision sign, if any, and two-
thirds of the property owners within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision sign.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19704; 20359; 20495; 20927; 24232; 25455)
SEC. 51A-7.304.   DETACHED SIGNS.
   Detached signs are permitted in business zoning districts as follows:
   (a)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   EFFECTIVE-AREA-TO-HEIGHT RATIO means the ratio of the effective
area of a sign to its height. For example, a sign with an effective area of 50
square feet and a height of 25 feet has an effective-area-to-height ratio of 2:
1.
      (2)   MONUMENT SIGN means a detached sign applied directly onto a ground-
level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation between
the sign and the ground, or mounted on a fence.
      (3)   MULTI-TENANT SIGN means a detached sign that advertises two or more
businesses on a single premise.
      (4)   NON-MONUMENT SIGN means a detached sign that is not a monument
sign.
      (5)   SETBACK-TO-HEIGHT SLOPE is a plane projected upward and inward from
a point of beginning located at the property line 7.5 feet above a level plane
going through the nearest point of the vehicular traffic surface of the
adjacent improved public right-of-way other than an alley and extending
infinitely, as illustrated below. A .5:1 setback-to-height slope moves one-half
foot away from the point of beginning for every one foot the slope rises,
resulting in a 63.4349 degree slope. A 1:1 setback-to-height slope moves one
foot away from the point of beginning for every one foot the slope rises,
resulting in a 45 degree slope. A 2:1 setback-to-height slope moves two feet
away from the point of beginning for every one foot the slope rises, resulting
in a 26.5651 degree slope.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-103.png]
      (6)   SINGLE-TENANT SIGN means a detached sign that advertises only one
business.
      (7)   UNITY-AGREEMENT SIGN means a detached sign erected under a detached
sign unity agreement pursuant to Section
51A-7.213.
   (b)   General regulations applicable to all detached signs.
      (1)   Except as provided in Section
51A-7.306(a), detached signs must be premise signs.
      (2)   No portion of a detached sign may be located above a residential
proximity slope. See Section
51A-4.412.
      (3)   Non-monument signs are not allowed within 250 feet of either
private property in a non-business zoning district or a public park of more
than one acre. The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to this
provision when, in the opinion of the board, the special exception will not
adversely affect neighboring property.
      (4)   Only one detached sign is allowed per street frontage other than
expressways. One expressway sign is allowed for every 450 feet of frontage or
fraction thereof on an expressway.
      (5)   Detached signs on the same premise must be at least 200 feet apart.
      (6)   All of the premises operating under a detached sign unity agreement
may together have only one unity-agreement sign per street frontage, but each
premise operating under that detached sign unity agreement may have one single-
tenant monument sign.
      (7)   Detached signs may not be placed in a visibility triangle. See
Section
51A-4.602(d).
      (8)   The support structure for monument signs must be constructed of
concrete, metal, or masonry; wood is prohibited. The board of adjustment may
grant a special exception to this provision when, in the opinion of the board,
an alternative material will be as durable as concrete, metal, or masonry. This
provision does not control the material used for the sign itself.
      (9)   Measurements of distance under this section are taken radially
unless otherwise specified. “Radial” measurement is measurement taken along the
shortest distance between a sign or proposed sign location and the nearest
point of the object.
      (10)   The effective area of a sign attached to a fence is the effective
area of the sign only, not the area of the entire fence.
   (c)   Regulations applicable to single-tenant signs.
      (1)   Setback.
         (A)   Monument signs. There is no minimum setback for a single-tenant
monument sign.
         (B)   Non-monument signs. The minimum setback for a single-tenant non-
monument sign is 15 feet.
      (2)   Height. The height of a single-tenant sign may not exceed a 2:
1 setback-to-height slope or 35 feet, whichever is less.
      (3)   Effective area. The effective area of a single-tenant sign may not
exceed an 8:1 effective-area-to-height ratio or 200 square feet, whichever is
less.
   (d)   Regulations applicable to multi-tenant signs.
      (1)   Setback.
         (A)   Monument signs. The minimum setback for a multi-tenant monument
sign is five feet.
         (B)   Non-monument signs. The minimum setback for a multi-tenant non-
monument sign is 15 feet.
      (2)   Height. The height of a multi-tenant sign may not exceed a 1:
1 setback-to-height slope or 35 feet, whichever is less.
      (3)   Effective area.
         (A)   Monument signs. The effective area of a multi-tenant monument
sign may not exceed a 10:1 effective-area-to-height ratio or 200 square feet,
whichever is less.
         (B)   Non-monument signs. The effective area of a multi-tenant non-
monument sign may not exceed a 5:1 effective-area-to-height ratio or 200 square
feet, whichever is less.
      (4)   Address required. A multi-tenant sign must contain the address of
the premise.
   (e)   Regulations applicable to unity-agreement signs.
      (1)   Applicability. This subsection controls over Subsections (c) and
(d) of this section.
      (2)   Setback.
         (A)   Monument signs. The minimum setback for a unity-agreement
monument sign is five feet.
         (B)   Non-monument signs. The minimum setback for a unity-agreement
non-monument sign is 15 feet.
      (3)   Height. The height of a unity-agreement sign may not exceed a .5:
1 setback-to-height slope or 35 feet, whichever is less.
      (4)   Effective area. The effective area of a unity-agreement sign may
not exceed a 10:1 effective-area-to-height ratio or 200 square feet, whichever
is less.
   (f)   Regulations applicable to expressway signs.
      (1)   Applicability. This subsection controls over Subsections (c), (d),
and (e) of this section.
      (2)   Setback, height, and effective area generally.
         (A)   An expressway sign with a minimum setback of five feet may have
a maximum height of 20 feet and maximum effective area of 50 square feet.
         (B)   An expressway sign with a minimum setback of 15 feet may have a
maximum height of 30 feet and a maximum effective area of 150 square feet.
         (C)   An expressway sign with a minimum setback of 25 feet may have a
maximum height of 40 feet and a maximum effective area of 400 square feet.
         (D)   The height of an expressway sign may be extended to 50 feet, or
to 30 feet above the nearest point on the nearest travel surface of the nearest
expressway or new expressway, whichever is higher, if the total height of the
sign does not exceed 60 feet above the ground at the base of the sign.
      (3)   Setback, height, and effective area of unity-agreement expressway
signs.
         (A)   A unity-agreement expressway sign with a minimum setback of five
feet may have a maximum height of 30 feet and a maximum effective area of 150
square feet.
         (B)   A unity-agreement expressway sign with a minimum setback of 15
feet may have a maximum height of 40 feet and a maximum effective area of 250
square feet.
         (C)   A unity-agreement expressway sign with a minimum setback of 25
feet may have a maximum height of 50 feet and a maximum effective area of 450
square feet.
         (D)   The height of a unity-agreement expressway sign may be extended
to 50 feet, or to 30 feet above the nearest point on the nearest travel surface
of the nearest expressway or new expressway, whichever is higher, if the total
height of the sign does not exceed 60 feet above the ground at the base of the
sign. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20927; 21186; 21455; 21797; 21798; 24232; 25786; 25814;
26082; 29024)
SEC. 51A-7.305.   ATTACHED SIGNS.
   Attached signs are permitted in business areas in accordance with the
following provisions:
   (a)   Except as otherwise permitted under Sections 51-4.213(25), 51-4.217(b)
(5),
51A-4.206(1), and
51A-4.217(b)(9), all attached signs must be premise signs or convey a
noncommercial message.
   (b)   All signs and their words shall be mounted parallel to the building
surface to which they are attached, and shall project no more than 18 inches
from that surface except as provided in Subsection (e) below.
   (c)   On the primary facade, the combined effective area of all attached
signs may not exceed 25 percent of the total area of the primary facade. On
each secondary facade, the combined effective area of all attached signs may
not exceed 15 percent of the total area of that secondary facade. As applied to
a building with multiple occupants, the facade area of each use with a separate
certificate of occupancy shall be treated as a separate facade. On any building
facade, there may be a maximum of eight words which contain any character of a
height equal to or exceeding four inches and pertain to any premise or any non-
residential occupancy. Words consisting of characters less than four inches
high may be used without limit.
   (d)   The combined effective area of all signs attached to any window or any
glass door may not exceed 15 percent of the area of that window or that glass
door. Signs in the upper two-thirds of a window or glass door are prohibited.
Signs attached to a window or a glass door must be brought into compliance with
this provision by September 25, 2008.
   (e)   Attached signs may project more than 18 inches from vertical building
planes as follows:
      (1)   Any premise or any non-residential occupancy may erect not more
than one attached sign projecting up to a maximum of four feet from a vertical
building plane, but not above the roof, provided that the premise or occupancy
maintains no detached sign on the premise, and that the sign does not exceed 20
square feet in effective area, and that no part of the sign descends closer to
grade than 10 feet, nor projects into or over any public right-of-way.
      (2)   On any premise or non-residential occupancy, a sign may be erected
at the eaves or edge of the roof or on a parapet or edge of a canopy; provided,
that the sign is parallel to the vertical building plane, and does not project
more than four feet above the surface to which it is attached.
      (3)   Any premise or non-residential occupancy may erect one attached
sign projecting up to a maximum of four feet from a vertical building plane if:
         (A)   the sign does not exceed 60 square feet in effective area;
         (B)   no single face of a three-dimensional sign exceeds 60 square
feet;
         (C)   the attached sign is not above the highest point of a facade;
         (D)   no part of the sign descends closer to grade than 10 feet;
         (E)   the sign does not project into or over any public right-of-way;
and
         (F)   the contents of the sign are limited to a registered trademark
or logo that contains no word or character.
   (f)   Words may be attached to machinery or equipment which is necessary or
customary to the business, including but not limited to devices such as
gasoline pumps, vending machines, ice machines, etc., provided that words so
attached refer exclusively to products or services dispensed by the device,
consist of characters no more than four inches in height, and project no more
than one inch from the surface of the device. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20927; 21978;
24232; 27244; 27253; 29024)
SEC. 51A-7.306.   DETACHED NON- PREMISE SIGNS PROHIBITED GENERALLY.
   (a)   No person may erect or maintain a detached non-premise sign in the
city. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the sign:
      (1)   is a nonconforming use;
      (2)   is a special purpose sign, movement control sign, protective sign,
or vehicular sign as defined in this article;
      (3)   is a sign that contains primarily a political message for which a
permit is not required under Section
51A-7.602;
      (4)   is in a special provision sign district or planned development
district and expressly authorized by and in full compliance with the ordinances
establishing and amending that district;
      (5)   was lawfully relocated pursuant to Section
51A-7.307;
      (6)   is expressly authorized by and in full compliance with a valid
order of the court or board of adjustment; or
      (7)   is a sign adverting an occasional sale (garage sale) pursuant to
Sections 51-4.217(b)(5) or
51A-4.217(b)(9).
   (b)   A lawfully erected detached non-premise sign in a special provision
sign district or planned development district shall be considered a legal (as
opposed to non-conforming) use if it is expressly authorized by and in full
compliance with the ordinances establishing and amending that district. (Ord.
Nos. 19455; 19766; 19786; 20360; 20927; 21663; 22392; 24232; 25921; 29024)
SEC. 51A-7.307.   RELOCATION OF CERTAIN DETACHED NON-PREMISE SIGNS.
   (a)   In general. Non-conforming detached non-premise signs located on or
overhanging a parcel of land acquired by a governmental entity may be relocated
subject to the restrictions in this section.
   (b)   Application. The owner of the sign and the governmental entity must
sign a relocation application. The owner of the sign must submit the relocation
application within one year after the sign is actually removed from the parcel
of land pursuant to a request of the governmental entity. The relocation must
be completed within one year after approval of the relocation application.
   (c)   Compliance required. Except as provided in this section, relocated
signs must fully comply with the size, height, spacing, setback, and other
restrictions in this article.
   (d)   Relocation to remainder.
      (1)   All relocated signs must be relocated on the remainder of the tract
from which the parcel of land was acquired unless relocating to the remainder
is not possible for reasons such as:
         (A)    there is no remainder;
         (B)   the sign owner is unable to obtain an agreement from the
property owner of the remainder; or
         (C)   the remainder is not of sufficient size or suitable
configuration to allow the relocated sign to be as visible as the original sign
from the nearest main traveled thoroughfare.
      (2)   Signs relocated to a remainder may not be less conforming than the
original sign, but must comply with the spacing requirements of Paragraphs (e)
(12) and (e)(13).
      (3)    All signs located on a railroad right-of-way must be relocated
within that same railroad right-of-way. Relocated signs must be relocated
within 500 feet of their original location unless possible locations are not of
a suitable size or configuration or are otherwise unusable. Signs that have
been relocated within 500 feet of their original location may not be less
conforming than the original sign. If a sign cannot be relocated within 500
feet of its original location, it can be relocated anywhere in that same
railroad right-of-way, but must fully comply with the size, height, spacing,
setback, and other restrictions in this article.
   (e)   Restrictions on relocations.
      (1)   A sign may not be relocated within 1,000 feet of a new expressway.
      (2)   A sign may not be relocated within 100 feet of an expressway unless
it was originally located within 100 feet of an expressway or new expressway.
      (3)   A sign message on a relocated sign may not be oriented to be
visible from a new expressway.
      (4)   A sign message on a relocated sign may not be oriented to be
visible from an expressway unless it was originally oriented to be visible from
an expressway or new expressway.
      (5)   A non-HBA sign must be relocated at least 500 feet from another
non-premise sign.
      (6)   An HBA sign must be relocated at least 500 feet from another non-
premise sign on the same side of the expressway.
      (7)   No more than one relocation is permitted between the sites or
former sites of non-premise signs that existed on April 26, 2000 unless the
distance between the sites or former sites in feet equals or exceeds the number
of relocated signs multiplied by 1,500.
      (8)   A relocated sign may not have a greater effective area than it had
at its original location, except that the effective area of multiple relocated
signs may be combined, provided that:
         (A)   the overall number of signs within the city is reduced;
         (B)   the effective area of the combined sign is equal to or less than
the sum of the effective area of the individual signs; and
         (C)   except as provided in Paragraph (g)(3), the effective area does
not exceed 400 square feet for a combined non-expressway sign or 672 square
feet for a combined expressway sign.
For purposes of this paragraph, the effective area of a relocated sign does not
include the sign skirting if no part of the sign message appears on the
skirting other than the name of the sign company.
      (9)   Two one-faced signs may be relocated to create one two-faced sign,
provided that:
         (A)   the two faces are oriented within 60 degrees of one another; and
         (B)   except as provided in Paragraph (g)(3), the effective area does
not exceed 400 square feet for a combined non-expressway sign or 672 square
feet for a combined expressway sign.
This paragraph controls over Paragraphs (5) and (6).
      (10)   All relocated signs must be built to comply with the building
code.
      (11)   A sign may not be relocated until demolition and other required
permits have been applied for and approved by the city.
      (12)   A sign may not be relocated within 2,000 feet of the Trinity
River, measured from the center line of the Trinity River. For purposes of this
paragraph, the term “Trinity River” means the portion of the river south of the
confluence of the Elm and West forks as depicted on the most recent version of
the flood insurance rate maps published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
      (13)   A sign may not be relocated within 500 feet of a historic
district, public park, city-owned lake, or the escarpment zone or geologically
similar areas.
      (14)   A non-HBA sign may not be relocated within 500 feet of a non-
business or residential zoning district.
      (15)   An HBA sign may not be relocated within 300 feet of a non-business
or residential zoning district.
      (16)   A sign may not be relocated within 200 feet of any intersection
involving:
         (A)   two or more arterials;
         (B)   an expressway frontage road and an arterial; or
         (C)   expressway travel lanes or ramps.
      (17)   No new properties, such as electrical, mechanical, or LED, may be
added to a relocated sign. (For example, a non-illuminated sign may not be
converted to an illuminated sign, and a plain billboard may not be converted to
a digital or tri-vision sign.)
   (f)   Relocated expressway signs.
      (1)   A relocated expressway sign may exceed the effective area in
Subsection (g). A relocated expressway sign may not have an effective area that
exceeds 672 square feet.
      (2)   A relocated expressway sign must have a setback of at least 40 feet
from the nearest expressway travel lane and at least five feet from the nearest
public right-of-way but may not be relocated more than 200 feet from the
expressway right-of-way.
      (3)   The effective area of a relocated expressway sign does not include
extensions of the sign face if:
         (A)   the extensions do not collectively exceed 20 percent of the
original area of the sign face; and
         (B)   no individual extension exceeds 80 percent of the original
length or 50 percent of the original height of the sign face.
      (4)   The height of a relocated expressway sign may not exceed an overall
height of 50 feet, or 42.5 feet above the nearest point on the nearest travel
surface of the nearest expressway or new expressway, whichever is higher, if
the total height of the sign does not exceed 80 feet above the ground at the
base of the sign.
   (g)   Limitations on size. Except as provided in Subsection (f):
      (1)   a relocated sign with an effective area of 72 square feet or less
may not exceed 20 feet in height; and
      (2)   a relocated sign with an effective area greater than 72 square feet
may not exceed 400 square feet in effective area or 30 feet in height.
      (3)   A relocated sign in a CR, RR, MU-1, MU- 1(SAH), MU-2, MU-2(SAH),
MC-1, or MC-2 zoning district, or in an SC or GR subdistrict of a PD district,
may not exceed 72 square feet in effective area or 20 feet in height. This
provision controls over Paragraphs (1) and (2).
   (h)   Measurements. Measurements of distance under this section pertaining
to minimum separation between signs are linear unless otherwise specified in
the provision. A “linear” measurement is taken from a sign or proposed sign
location to the nearest point on another sign. Measurements of distance under
this section pertaining to minimum distance from zoning districts or locations
are taken radially unless otherwise specified in the provision. “Radial”
measurement is a measurement taken along the shortest distance between a sign
or proposed sign location and the nearest point of a private property line in a
restricted zoning district or location.
   (i)   Specific use permit. The city council may grant a specific use permit
to:
      (1)   authorize a detached non-premise sign to have lesser spacing than
that required in Paragraphs (e) (12), (13), (14) or (15); or
      (2)   allow the relocation of an HBA sign or an expressway sign to an LO
(A), MO(A), or GO(A) district.
For more information regarding specific use permits, see Section
51A-4.219. (Ord. Nos. 24232; 27516)
SEC. 51A-7.308.   DIGITAL DISPLAY ON CERTAIN DETACHED NONPREMISE SIGNS.
   (a)   In general. Certain nonconforming detached non-premise signs may be
modified to use digital display technology subject to the restrictions in this
section.
   (b)   Application. The owner of the sign must submit a digital display sign
permit application for a face modification. After the building official
approves the digital display sign permit, the owner must apply for a demolition
permit to remove sign face area in accordance with Subsection (d). The owner
must complete demolition of sign face according to the applicable ratio in
Subsection (d) before the sign face is modified.
   (c)   Compliance required.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, digital display signs must
fully comply with the size, height, spacing, setback, and other restrictions in
this article for detached non-premise signs.
      (2)   Digital display sign support structures must be built to comply
with the building code.
      (3)   Digital display signs must comply with Title 43 Texas
Administrative Code Section 21.163, “Electronic Signs,” as amended.
      (4)   Both existing and new digital signs must comply with all lighting
and safety standards mandated by federal, state, or local rules or statutes,
including standards adopted or amended after the date of passage of these
requirements. Lighting and safety standards include brightness; message
duration; and proximity of the sign to other digital displays, ramps, and
interchanges.
   (d)   Sign face exchange ratio.
      (1)   Except as provided in Paragraph (2), for every one square foot of
sign face modified to use digital display technology, three square feet of
detached non-premise sign face area must be removed from within the city.
         (A)   To receive credit for the area of a conventional face removed,
the conventional sign face removed must result in elimination of a sign
structure (if a face is removed from a structure, the entire structure must be
removed).
         (B)   At least one structure removed must be within a five mile radius
of the conventional face being converted.
         (C)   No credit is given for the area of the conventional face removed
to convert to a digital display.
         (D)   Removal of sign face area must be completed before modification
of sign area to use digital display technology.
      (2)   A company holding a valid state advertising license and that
maintains 61 or fewer registered expressway non-premise signs on January 1,
2011 shall be allowed one sign face modification without complying with
Paragraph (1). The new digital sign face may be no larger than the preexisting
conventional sign face. Any subsequent modifications must comply with Paragraph
(1).
   (e)   Location and number.
      (1)   A maximum of 50 non-premise locations with digital displays are
permitted in the city. The director shall time stamp all applications upon
receipt. The director shall review applications in order of submittal. If the
director determines that an application is incomplete or does not meet the
requirements of this section, the director shall reject the application and
then review the next application. If the initial number of applications exceeds
the number of permits available, the director shall provide for a lottery to
distribute the permits.
      (2)   Digital display signs may only be expressway signs.
      (3)   For support structures with only one digital display sign, signs
must be located a minimum of 1,500 feet from any other digital display sign
oriented to the same traffic direction along the main travel lanes of the
expressway, measured linearly. For support structures with two digital display
signs, signs must be located a minimum of 2,000 feet from any other digital
display sign along the same expressway, measured linearly.
      (4)   Digital display signs may not be located within 300 feet of any lot
located in a residential district, measured radially.
      (5)   Digital display signs may not be located within 2,000 feet of the
Trinity River, measured from the center line of the Trinity River. For purposes
of this paragraph, the term “Trinity River” means the portion of the river
south of the confluence of the Elm and West Forks as depicted on the most
recent version of the flood insurance rate maps published by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
      (6)   Digital display signs may not be located within 500 feet of a lot
in a historic district.
      (7)   Digital display signs may not be located within 500 feet of an
escarpment zone.
   (f)   Digital display sign support structures.
      (1)   Digital display sign support structures may not exceed an overall
height of 50 feet or 42.5 feet above the nearest point on the nearest travel
surface of the nearest expressway, whichever is higher, except that no digital
display sign may be higher than the conventional sign it replaced.
      (2)   On support structures with two sign faces:
         (A)   If existing faces are pivoted at an angle of 10 degrees or
greater from each other and toward the main travel lanes of an expressway, one
or both sign faces may be converted to digital display.
         (B)   If existing faces are pivoted at an angle of less than 10
degrees, only one face may be converted to a digital display. The other sign
face must be removed.
      (3)   Sign support structures and faces being converted to accommodate
digital displays may not be modified to change the angle of a sign face.
      (4)   Electrical service to sign support structures with digital displays
must be underground between the property line and the sign.
   (g)   Display.
      (1)   All digital displays signs must automatically adjust the sign
brightness so that the brightness level of the sign is no more than 0.3
footcandles over ambient light conditions at a distance of 250 feet from the
sign. A digital display sign must be equipped with both a dimmer control and a
photocell that automatically adjusts the display’s intensity according to
natural ambient light conditions.
      (2)   A digital display may not increase the light level on a lot in a
residential district over ambient conditions without the digital display,
measured in footcandles at the point closest to the sign that is five feet
inside the residential lot and five feet above the ground.
      (3)   Before the issuance of a digital display sign permit, the applicant
shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that:
         (A)   the light intensity has been factory programmed to comply with
the maximum brightness and dimming standards in this subsection; and
         (B)   the light intensity is protected from end-user manipulation by
password-protected software or other method satisfactory to the building
official.
   (h)   Change of message. Changes of message must comply with the following:
      (1)   Each message must be displayed for a minimum of eight seconds.
      (2)   Changes of message must be accomplished within two seconds.
      (3)   Changes of message must occur simultaneously on the entire sign
face.
      (4)   No flashing, dimming, or brightening of message is permitted except
to accommodate changes of message.
   (i)   Malfunction. Digital display sign operators must respond to a
malfunction or safety issue within one hour after notification and must remedy
that malfunction or safety issue within 12 hours after notification. In case of
sign malfunction, the digital display must freeze until the malfunction is
remedied.
   (j)   Display of emergency information. The city may exercise its police
powers to protect public health, safety, and welfare by requiring emergency
information to be displayed on digital display signs. Upon notification, the
sign operators shall display: Amber Alerts, Silver Alerts, information
regarding terrorist attacks, natural disasters, and other emergency situations
in appropriate sign rotations. Emergency information messages must remain in
rotation according to the issuing agency’s protocols.
   (k)   Sunset. The director shall issue no permits after August 31, 2015,
unless that date is extended by ordinance before that date. The city plan
commission and city council shall review this section before August 31, 2015.
(Ord. Nos. 28238; 29393; 29557)
Division 51A-7.400. Provisions for Non-Business Zoning Districts.
SEC. 51A-7.401.   APPLICATION OF DIVISION.
   The provisions of this division apply to all signs located:
      (1)   in any non-business zoning district;
      (2)   within 100 feet of private property in a non-business zoning
district; or
      (3)   within 100 feet of a public park of more than one acre. (Ord. Nos.
19455; 20007; 20379)
SEC. 51A-7.402.   GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SIGNS IN NON-BUSINESS ZONING
DISTRICTS.
   (a)   No portion of an illuminated sign shall have a luminance greater than
200 foot lamberts.
   (b)   Except for wind devices, no sign nor part of any sign in a non-
business zoning district shall move, flash, rotate, or change its illumination
more than once an hour.
   (c)   Except as otherwise permitted under Sections 51-4.213(25) or (26), 51-
4.217(b)(5),
51A-4.206(1) or (3), and
51A-4.217(b)(9), an occupant in non-business zoning districts may erect only
signs that convey a noncommercial message, special purpose signs, and premise
signs, which include movement control signs and protective signs.
   (d)   Subdivision signs are subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   Subdivision signs are exempt from compliance with the provisions of
Section
51A-7.403, “Detached Signs,” of this article.
      (2)   The maximum effective area of each subdivision sign may not exceed
40 square feet.
      (3)   The maximum number of subdivision signs permitted is two signs per
street entrance into the residential neighborhood.
      (4)   Subdivision signs may not project more than three inches from the
surface of the structure.
      (5)   Subdivision signs may not be internally illuminated.
      (6)   The highest part of a subdivision sign may not exceed six feet in
height.
      (7)   Subdivision signs must be landscape signs or monument signs. For
purposes of this subsection, “landscape sign” means a sign that is part of a
single landscape design that creates a base for the sign in conjunction with a
retaining wall or an open space created with the use of water or planting
material, and “monument sign” means a detached sign applied directly onto a
ground-level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation
between the sign and the ground.
      (8)   Subdivision signs may be located within the public right-of-way if
a license for use of the public right-of-way is obtained pursuant to the
requirements of the Dallas City Code.
      (9)   Subdivision signs may only contain the name of the single family,
duplex, or townhouse residential neighborhood.
      (10)   The application for a subdivision sign permit must be submitted by
a homeowners association.
      (11)   The application for a subdivision sign permit must be supported by
the owner of property abutting the proposed subdivision sign, if any, and two-
thirds of the property owners within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision sign.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 20927; 24232; 24270; 25455; 29024)
SEC. 51A-7.403.   DETACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   A multifamily or non-residential premise may display detached signs
subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   TYPE OF SIGNS: A sign permitted by this subsection must:
         (A)   be a premise sign; or
         (B)   convey a noncommercial message.
      (2)   NUMBER OF SIGNS: Each premise may have one detached sign for each
600 feet, or fraction thereof, of frontage along a public way, other than an
alley.
      (3)   SETBACK: A sign permitted by this subsection must comply with the
following setback requirements:
         (A)   A minimum setback of five feet is required of all detached
signs.
         (B)   A minimum setback of 10 feet is required for signs exceeding 10
square feet in effective area or 15 feet in height.
         (C)   A minimum setback of 20 feet is required for all signs exceeding
20 square feet in effective area or 20 feet in height.
         (D)   A minimum setback of 15 feet is required if any part of the
sign, other than supports that do not exceed a total cross-sectional area of
one square foot, occupies the space between two feet and 10 feet above grade.
      (4)   EFFECTIVE AREA AND HEIGHT: A detached sign may not exceed 50 square
feet in effective area or 25 feet in height.
   (b)   A single family or duplex residential premise may display detached
signs subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   TYPE OF SIGNS: A sign permitted by this subsection must:
         (A)   refer to the sale or lease of the premises;
         (B)   refer to an occasional sale authorized in Section
51A-4.217(b)(5) of this code; or
         (C)   convey a noncommercial message.
      (2)   NUMBER OF SIGNS: Each premise may have one detached sign for each
600 feet, or fraction thereof, of frontage along a public way, other than an
alley.
      (3)   SETBACK: A sign permitted by this subsection must comply with the
following setback requirements:
         (A)   A minimum setback of five feet is required for all detached
signs unless the premise has a yard that is less than five feet, in which case
the sign must be set back the maximum possible distance.
         (B)   A minimum setback of 10 feet is required for signs exceeding 10
square feet in effective area.
         (C)   A minimum setback of 15 feet is required if any part of the
effective area of the sign occupies the space above two feet above grade.
      (4)   EFFECTIVE AREA AND HEIGHT: A detached sign may not exceed 20 square
feet in effective area or eight feet in height. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20927; 20962;
21798)
SEC. 51A-7.404.   ATTACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   Attached signs are permitted for multifamily premises, non-residential
premises, and non-residential occupancies in non-business zoning districts,
subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   Except as otherwise permitted under Section 51-4.213 in Chapter 51,
or under Section
51A-4.206 in this chapter, all attached signs must be premise signs or convey a
noncommercial message.
      (2)   All signs erected pursuant to this section shall be limited to one
per facade per occupant of premise.
      (3)   Words consisting of characters all of which are less than four
inches in height may be used without limit as to number, and shall not be
considered in computing the effective area.
      (4)   Reserved.
      (5)   No attached sign erected pursuant to this section shall be
permitted to have more than eight words consisting of characters in excess of
four inches in height and such sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in
effective area. As an exception to this rule a building in an LO(A), MO(A), GO
(A), or O-2 zoning district may be permitted to have additional attached signs
with larger effective areas above the first two stories of the building when
the following conditions are met:
         (A)   If an election is made to erect a sign greater than 40 square
feet only one sign on that facade will be permitted above the first two stories
of the building. Nothing herein shall prohibit each occupant or premise
otherwise authorized an attached sign pursuant to this section to have such a
sign below the third story of the building.
         (B)   Only two attached signs per building may have an effective area
larger than 40 square feet and each shall be on a separate facade.
         (C)   Each attached sign erected pursuant to this exception may have
an additional 40 square feet of effective area for each additional story above
the first two stories of the building.
      (6)   All signs and their words shall be mounted parallel to the building
surface to which they are attached and shall project no more than 18 inches
from the surface to which they are attached except as provided in Paragraph (7)
below. Signs shall not be mounted on roofs and shall not project above roofs.
      (7)   A non-residential premise may erect one attached sign that projects
no further than 4 feet from the vertical building surface provided that the
sign may not be illuminated, exceed 20 square feet in effective area, extend
above the roof or over any public right-of-way, be located within the space 10
feet above the grade, or be on a premise with a detached sign.
   (b)   A single family or duplex residential premise may not display an
attached sign except a protective sign. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 19879; 21978;
24232; 29611)
Division 51A-7.500. Special Provision Sign Districts.
SEC. 51A-7.501.   PURPOSE OF SPECIAL PROVISION SIGN DISTRICTS.
   For the purpose of establishing, enhancing, preserving, or developing the
character, quality, and property values of areas of unique character and
special development potential, and to protect public welfare, districts whose
signs are regulated by special provisions may be established from time to time,
as provided below. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 24232)
SEC. 51A-7.502.   CREATION OF A SPECIAL PROVISION SIGN DISTRICT.
   By amendment to this article, the city council may designate an area as a
special provision sign district subject to the following conditions:
   (1)   The district must include frontage on a street, either for an entire
blockface or for not less than 500 feet measured along the way or continuous
set of intersecting ways.
   (2)   A special provision sign district is an overlay zoning district that
must be created or amended in accordance with Section
51A-4.701.
   (3)   As a prerequisite to the establishment of such a special provision
sign district, the council must determine that the modified rules established
for said districts shall:
      (A)   establish, preserve, enhance, or develop the character of a
particular area;
      (B)   cause no disturbance to neighboring property lying outside the
proposed district;
      (C)   create no hazard or annoyance to motorists or pedestrians; and
      (D)   not contravene the intent of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20927;
24232; 30932)
SEC. 51A-7.502.1.   NON-PREMISE SIGNS IN SPECIAL PROVISION SIGN DISTRICTS.
   (a)   The city council may expressly authorize one or more non-premise signs
in:
      (1)   all special provision sign districts created on or before October
14, 1999; and
      (2)   any special provision sign district created after that date if:
         (A)   the district has an area of at least 50 acres; and
         (B)   the signs are located in or within one mile of the central
business district.
   (b)   The city council may expressly authorize one or more non-premise
athletic field signs in any special provision sign district, regardless of the
size or location of the district.
   (c)   A minimum of 30 percent of the effective area of a detached HBA sign
that exceeds 100 square feet in effective area must identify activities
conducted or premises located in the special provision sign district. (Ord.
24232)
SEC. 51A-7.503.   MODIFICATIONS ALLOWED IN SPECIAL PROVISION SIGN DISTRICTS.
   Without changing the definition of this article, or altering its basic
structure, the modified rules for special provision sign districts may:
   (1)   impose sign restrictions which are in addition to, or more stringent
than those provided for elsewhere in this article; and
   (2)   waive certain restrictions, or establish restrictions more lenient
than those provided for elsewhere in this article. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 24232)
SEC. 51A-7.504.   SPECIAL SIGN DISTRICT ADVISORY COMMITTEE CREATED.
   (a)   There is hereby created a committee to be known as the special sign
district advisory committee, hereinafter called the “committee”, composed of
five members appointed by the city plan commission. The committee shall be
appointed within 15 days following the effective date of the establishment of
the first special provision sign district created pursuant to the provisions of
Division
51A-7.500 of this article. The members of the committee shall include one
architect, one graphic designer, and one businessman associated with the sign
industry. The city plan commission is authorized to solicit a list of nominees
from any trade or professional association the membership of which has special
knowledge of or interest in the design, construction, and placement of signs or
urban planning and design. Appointments to the committee shall be for a term of
two years ending on September 1 of each odd-numbered year and the members shall
serve without compensation. The commission shall designate a chairman and vice-
chairman from the members. The commission may appoint up to three alternate
members to the committee who serve in the absence of one or more regular
members when requested to do so by the chairperson or by the city manager. The
alternate members serve for the same period and are subject to removal the same
as regular members. The commission shall fill vacancies occurring in the
alternate membership the same as in the regular membership.
   (b)   The committee shall meet at least once each month with additional
meetings upon call by the committee chairman or a simple majority of the
committee members. A simple majority of members present shall constitute a
quorum and issues shall be decided by a simple majority vote of the members
present. The department shall furnish staff support to the committee.
   (c)   The function of the committee shall be to familiarize itself
thoroughly with the character, special conditions, and economics of all special
provision sign districts as provided in Section
51A-7.503 of this article. In addition, the committee shall, upon request,
provide guidance, advice and assistance to any applicant for a sign permit in a
special provision sign district.
   (d)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect or modify the
authority of any committee or commission whose duty it is to review permits for
changes to the exterior of buildings in a special purpose district. Such
committee or commission shall continue to review said permits using the
standards and procedures established for that special purpose district.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the city
council from creating a separate procedure for allowing a separate committee to
function as or in lieu of the sign district advisory committee for a particular
special provision sign district. Any such separate procedure or separate
committee must be established as part of the ordinance creating the special
provision sign district or as part of an amendment thereto. (Ord. Nos. 19455;
20345; 20927; 24232; 25047; 28073)
SEC. 51A-7.505.   PERMIT PROCEDURES FOR SPECIAL PROVISION SIGN DISTRICTS.
   Unless otherwise provided as part of the ordinance creating a special
provision sign district or as part of an amendment thereto, the following
permit procedures apply:
   (1)   When required. Except when erecting a sign in a historic overlay
district, in which case a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained in
accordance with Section
51A-4.501(b), no sign permit may be issued in a special provision sign district
to any applicant unless the application has first been reviewed by the director
and a certificate of appropriateness has been issued in accordance with this
section.
   (2)   Application. When applying for a sign permit in a special provision
sign district, the applicant shall submit an application to the building
official. After determining that the proposed sign conforms with the other
sections of the code, the building official shall forward a copy of the
application to the director within five working days of its receipt. The
applicant shall provide the building official, the director, and the committee
with specific information in the form of perspectives, renderings, photographs,
models, or other representations sufficient to show the nature of the proposed
sign and its effect on the immediate premises. Any applicant may request a
meeting with the director or the committee before submitting an application and
may consult with the director or the committee during the review of the permit
application. Every applicant is entitled to appear before the committee and to
be present when any vote is taken.
   (3)   Determination of procedure. Upon receipt of an application, the
director shall determine whether it is to be reviewed under the director
procedure or the committee procedure. The proposed sign must be reviewed under
the director procedure if it:
      (A)   has an effective area less than 50 square feet;
      (B)   is a premise sign;
      (C)   does not contain any changeable message or flashing or blinking
lights;
      (D)   has a setback of at least 10 feet;
      (E)   is not located within a historic overlay district;
      (F)   does not project more than 18 inches over public right-of-way if it
is an attached sign;
      (G)   has an effective area of less than 15 percent of the facade of the
building to which the sign is attached if the sign is an attached sign; and
      (H)   does not exceed 25 feet in height if the sign is a detached sign.
If the proposed sign does not meet all of the above requirements, it must be
reviewed under the committee procedure.
   (4)   Director procedure.
      (A)   Decision by the director. If the director determines that the sign
must be reviewed under the director procedure, the director shall review the
application and approve or deny it within 10 days of its receipt.
      (B)   Appeals. Any interested person may appeal the decision of the
director by submitting a written request for appeal to him or her within 10
days of the decision. The appeal starts the committee procedure.
   (5)   Committee procedure.
      (A)   Decision by the committee. If the director determines that the sign
must be reviewed under the committee procedure or that his or her decision has
been appealed, he or she shall forward the application to the committee for
review.
      (B)   Factors the committee shall consider. In reviewing an application,
the committee shall first consider whether the applicant has submitted
sufficient information for the committee to make an informed decision. If the
committee finds the proposed sign to be consistent with the special character
of the special provision sign district, the committee shall make a
recommendation of approval to the city plan commission. The committee shall
consider the proposed sign in terms of its appropriateness to the special
provision sign district with particular attention to the effect of the proposed
sign upon the economic structure of the special provision sign district and the
effect of the sign upon adjacent and surrounding premises without regard to any
consideration of the message conveyed by the sign. After consideration of these
factors, the committee shall recommend approval or denial of the application
and forward that recommendation to the city plan commission.
   (6)   Decision by the commission. Upon receipt of a recommendation by the
committee, the commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the
application. At least 10 days before the hearing, notice of the date, time, and
place of the hearing, the name of the applicant, and the location of the
proposed sign must be published in the official newspaper of the city and the
building official shall serve, by hand-delivery or mail, a written notice to
the applicant that contains a reference to this section, and the date, time,
and location of this hearing. A notice sent by mail is served by depositing it
properly addressed and postage paid in the United States mail. In addition, if
the application is for a detached sign or for an attached sign that has more
than 100 square feet of effective area, the applicant must post the required
number of notification signs in accordance with Section
51A-1.106. In making its decision, the commission shall consider the same
factors that were required to be considered by the committee in making its
recommendation. If the commission approves the application, it shall forward a
certificate of appropriateness to the building official within 15 days after
its approval. If the commission denies the application, it shall so inform the
building official in writing. Upon receipt of the written denial, the building
official shall so advise the applicant within five working days of the date of
receipt of the written notice.
   (7)   Authority of building official not affected. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to affect or modify the authority of the building official
to refuse to grant a sign permit in any case in which the proposed sign does
not conform to specific provisions of height, effective area, setback, or
similar restrictions established in this article or the modified restrictions
applicable to the special provision sign district, or to the structural
requirements of the building code or other codes which the building official is
required by law to enforce.
   (8)   Action required within 60 days. If no action has been taken by the
city within 60 days of the receipt of the application by the building official,
a certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed issued and the building
official shall so advise the applicant.
   (9)   Change in application. No change may be made in any permit application
subsequent to action by the city without resubmittal to the director and
approval of the resubmitted application by following the procedures in this
section.
   (10)   Appeal to council. An applicant may appeal a denial of a certificate
of appropriateness by the commission to the city council within 60 days of the
date of the decision by the commission.
   (11)   Criminal responsibility. A person commits an offense if he or she
erects or maintains a sign in a special provision sign district without first
obtaining a certificate of appropriateness expressly authorizing the sign as
required by this article. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20949; 20962; 21402; 22425; 24163;
24232; 30892)
SEC. 51A-7.506.   EXPIRATION OF SPECIAL PROVISION SIGN DISTRICTS.
   The city council may establish a special provision sign district for a
limited time. At the end of this period, the special provision sign district,
and its provisions regulating signs, shall be discontinued, unless renewed for
another limited period in accordance with the procedure established in Section
51A-7.502. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 24232)
SEC. 51A-7.507.   TEMPORARY SIGNS IN SPECIAL PROVISION SIGN DISTRICTS
   (a)   Purpose. This section allows persons to erect and maintain temporary
signs within special provision sign districts while their applications for
permanent signs in those districts are pending. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as prohibiting a special provision sign district from having a
separate procedure for obtaining a temporary sign permit.
   (b)   Procedures to obtain permit.
      (1)   In general. Notwithstanding Section
51A-7.505, an applicant for a sign permit in a special provision sign district
may apply for a permit to erect a temporary sign in accordance with this
section. The permit must be obtained before erecting or maintaining the sign.
      (2)   Application for permit. An application for a permit must be filed
with the building official on a form provided by the city. Each application
must comply with the requirements of the Dallas Building Code.
      (3)   Requirements. The building official shall deny the application
unless the proposed temporary sign meets all of the following requirements. The
sign must:
         (A)   comply with all provisions of the code, as amended, except for
Section
51A-7.505;
         (B)   be an attached sign;
         (C)   be a premise sign;
         (D)   be constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, or nylon;
         (E)   not be an illuminated sign;
         (F)   not have dimensions that exceed the dimensions of the sign for
which the applicant proposes to obtain a certificate of appropriateness; and
         (G)   not be the same sign for which the applicant proposes to obtain
a certificate of appropriateness.
      (4)   Decision of the building official.
         (A)   Timing. The building official shall make a decision regarding
the application within five working days after it is filed. If the applicant
has not provided all the information required by this section, then the five-
day period does not begin until the required information is provided.
         (B)   Failure to act. If the building official fails to make a
decision regarding the application within five working days after it is filed,
it is approved subject to compliance with all applicable city ordinances.
         (C)   Form of decision. The decision must take one of the following
three forms:
            (i)   Approval, no conditions.
            (ii)   Approval, subject to conditions noted.
            (iii)   Denial.
         (D)   Approval with no conditions. If there are no grounds for denying
the application, the building official shall approve it with no conditions.
         (E)   Approval subject to conditions noted. As an alternative to
denial of the application, the building official may approve it subject to
conditions noted if compliance with all conditions will eliminate what would
otherwise constitute grounds for denial. If he or she approves it subject to
conditions noted, he or she shall state in writing the specific requirements to
be met before it is approved.
         (F)   Denial.
            (i)   Grounds for denial. The building official shall deny the
application if it does not comply with all of the requirements of this section
or contain all required information.
            (ii)   Statement of reasons. If the building official denies the
application, he or she shall state in writing the specific reasons for denial.
         (G)   Notice of decision. The building official shall give written
notice to the applicant of his or her decision regarding the application.
Notice is given either by hand-delivery or by depositing the notice properly
addressed and postage paid in the United States mail. If the notice is mailed,
it must be sent to the address shown on the application.
   (c)   Revocation of permit. The building official shall revoke the permit if
he or she determines that the permittee has:
      (1)   failed to comply with any provision of the code, as amended, except
for Section
51A-7.505;
      (2)   made a false statement of material fact on the application; or
      (3)   erected or maintained a sign that endangers the safety of persons
or property and is not otherwise in the public interest.
   (d)   Expiration of permit. A permit automatically expires 60 days from the
date of its issuance.
   (e)   Permit limit. Once a permit expires or is revoked, no person may apply
for another permit for that sign.
   (f)   Appeals. In considering an appeal from a decision of the building
official made in the enforcement of this section, the sole issue before the
board of adjustment shall be whether or not the building official erred in his
or her decision. The board shall consider the same standards that the building
official was required to consider in making the decision on the permit.
   (g)   Criminal responsibility. If a sign violates this section and is not
otherwise authorized by the code, a person is criminally responsible for a sign
unlawfully erected or maintained if the person:
      (1)   erects or maintains the sign;
      (2)   is an owner or operator of a use or business to which the sign
refers; or
      (3)   owns part or all of the land on which the sign is located.
   (h)   No representation by the city. The grant of a permit to erect a
temporary sign does not mean that an applicant will receive a certificate of
appropriateness for any sign. (Ord. Nos. 20954; 24232; 30892)
Division 51A-7.600. Permit Procedures.
SEC. 51A-7.601.   ADMINISTRATION OF ARTICLE BY DIVISION OF BUILDING INSPECTION.
   The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the
division of building inspection. (Ord. 19455)
SEC. 51A-7.602.   PERMITS.
   (a)   While all signs not explicitly exempted are subject to the provisions
of this article, and while a permit to erect any sign not so exempted may be
applied for if desired, a permit is required only for the following signs:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (b), all signs having an
effective area greater than 20 square feet.
      (2)   All signs having a height in excess of eight feet.
      (3)   All illuminated signs.
      (4)   All signs with moving elements.
      (5)   All signs erected or to be erected in or over any public way.
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (b), all signs
projecting more than 18 inches from any wall, roof, parapet, or eaves.
   (b)   Pursuant to Section 216.903 of the Texas Local Government Code, a
permit is not required for a sign that contains primarily a political message
and is located on private real property with the consent of the property owner
unless the sign:
      (1)   has an effective area greater than 36 feet;
      (2)   is more than eight feet high;
      (3)   is illuminated; or
      (4)   has any moving elements.
In this subsection, the term “private real property” does not include real
property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows the city to
use the property for a public purpose. This subsection does not apply to a
sign, including a billboard, that contains primarily a political message on a
temporary basis and that is generally available for rent or purchase to carry
commercial advertising or other messages that are not primarily political.
   (c)   Any sign for which a permit is issued shall be inspected after its
erection for conformity to the provisions of this article by the division of
building inspection. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 25921)
SEC. 51A-7.603.   APPLICATIONS.
   All applicants for permits must comply with the requirements of Subchapter
36 of Chapter 53, the Dallas Building Code. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20927; 28553)
SEC. 51A-7.604.   RESERVED.
(Ord. 20927)
SEC. 51A-7.605.   EXTRAORDINARILY SIGNIFICANT SIGNS.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   The city council or city plan commission may authorize a hearing to
designate an existing sign as an extraordinarily significant sign. Any person
may apply for designation of an existing sign as an extraordinarily significant
sign. Except for city council or city plan commission authorized hearings, each
owner of a proposed extraordinarily significant sign and each owner of property
where the proposed extraordinarily significant sign is located must sign the
application.
      (2)   The director shall send written notice of a public hearing on an
application to designate an extraordinarily significant sign to all owners of
real property lying within 200 feet of the boundary of the area of request.
      (3)   If a sign is designated as an extraordinarily significant sign, it
is exempted from the provisions of Section
51A-7.210(b)(1)(A) and Division
51A-7.700 of this article.
      (4)   An owner of an extraordinarily significant sign must ensure that
the sign is not structurally dangerous or a fire hazard, and does not cause
electrical shocks or other hazardous conditions.
   (b)   The city plan commission shall review an application to designate an
extraordinarily significant sign in accordance with Subsection (c) of this
section in a public hearing and shall submit its recommendation to the city
council. The city council shall act upon the recommendation of the city plan
commission by granting or denying the application subject to the voting
requirement in Section
51A-4.701(c)(2)(B) and Section
51A-7.803 of this article.
   (c)   To qualify for designation as an extraordinarily significant sign, the
sign must:
      (1)   be at least 40 years of age;
      (2)   possess unique physical design characteristics such as
configuration, color, texture, or other unique characteristics; and
      (3)   be of extraordinary significance to the city, the historic district
where it is located, or the historic structure to which it is attached.
   (d)   In the consideration of Subsection (c)(3) of this section, the
following must be evaluated:
      (1)   the significance of the sign on the basis of the significance of
the physical composition or structure of the sign without regard to the
significance of the company or other entity which is identified by the sign;
and
      (2)   the importance of the sign in identifying a particular area of the
city and the attitude and sentiment of the community concerning the
significance of the sign without regard to the significance of the company or
other entity which is identified by the sign. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 19557; 20927;
21186; 22738)
Division 51A-7.700. Non-Conformance and Enforcement Procedures.
SEC. 51A-7.701.   PURPOSE OF DIVISION.
   It is the declared purpose of this division that, in time, all privately
owned signs shall either conform to the provisions of this article or be
removed. By the passage of this ordinance and its amendments, no presently
illegal sign shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such sign complies
with all current standards under the terms of this ordinance and all other
ordinances of the city of Dallas. Any sign which does not conform to all
provisions of this ordinance shall be a non-conforming sign if it legally
existed as a conforming or non-conforming sign under prior ordinances; or an
illegal sign if it did not exist as a conforming or non-conforming sign, as the
case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this ordinance
that this division, and not the provisions of
Article IV, shall exclusively govern how non-conforming signs in the city are
treated. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this ordinance that
no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or
criminal, incurred prior to the time this ordinance was adopted shall be
discharged or affected by such passage, but prosecutions and suits for such
offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted, and causes
presently pending may proceed. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 24232)
SEC. 51A-7.702.   REMOVAL AND MAINTENANCE OF CERTAIN NON- CONFORMING SIGNS.
   (a)   Signs erected without a permit, either prior to or after the adoption
of this article, are illegal signs if a permit was required for its erection
according to the law in effect at the time the sign was erected. It shall be
unlawful to maintain any illegal sign. It is a defense to prosecution under
this subsection if the sign has been made to comply with the provisions of this
article so that a permit may be issued.
   (b)   All signs that were legally erected pursuant to a valid permit or
legally maintained and that do not conform to the provisions of this article
must be removed or modified if useful life determinations were made and
amortization periods were set by the Municipal Board on Sign Control before
January 1, 1990.
   (c)   No person may repair a non-conforming sign if the cost of repair is
more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the
same location, unless that sign is brought into conformity with this chapter.
No person may repair a non-conforming sign where the effect of such repair
shall be to enlarge or increase the structure of the non-conforming sign. For
purposes of this section, mono-pole, metal, and wood are each an example of a
“type” of sign and the term “repair” does not include maintenance or changes of
words or other content on the face of a sign.
   (d)   The effective area of a detached non-premise sign does not include the
sign skirting if no part of the sign message appears on the skirting other than
the name of the sign company.
   (e)   No new electrical or mechanical properties may be added to a non-
conforming detached non-premise sign. (For example, a non-illuminated sign may
not be converted to an illuminated sign, and a plain billboard may not be
converted to a tri-vision type.)
   (f)   The effective area of a detached non-premise expressway sign does not
include extensions of the sign face if:
      (1)   the extensions do not collectively exceed 20 percent of the
original area of the sign face; and
      (2)   no individual extension exceeds 80 percent of the original length
or 50 percent of the original height of the sign face. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20927;
22113; 23094; 24232)
SEC. 51A-7.703.   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (a)    The board of adjustment may, in specific cases, take the following
actions and authorize the following special variances and exceptions with
respect to the provisions of this article.
   (b)   The board of adjustment may waive any filing fee for an appeal under
this article when the board finds that payment of the fee would result in
substantial financial hardship to the applicant. The applicant may either pay
the fee and request reimbursement as part of his appeal or request the matter
be placed on the board’s miscellaneous docket for predetermination. If the
matter is placed on the miscellaneous docket, the applicant may not file his
appeal until the merits of the request for waiver have been determined by the
board.
   (c)   When in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will be
substantially served and appropriate use of the neighboring area will not be
substantially and permanently injured, the board of adjustment may, in specific
cases and subject to appropriate conditions, authorize only the following
special variances and exceptions to the regulations established in this article
for non-conforming signs legally erected or maintained prior to April 30, 1973:
      (1)   Reserved.
      (2)   Permit a variance for detached non-premise signs of up to 20
percent of the setback, effective area, and height requirements of this
article.
      (3)   Permit a variance for detached premise signs of up to 25 percent of
the setback, effective area, and height requirements of this article.
      (4)   Authorize one additional detached sign on a premise in excess of
the number permitted by this article.
      (5)   Authorize up to two additional large letter words on an attached
sign in excess of the number permitted by this article.
      (6)   Permit the following special variances and exceptions for movement
control signs when from the evidence presented the board finds them to be
necessary to give directions to a business:
         (A)   Authorize an identification message to be placed on the sign.
         (B)   Authorize an effective area of up to 4 square feet.
         (C)   Authorize a height of up to 2-1/2 feet.
      (7)   Authorize the remodeling, renovation, or alteration of a sign when
some non-conforming aspect of the sign is thereby reduced and when the period
of time allowed for the owner of the sign to recoup his investment is not
thereby extended.
      (8)   The board of adjustment may also vary any or all other provisions
of this article not specified above with respect to premise signs only when the
board has made a specific finding from evidence presented that strict
compliance will result in substantial financial hardship or inequity to the
applicant without sufficient corresponding benefit to the city and its citizens
in accomplishing the objectives of this article.
   (d)   Except as provided in Section
51A-7.703(c) the board of adjustment may, in specific cases and subject to
appropriate conditions, authorize only the following special variances and
exceptions to the regulations established in this article when the board has
made a special finding from the evidence presented that strict compliance with
the requirement of this article will result in substantial financial hardship
or inequity to the applicant without sufficient corresponding benefit to the
city and its citizens in accomplishing the objectives of this article:
      (1)   Permit a variance for detached premise signs of up to 10 percent of
the setback, effective area, and height requirements of this article.
      (2)   Authorize one additional detached premise sign on a premise in
excess of the number permitted by this article.
      (3)   Authorize up to two additional large letter words on an attached
sign in excess of the number permitted by this article.
      (4)   Authorize signs attached to a window or glass door in a business
zoning district to exceed 15 percent of the area of that window or glass door
or to be located within the upper two-thirds of that window or glass door if
the board finds that the proposed signs do not eliminate visibility into, or
out from, the premise.
         (A)   A sign authorized by this paragraph:
            (i)   must be made of translucent vinyl or a similar material with
at least a 65/35 perforation pattern (a maximum of 65 percent of the area is
closed, a minimum of 35 percent of the area is open); and
            (ii)   may only have images; any text or characters on the sign are
limited to 15 percent of the window area and are only permitted in the lower
one-third of the window.
         (B)   A convenience store regulated by
Chapter 12B is not eligible for this special exception.
         (C)   Once a special exception is approved, a business does not need
to return to the board of adjustment to change out the images or words on a
sign as long as the sign complies with the approved special exception.
      (5)   Permit the following special variances and exceptions for movement
control signs when from the evidence presented the board finds them to be
necessary to give directions to a business:
         (A)   Authorize an identification message to be placed on the sign.
         (B)   Authorize an effective area of up to 4 square feet.
         (C)   Authorize a height of up to 2-1/2 feet.
   (e)   The board of adjustment may hear and decide appeals which allege error
in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building
inspection division in the enforcement of this article.
   (f)   The board of adjustment may require a non-conforming sign to be
brought into immediate conformity with all current standards of all ordinances
of the city of Dallas, or to be removed when from the evidence presented the
board finds the sign to be hazardous to the public or to have been abandoned by
its owners.
   (g)   Where a permit was required for a sign’s erection according to the law
in effect at the time the sign was erected and where building inspection
division finds no record of a permit being issued, the board of adjustment may
authorize the issuance of a replacement permit when from the evidence presented
the board finds either that a permit was issued or that arrangements were made
with a sign company to obtain said permit. The period of time allowed by
Section
51A-7.702(b) for the owner to recoup his investment will not be extended by
issuance of a replacement permit. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20927; 28784)
SEC. 51A-7.704.   RESERVED.
(Ord. 20927)
SEC. 51A-7.705.   DETERMINATION OF NONCOMMERCIAL AND PRIMARILY POLITICAL
MESSAGES.
   (a)   Findings. The city council finds that it may be necessary in the
enforcement of this article to determine whether the message displayed upon a
sign is commercial, noncommercial, or primarily political.
   (b)   Hearing. If a person receives a notice of violation or is cited for
maintaining an illegal sign, and the person notifies the city attorney in
writing within 10 days of receiving the notice or citation that he believes the
sign displays a noncommercial or primarily political message and is therefore
not in violation of this article, the city attorney shall postpone prosecution
of the case and have the matter placed on the agenda of the board of adjustment
for appeal under Section
51A-7.703(e) of this article. The board shall give the person maintaining the
sign 10 days written notice of a public hearing on the matter. After hearing
the evidence, the board shall decide whether the message displayed on the sign
is commercial, noncommercial, or primarily political. No fee may be charged for
this appeal.
   (c)   Judicial Review. If the board decides that the message is commercial
or not primarily political and that the sign is therefore illegal, the person
maintaining the sign may within 10 days of the board’s decision file a notice
of nonacceptance of the decision with the city attorney. Within three days
after receiving notice of nonacceptance, the city attorney shall initiate suit
in the district court for determination that the sign is illegal and for an
injunction to prohibit display of the sign in violation of this article. The
city shall bear the burden of showing that the sign is illegal. In computing
the three-day time period, Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays are excluded.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 20927; 25921)
SEC. 51A-7.706.   RESERVED.
(Ord. 21511)
Division 51A-7.800. Procedure For Changes and Amendments.
SEC. 51A-7.801.   AUTHORITY TO AMEND; SUBMISSION OF PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO CITY
PLAN COMMISSION.
   The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change this
article. The amendment, supplement, or change may be petitioned for by any
person, corporation, or group of persons by filing an application and paying an
application fee to the department. Proposals for amending, supplementing, or
changing this article in the public interest may also be initiated by motion of
the city council or the city plan commission. Before taking any action on a
proposed amendment, supplement, or change, the city council shall submit the
same to the city plan commission for its recommendation and report. (Ord. Nos.
19455; 20927; 25047; 28073)
SEC. 51A-7.802.   PUBLIC HEARINGS PROVIDED.
   The city plan commission shall hold a public hearing on any amendment,
supplement or change prior to making its recommendation and report to the city
council. The director shall give notice of the public hearing in the official
newspaper of the city at least 10 days before the hearing. The city council
shall hold a public hearing before acting on the city plan commission’s
recommendation and report. At least 15 days notice of the time and place of
city council hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city
of Dallas. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20007)
SEC. 51A-7.803.   THREE-FOURTHS VOTE OF CITY COUNCIL IN CERTAIN CASES.
   If the city plan commission votes to recommend against a proposed change to
this article as clearly reflected in the minutes of its meeting, the change
shall not become effective except by a three-fourths vote of the members of the
city council of the city of Dallas. (Ord. 19455; 24185)
Division 51A-7.900. Downtown Special Provision Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.901.   DESIGNATION OF DOWNTOWN SPECIAL PROVISION SIGN DISTRICT.
   (a)   The Downtown Special Provision Sign District is designated to be known
as the Downtown Sign District. For purposes of this article, the boundaries of
the Downtown Sign District is that area bounded by the following lines:
      BEGINNING at a point being the intersection of the SE line of Thomas
Avenue with the SW line of Hall Street, said point being the most northerly
corner of Lot 1, Block T/587;
      THENCE with said SW line of Hall Street proceeding southeasterly,
crossing North Central Expressway, Cochran Street, and Jewett Street and
continuing to the NW line of Flora Street, a point for a corner;
      THENCE southwesterly with said NW line of Flora Street, approximately 187
feet to a point on a common tract line in Block 1/594;
      THENCE crossing Flora Street to a point in a common tract line in Block
595, being approximately 197 feet SW from Hall Street;
      THENCE along common tract lines in Block 595 southeasterly to a point for
a corner on the NW line of Ross Avenue, being approximately 181 feet SW from
Hall Street;
      THENCE southwesterly with said NW line of Ross Avenue to a point for a
corner on the northwesterly extension of the SW line of Pavillion Street;
      THENCE southeasterly along said extension line and with the SW lines of
Pavillion Street, crossing Van Court Street and continuing to a point for a
corner on the NW line of San Jacinto Street;
      THENCE southwesterly with the NW line of San Jacinto Street to a point
for a corner on the common line of Blocks 4/505 and 504;
      THENCE southerly, crossing San Jacinto Street to a point on a common
tract line in Block 1/503, being approximately 205 feet from the NE line of
Liberty Street and continuing southeasterly along common tract lines in Block
1/503 to a point for a corner on the NW line of Adolph Street, being
approximately 203 feet NE from Liberty Street;
      THENCE southwesterly with said NW line of Adolph Street and extending
same to a point for a corner on the SW line of Liberty Street;
      THENCE southeasterly with the SW line of Liberty Street to a point for a
corner on the NW line of Bryan Street;
      THENCE southwesterly, along the NW line of Bryan Street to a point for a
corner, being on the northwesterly extension line of the SW line of
approximately 25 feet wide Allen Street;
      THENCE southeasterly with said extension line and the SW line of Allen
Street and continuing southeasterly along a common tract line in Block 289 to a
point for a corner on the NW line of Live Oak Street, said point being
approximately 252 feet SW from Liberty Street;
      THENCE southwesterly with the NW line of Live Oak Street and extending
same to the SW line of Cantegral Street, a point for a corner;
      THENCE southeasterly along the SW lines of Cantegral Street, crossing
Live Oak Street and Florence Street to a point for a corner on the NW line of
15 feet wide Lodge Street;
      THENCE southeasterly thru Block 271 with the NW line of Lodge Street to a
point for a corner on the NE line of Good-Latimer Expressway;
      THENCE southeasterly with said NE lines of Good-Latimer Expressway,
crossing Swiss Avenue, Floyd Street, Gaston Avenue and the T.& P.R.R. right of
way and extending to a point for a corner on the southwesterly extension of the
SE line of 25 feet wide Monument Street;
      THENCE northeasterly with said extension line and the SE line of Monument
Street to a point for a corner on the SW line of an alley in Block 286;
      THENCE southeasterly and southerly with the westerly lines of said alley
in Block 286 and extending same to a point for a corner on the South line of
Elm Street;
      THENCE easterly with the south line of Elm Street to a point for a corner
on the common block line of Blocks 182 and A/480;
      THENCE southerly with said common line of blocks 182 and A/480 and with
the common line of Blocks 182 and 2/480 and crossing Main Street to a point for
corner on the common line of Blocks 183 and 3/183;
      THENCE easterly along the south line of Main Street, crossing Prior
Street and continuing to a point for a corner on the West line of Crowdus
Street;
      THENCE southerly along the west lines of Crowdus Street, crossing
Commerce Street to a point for a corner, same being the northeast corner of
Block 4/186;
      THENCE easterly along the south lines of Commerce Street, crossing
Crowdus Street and continuing to a point for a corner on the common line of
Lots 4 and 3, Block 13/191;
      THENCE southerly along the common line of Lots 4 and 3 Block 13/191,
crossing 25 feet wide Clover Street and continuing along the common line of
Lots 11 and 12, Block 13/191, and crossing Canton Street to a point for a
corner on the common line of Lots 4 and 3, Block 12/192;
      THENCE easterly along the south line of Canton Street to the west line of
Oakland Avenue, a point for a corner;
      THENCE southerly with said west line of Oakland Avenue and extending same
to a point for a corner on the south line of 25 feet wide Virgil Street;
      THENCE easterly along the south lines of Virgil Street crossing Oakland
Avenue and Walton Street and continuing to a point for a corner on the west
line of Hall Street;
      THENCE easterly with the extension of the south line of 30 feet wide
Virgil Street, crossing Hall Street, Block 850 and part of Block 851 to a point
for a corner, being the northwesterly extension of a common block line of
Blocks 851 and 7/851;
      THENCE southwesterly along said northwesterly extension line and common
block line of Blocks 851 and 7/851 to a common block corner and continuing
northeasterly with said common block line and with the common block line of
Blocks 851 and 6/851 and extending same through part of Block 851 to a point
for a corner on the southwest right of way line of the T.& P.R.R.;
      THENCE southeasterly with said SW right of way line of the T.& P.R.R. to
a point for a corner, being on the southwesterly extension of a common tract
line in Block 6/828, same being approximately 177.5 feet northwesterly from and
parallel to Hickory Street;
      THENCE northeasterly, crossing the T.& P.R.R. right of way and 20 feet
wide Truck Avenue and continuing along said common tract line in Block 6/828 to
a point for a corner on the southwest line of Second Avenue;
      THENCE southeasterly with said southwest line of Second Avenue and
extending same to a point for a corner on the southeast line of Hickory Street;
      THENCE northeasterly, crossing Second Avenue and continuing along the
southeast line of Hickory Street to a point for a corner on the southwest line
of First Avenue;
      THENCE southeasterly along said southwest line of First Avenue, crossing
the G.C.&.S.F.R.R. right of way to a point for a corner on the northeasterly
line of Block 2/812;
      THENCE easterly with the southerly line of First Avenue, crossing R. L.
Thornton Freeway to the easterly right of way line of said freeway, same being
the northwest cornerpoint of Block 6/812;
      THENCE southerly along the west line of said Block 6/812 to its southwest
cornerpoint;
      THENCE southwesterly, crossing a portion of R. L. Thornton Freeway right
of way, including an underpass portion of Second Avenue, to a point for a
corner on the southeast right of way line of R. L. Thornton Freeway and the
west line of Oak Lane, same being the present northeast corner of Block 3/812;
      THENCE southerly with the west lines of Oak Lane, crossing Third Avenue
and continuing to the most southerly cornerpoint of Block 4/812;
      THENCE westerly, crossing Block 853 and the G.C.&S.F.R.R. right of way
with the shortest line connecting to a point on the northeast line of said
G.C.&S.F.R.R. right of way and being on the southwest line of Chestnut Street
extended;
      THENCE southwesterly with the northeast line of said railroad right of
way to a point on the southwest line of Jeffries Street extended;
      THENCE northwesterly with said extension line and the southwest line of
Jeffries Street to the southeast line of Hickory Street, a point for a corner;
      THENCE southwesterly with said southeast line of Hickory Street and
extending same to a point for a corner on the centerline of Oakland Avenue;
      THENCE southeasterly along the centerline of Oakland Avenue to a point
for a corner on the northwest right of way line of the G.C.& S.F.R.R.;
      THENCE southwesterly with said northwest right of way line of the G.C.&
S.F.R.R. to a point for a corner on the southeasterly extension of the
southwest line of Lot 17, Block 14/865;
      THENCE crossing Central Expressway (Interstate Highway 45) to a point for
a corner, being on the westerly right of way line of said Central Expressway
(Interstate Highway 45) and the northwest line of Corinth Street;
      THENCE southwesterly with said northwest line of Corinth Street to the
northeast line of Good-Latimer Expressway, a point for a corner;
      THENCE westerly, crossing Good-Latimer Expressway to a point for a corner
on the northwest line of a 12 feet wide tract in Block 869-1/4, the same being
approximately 142 feet from and parallel to Corinth Street;
      THENCE southwesterly with the northwest line of said 12 feet wide tract
in Block 869 1/4 to a point for a corner on the northeast right of way line of
the (T.&N.O.R.R.) H.& T.C.R.R.;
      THENCE westerly, crossing said (T.&N.O.R.R.) H.&T.C.R.R. right of way to
a point for a corner on the northwest line of Corinth Street;
      THENCE southwesterly with the northwest lines of Corinth Street, crossing
South Central Expressway and Harwood Street and continuing to the northeast
line of Park Avenue to a point for a corner;
      THENCE northwesterly with said northeast lines of Park Avenue, crossing
Hickory Street and continuing to a point for a corner on the northeasterly
extension of the northwest line of Beaumont Street, same being the southeast
line of Block 454 extended;
      THENCE southwesterly with said northwest line of Beaumont Street to a
point for a corner on the northeast line of an alley in Block 454;
      THENCE northwesterly with said northeast line of an alley in Block 454 to
a point for a corner on the common line of Lots 16 and 17 extended;
      THENCE southwesterly along said extension line and common lot line to the
northeast line of St. Paul Street, a point for a corner;
      THENCE northwesterly with said northeast line of St. Paul Street and
extending same to a point for a corner on the northwest line of Gano Street;
      THENCE southwesterly with said northwest line of Gano Street to a point
for a corner on the northeast line of Ervay Street;
      THENCE crossing Ervay Street to a point for a corner on the northwest
line of Gano Street;
      THENCE northwesterly with the southwest line of Ervay Street and
extending same to a point for a corner on the northwest line of approximately
35 feet wide Sullivan Avenue;
      THENCE southwesterly along said northwest line of Sullivan Avenue to the
northeast line of Orr Street, a point for a corner;
      THENCE northwesterly with said northeast line of Orr Street and extending
same to a point for a corner, being on the northeasterly extension of the
common line of Blocks 448 1/2 and Block B/93;
      THENCE southwesterly along said common block line to a point for a corner
on the northeast line of Browder Street;
      THENCE with said northeast line of Browder Street northwesterly and
extending to the northwest line of Blakeney Street, a point for a corner;
      THENCE southwesterly crossing Browder Street and continuing along the
northwest line of approximately 25 feet wide Blakeney Street to the northeast
line of Akard Street, a point for a corner;
      THENCE westerly, crossing Akard Street to a point for a corner on the
southwest line of Akard Street and the northwest line of Powhattan Street;
      THENCE southwesterly along the northwest line of Powhattan Street,
crossing Peters Street, Wall Street, and a C.R. & P.R.R. right of way and
continuing with said northwest line of Powhattan Street and extending to a
point for a corner on the southwest line of Lamar Street;
      THENCE northwesterly with said southwest line of Lamar Street to a point
for a corner being approximately 660 feet southeasterly from the southeast line
of Cadiz Street;
      THENCE southwesterly crossing Block 1082, Austin Street, Block 1082, the
M.K.T.R.R. and C.R. & P.R.R. right of ways and Block 1081 and across an old
channel of the Trinity River with the shortest line connecting to the common
northeast corner point of Lots 10 and 11, Block 69/7338;
      THENCE southwesterly with the common line of Lots 10 and 11, Block 69/
7338 and crossing Industrial Blvd. to a point for a corner on the common line
of Lots 4 and 5, Block 71/340;
      THENCE southwesterly with said common line of Lots 4 and 5 and with the
common line of Lots 24 and 25 through Block 71/340 to a point for a corner on
the northeast line of Rock Island Street;
      THENCE southwesterly, crossing Rock Island Street and through part of
Block 8000 to a point for a corner on the approximate centerline of the Trinity
River East Levee (of the City and County of Dallas Levee Improvement District),
said point being approximately 660 feet southeasterly from the southeast right
of way line of Cadiz Street Viaduct;
      THENCE northwesterly and northerly with said approximate centerline of
the Trinity River East Levee and crossing Cadiz Street Viaduct right of way, R.
L. Thornton Freeway right of way, the North Texas Traction Company right of
way, Houston Street Viaduct right of way, Texas Turnpike Authority right of way
and continuing to a point for a corner on the southerly right of way line of
West Commerce Street;
      THENCE easterly with said southerly line of West Commerce Street to a
point for a corner on the east line of said Trinity River East Levee;
      THENCE crossing West Commerce Street and continuing northwesterly with
said east line of the Trinity River East Levee to a point for a corner on the
original 230 feet wide Texas and Pacific R.R. southerly right of way line;
      THENCE easterly along said original Texas and Pacific R.R. southerly
right of way line to a point for a corner on same, being approximately 660 feet
westerly from the westerly line of Stemmons Freeway;
      THENCE northerly, crossing the Texas and Pacific R.R. right of way and
part of Block 6828 to a point for a corner on the westerly line of Industrial
Blvd. and on the common line of Block 6828 and 409;
      THENCE with the westerly line of Industrial Blvd. northwesterly and
extending same to a point for a corner, being on the westerly extension of the
north line of Continental Avenue;
      THENCE easterly along said extension line and the north line of
Continental Avenue and extending same to a point for a corner on the northeast
line of Dragon Street, same being the southwest corner of Block 2/409;
      THENCE northwesterly with the northeast lines of Dragon Street, crossing
Wichita Street and continuing to a point for a corner in Block 409 on a common
tract line, being approximately 369 feet northwest of the northwest line of
Wichita Street;
      THENCE northeasterly with common tract lines to a point for a corner on
the southwest line of Slocum Street;
      THENCE northeasterly, crossing Slocum Street, Block 401, Stemmons
Freeway, the C.R.I.& P.R.R. and S.L. & S. W. R. R. right of ways, a Dallas
Power and Light Company tract in Blocks 392 and 393 and the MKT R.R. right of
way and crossing part of Blocks I/389, J/384 and a closed portion of Griffin
and Ashland Streets, with the shortest line connecting to a point on the
southeast line of Ashland Street and the northeast line of an alley in Block G/
385;
      THENCE northeasterly with said southeast lines of Ashland Street,
crossing Summer Street and extending to a point for a corner on the NE line of
Wesley Alley;
      THENCE southeasterly along said NE line of Wesley Alley to the SE line of
Block I/354, a point for a corner;
      THENCE northeasterly along the southeast line of Block I/354 and along
the northwest line of Cedar Springs Road to a point for a corner on the
southwest line of 24 feet wide Yates Alley;
      THENCE northeasterly with the northwest lines of Cedar Springs Road,
crossing Yates Alley, old Field Street, Alamo Street, right of way for new
extension of Field Street, and Caroline Street and extending said northwest
line of Cedar Springs Road across Akard Street to a point for a corner on the
east line of Cedar Springs Road;
      THENCE with the east line of Cedar Springs Road northerly to the south
line of Harwood Street, a point for a corner;
      THENCE easterly with said south line of Harwood Street and extending same
to a point for a corner on the easterly line of McKinney Avenue extended;
      THENCE northeasterly along said extension line and the easterly line of
McKinney Avenue to a point for a corner on the southwest line of Olive Street;
      THENCE crossing Olive Street to a point for a corner on the southeast
line of Thomas Street;
      THENCE northeasterly along the southeast lines of Thomas Street, crossing
Pearl Street, Crockett Court, Leonard Street, Fairmount Street, Routh Street,
Boll Street, Worthington Street, Clay Alley, Allen Street, Clyde Alley, Clark
Street, Ellis Street and Hugo Street and continuing to the southwest line of
Hall Street and the point of beginning.
   (b)   Other special provision sign districts created in accordance with this
article are not controlled by this division even though such districts may be
wholly or partially located within the boundaries described in Subsection (a).
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 20167; 21404; 24606)
SEC 51A-7.901.1.   DESIGNATION OF SUBDISTRICTS.
   (a)   This district is divided into nine subdistricts: Retail Subdistrict A,
Retail Subdistrict B, the General CBD Subdistrict, the Downtown Perimeter
Subdistrict, the Main Street Subdistrict, the Convention Center Subdistrict,
the Akard Station Subdistrict, the Whitacre Tower Subdistrict, and the
Discovery Subdistrict.
   (b)    Retail Subdistrict A is that central area of downtown within the
boundaries described in the Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 30685, passed
by the Dallas City Council on October 25, 2017.
   (c)    Retail Subdistrict B is that central area of downtown within the
boundaries described in the Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 30685, passed
by the Dallas City Council on October 25, 2017.
   (d)   The General CBD Subdistrict is that area of the district within the
Freeway Loop, more particularly described in the Exhibit A attached to
Ordinance No. 30685, passed by the Dallas City Council on October 25, 2017.
   (e)   The Downtown Perimeter Subdistrict is that area outside of the freeway
loop within the downtown sign district.
   (f)    The Main Street Subdistrict is that area of downtown near Main Street
described in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 30685, passed by the Dallas
City Council on October 25, 2017.
   (g)   The Convention Center Subdistrict is that area of downtown near the
convention center, more particularly described in the Exhibit A attached to
Ordinance No. 30685, passed by the Dallas City Council on October 25, 2017.
   (h)   The Akard Station Subdistrict is that area of downtown that is more
particularly described in the Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 30685, passed
by the Dallas City Council on October 25, 2017.
   (i)   The Whitacre Tower Subdistrict is that area of downtown within the
boundaries described in the Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 30685 passed by
the Dallas City Council on October 25, 2017.
   (j)   The Discovery Subdistrict is that area of downtown within the
boundaries described in the Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 31191, passed
by the Dallas City Council on April 24, 2019.
(Ord. Nos. 24606; 24925; 28346; 29227; 29751; 30685; 31191; 31374 ; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.902.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to regulate both the construction of new
signs and the alterations of existing signs with a view towards enhancing,
preserving, and developing the unique character of the downtown area while
addressing the diversity of businesses and promoting the economy of downtown.
The general objectives of this division include those listed in Section
51A-7.101 as well as aesthetic considerations to ensure that signs are
appropriate to the architecture of the district, do not obscure significant
architectural features of its buildings, and lend themselves to the developing
retail and residential uses and the pedestrian character of the area. The
district regulations are in large part inspired by the high level of pedestrian
activity and the need to maximize effective orientation of signage toward the
walking public. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20167; 21404; 24606)
SEC. 51A-7.903.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   ACTIVITY DISTRICT means a group of entertainment, cultural,
performance, retail, or restaurant establishments that generate pedestrian
activity within a particular geographic area, and that has a known name as a
destination such as, but not limited to, the Farmers Market, Main Street, or
the Arts District.
      (2)   ARCADE SIGN means any sign that is mounted under a canopy or awning
and is perpendicular to the building to which the canopy or awning is attached.
This sign is intended to be read from the pedestrian walkway that the canopy or
awning covers.
      (3)   AWNING means a fabric or vinyl surface supported by a metal
structure, which is applied to the face of a building.
      (4)   AWNING SIGN means a sign attached to, painted on, or otherwise
applied to an awning.
      (5)   BANNER means a sign applied on a strip of cloth, vinyl, or similar
material and attached to a building or structure. Awning, canopy signs, and
flags are not banners.
      (6)   CANOPY means a permanent, non-fabric architectural element
projecting from the face of a building.
      (7)   CANOPY SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by a
canopy, with no changeable message area.
      (8)   CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN means a sign composed of LED/LCD elements,
slide lettering, slated rotating surfaces, or other changeable message
technology that displays different designs or advertisements.
      (8.1)   CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGN means a sign that is affixed to a
construction barricade.
      (8.2)   CONVENTION CENTER COMPLEX means the convention center and
buildings attached to the convention center, including a convention center
hotel.
      (9)   DISTRICT or THIS DISTRICT means the Downtown Sign District.
      (10)   DISTRICT ACTIVITIES means activities that take place on five or
more premises within an activity district.
      (11)   EFFECTIVE AREA means:
         (A)   for a detached sign other than outlined in (B) below, the area
within a minimum imaginary rectangle of vertical and horizontal lines that
fully contains all extremities of the sign, excluding its supports. This
rectangle is calculated from an orthographic projection of the sign viewed
horizontally. The viewpoint for this projection that produces the largest
rectangle must be used. If elements of the sign are moveable or flexible, such
as a flag or a string of lights, the measurement is taken when the elements are
fully extended and parallel to the plane of view;
         (B)   for signs placed on a fence, non enclosing wall, planter, or
other similar structure that is designed to serve a separate purpose other than
to support the sign, the entire area of such structure may not be computed, and
the effective area must be measured by the rule for effective area for attached
signs; and
         (C)   for an attached sign, the sum of the areas within minimum
imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which fully
contains a word. If a design, outline, illustration, or interior illumination
surrounds or attracts attention to a word, then it is included in the
calculation of effective area.
      (12)   ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY means a structure or building for sports
events or the performing arts, including indoor motion picture theaters,
theaters for live musical or dramatic performances, indoor and outdoor concert
halls, and exhibition halls.
      (13)   FACADE means any separate face of a building, including parapet
walls and omitted wall lines, or any part of a building which encloses or
covers usable space, chimneys, roof-mounted equipment, mounted antennas, or
water towers. Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction or in
directions within 45 degrees of one another, they are to be considered as part
of a single facade. A roof is not a facade or part of a facade. Multiple
buildings on the same lot will each be deemed to have separate facades.
      (14)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting 12 inches or
less from a building, and the face of which is parallel to the building facade.
      (15)   FREEWAY LOOP means the area of the city within Woodall Rogers
Freeway, R.L. Thornton Freeway, Central Expressway (elevated bypass), and
Stemmons  Freeway.
      (16)   GENERIC GRAPHICS means any pattern of shapes, colors, or symbols
that does not commercially advertise.
      (17)   KIOSK means a multi-sided structure for the display of premise and
nonpremise signs.
      (18)   LANDSCAPE SIGN means a sign that is a part of a single landscape
design which creates a base for the sign in conjunction with a retaining wall
or an open space created with the use of water or planting material.
      (19)   LOWER LEVEL SIGN means an attached sign wholly situated within the
lower level sign area.
      (20)   LOWER LEVEL SIGN AREA means the portion of a facade less than 36
feet above grade.
      (21)   MARQUEE SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by
a permanent canopy projecting over a pedestrian street entrance of a building,
and consisting primarily of changeable panels, words, or characters.
      (21.1)   MEDIA CENTER PLAZA means an outdoor area that is accessible to
the public, and includes:
         (A)   a plaza that is at least 120,000 square feet in size; and
         (B)   structures containing ground-floor retail and restaurant uses.
      (21.2)   MEDIA WALL SIGN means an attached sign projecting no more than
five feet from a building, the face of which is parallel to the building
facade, and which may wrap around the corner of a building. A media wall sign
must be located adjacent to a media center plaza. A media wall sign must be a
changeable message sign, and must incorporate changeable messages, including
streaming.
      (22)   MESSAGE AREA means the area within the effective area of a sign
that provides a specific commercial or non-commercial message and that excludes
all extremity and intra-areas associated with the sign fixture.
      (22.1)   MIDDLE LEVEL SIGN means an attached sign wholly or partially
situated within the middle level sign area.
      (22.2)   MIDDLE LEVEL SIGN AREA means the portion of a building facade
that is between the lower level sign area and the upper level sign area.
      (23)   MONUMENT SIGN means a detached sign applied directly onto a grade-
level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation between
the sign and grade.
      (24)   MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGN means a sign that directs vehicular and
pedestrian movement within this district.
      (24.1)   PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED CON- CESSION SIGN means a premise sign
displaying advertising for one or more retail uses to on-site pedestrians.
      (25)   PROJECTING ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting more
than 12 inches from a building at an angle other than parallel to the facade.
      (26)   PROMOTIONAL MESSAGE means a message that identifies or promotes a
cultural activity within this district, any special event being conducted in
this district, any event being conducted, in whole or in part, in an
entertainment complex, or any other event that will benefit the city. Benefit
to the city is established by:
         (A)   use of city property in accordance with a contract, license, or
permit;
         (B)   the receipt of city monies for the activity or event; or
         (C)   an ordinance or resolution of the city council that recognizes
the activity or event as benefitting the city.
      (27)   PUBLIC AREA means any publicly or privately-owned outdoor area
that is accessible to the public.
      (28)   RESIDENTIAL USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.209.
      (29)   RETAIL & PERSONAL SERVICE USES means those uses defined in Section
51A-4.210.
      (29.1)   RETAINING WALL SIGN means a sign in Retail Subdistrict B affixed
or engraved into a retaining wall supporting a landscape bed or similar
feature.
      (30)   SIGN HARDWARE means the structural support system for a sign,
including the fastening devices that secure a sign to a building facade or
pole.
      (31)   SPECIAL SIGN DISTRICT ADVISORY COMMITTEE means that committee
created by Section
51A-7.504 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (32)   TEMPORARY SIGN means a sign erected for a limited time that
identifies an event or activity of limited duration. Examples include signs
advertising the sale or lease of property, construction activity in progress,
or a concert or other cultural event.
      (33)   UPPER LEVEL SIGN means an attached sign wholly situated within the
upper level sign area.
      (34)   UPPER LEVEL SIGN AREA means the portion of a facade more than 36
feet above grade and within the top 12 feet of a facade on buildings 18 stories
or less, or within the top 36 feet of a facade on buildings more than 18
stories.
      (34.1)   VIDEOBOARD SIGN means a flat screen that is capable of
displaying moving images similar to television images, by light-emitting diode
or other similar technology, and that is mounted to the exterior of a building.
      (35)   WELCOME MESSAGE means a message that identifies and greets heads
of state, foreign dignitaries, groups using city property in accordance with a
contract, license, or permit, or government organizations.
      (36)   WINDOW ART DISPLAY means an exhibit or arrangement placed within a
storefront window of a building and designed to be viewed from a street or
public area.
      (37)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign painted or affixed to a window.
      (38)   WORD: For purposes of this division, each of the following is
considered to be one word:
         (A)   Any word in any language found in any standard unabridged
dictionary or dictionary of slang.
         (B)   Any proper noun or any initial or series of initials.
         (C)   Any separate character, symbol, or abbreviation such as “&”,
“$”, “%”, and “Inc.”
         (D)   Any telephone number, street number, or commonly used
combination of numerals and symbols such as “$5.00” or “50%”,
         (E)   Any Internet website, network, or protocol address, domain name,
or universal record locator.
         (F)   Any symbol or logo that is a registered trademark but which
itself contains no word or character.
         (G)   A street address is not considered to be a word. (Ord. Nos.
20167; 21404; 22425; 24606; 24925; 27795; 28346; 28347; 29227; 31191; 31374 ;
33252)
SEC. 51A-7.904.   DETACHED NON-PREMISE SIGNS.
   Except as provided in this division, no person may erect a detached non-
premise sign in this district. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20167; 21404; 24606; 24925)
SEC. 51A-7.905.   SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (a)   Except as provided in Sections
51A-7.908,
51A-7.914, and
51A-7.915, a person shall not alter, place, maintain, expand, or remove a sign
in this district without first obtaining a sign permit from the city.
   (b)   The procedure for obtaining a sign permit is outlined in Section
51A-7.505 of this article. Section
51A-7.602 of this article does not apply to signs in this district.
   (c)   A person who violates Subsection (a) is guilty of a separate offense
for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is continued. (Ord.
Nos. 20167; 21404; 24606; 24925)
SEC. 51A-7.906.    GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS IN THE DOWNTOWN SIGN
DISTRICT.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b), the regulations of Section
51A-7.303 apply in this district.
   (b)   For retail and personal service uses within the Main Street
Subdistrict, Retail Subdistrict A, and Retail Subdistrict B, the measurements
of luminance are taken from any premise or public right-of-way other than an
alley outside the Main Street Subdistrict, Retail Subdistrict A, and Retail
Subdistrict B, respectively.
   (c)   Illuminated signs in this district must comply with Section
51A-6.104 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 24606; 24925;
27795; 29227)
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SIGNS WITHIN THE GENERAL CBD, MAIN STREET, CONVENTION
CENTER,
RETAIL, AND DISCOVERY SUBDISTRICTS.
SEC. 51A-7.907.   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Signs over the right-of-way.
      (1)    Signs may be located within the public right-of-way subject to the
franchise requirements of Chapter XIV of the City Charter,
Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, as amended,
Chapter 45 of the Dallas Building Code, and the requirements of all other
applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
      (2)   The director shall review the location of any sign located in or
overhanging the public right-of-way to ensure that the sign will not pose a
traffic hazard or visibility obstruction.
      (3)   No portion of a sign may be located less than two feet from the
back of a street curb.
   (b)    Signs in general.
      (1)   Except as provided in Division
51A-7.900 of
Article VII, all applications for certificates of appropriateness for detached
signs in this district must be reviewed by the special sign district advisory
committee using the permit procedures set forth in Division
51A-7.500. The director procedure in Division
51A-7.500 is not available for detached signs in this district. All
applications for certificates of appropriateness for other types of signs in
this district must be in accordance with Division
51A-7.500 of
Article VII.
      (2)    Unless otherwise provided, all signs in this district must be
premise signs.
      (3)    All wind devices except for flags and banners are prohibited in
this district unless allowed under a special events permit issued under Chapter
42A of the Dallas City Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 24606; 24925; 25047; 28073)
SEC. 51A-7.908.   VIDEOBOARD SIGN.
   (a)   One videoboard sign may be attached to a building adjacent to the Main
Street Subdistrict.
   (b)   The videoboard sign may display any message.
   (c)   A certificate of appropriateness is required for approval of the
specific size and location of the videoboard sign.
   (d)   The videoboard sign may not be placed on a landmark structure. (Ord.
24925)
SEC. 51A-7.909.   ATTACHED NON- PREMISE DISTRICT ACTIVITY VIDEOBOARD SIGNS.
   (a)   Content. Non-premise district activity videoboard signs must display
district activity messages a minimum of three minutes of every operational hour
and must display either district activity messages or premise messages for an
additional minimum of nine minutes of every operational hour.
   (b)   Location and number.
      (1)   A maximum of 15 non-premise district activity videoboard signs are
permitted and may only be erected on buildings with frontage on streets within
Retail Subdistrict A and Retail Subdistrict B bounded by Jackson Street, Lamar
Street, Pacific Avenue, and Cesar Chavez Boulevard.
      (2)   A maximum of one non-premise district activity videoboard sign is
permitted per block face.
      (3)   Non-premise district activity videoboard signs may not be placed on
Pacific Avenue between Akard Street and Ervay Street.
      (4)   Non-premise district activity videoboard signs may not be placed on
building facades facing Main Street Garden or Belo Garden.
   (c)   Size. Non-premise district activity videoboard signs must have a
minimum of 100 square feet in effective area and may have a maximum 150 square
feet in effective area.
   (d)   SUP required.
      (1)   Non-premise district activity videoboard signs are only permitted
by SUP.
      (2)   All applications for non-premise district activity videoboard signs
must include a report from a traffic engineer stating that the placement of the
sign will not interfere with the effectiveness of traffic control devices
within 300 ft of the sign.
      (3)   If there is a conflict between Subsection
51A-4.206(1) and this section, this section controls.
      (4)   Original applications and renewal applications for non-premise
district activity videoboard signs must include an affidavit stating that the
building meets the occupancy requirements in Subsection (g).
      (5)   Within 10 days after expiration or revocation of the SUP the non-
premise district activity videoboard sign must be removed.
   (e)   Installation. Non-premise district activity videoboard signs must be
securely attached.
   (f)   Projecting signs. Projecting non-premise district activity videoboard
signs:
      (1)   must have a vertical orientation with height exceeding the width at
a minimum 16:9 height-to-width ratio;
      (2)   may project a maximum of 12 feet into the right-of-way:
         (A)   subject to the licensing requirements of Chapter XIV of the City
Charter,
Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, the Dallas Building Code, and all other
applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations;
         (B)   subject to review by the traffic engineer to ensure that the
sign will not pose a traffic hazard or visibility obstruction; and
         (C)   provided that no projecting sign may project closer than two
feet to a vertical plane extending through the back of a street curb;
      (3)   must have a minimum clearance of 15 feet above the sidewalk and a
maximum clearance of 35 feet above the sidewalk; and
      (4)   must have videoboard displays on both sides of the sign.
   (g)   Building occupancy requirements. Non-premise district activity
videoboard signs are only permitted on buildings with retail and personal
service uses, lodging uses, or office uses occupying at least 75 percent of the
leasable ground floor area and an overall building occupancy of at least 50
percent. Non-premise district activity videoboard signs are not allowed on a
lot containing a commercial surface parking lot use. The director shall notify
City Council of any building that falls below the occupancy requirements and
fails to reestablish the occupancy requirement within 120 days. The director
may waive the occupancy requirements of this subsection for up to one year if
the director determines that the building or multi-building complex is
currently being redeveloped. The director may revoke this waiver if
redevelopment stops or is inactive for 90 days or more. (Ord. Nos. 27481;
28347; 28424; 28553; 28822; 29227)
SEC. 51A-7.910.   OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ATTACHED VIDEOBOARD SIGNS.
   (a)   Display. 
      (1)   All videoboard signs:
         (A)   must contain a default mechanism that freezes the image in one
position in case of a malfunction;
         (B)   must automatically adjust the sign brightness based on natural
ambient light conditions in compliance with the following formula:
            
            (i)   the ambient light level measured in luxes, divided by 256 and
then rounded down to the nearest whole number, equals the dimming level; then
            (ii)   the dimming level, multiplied by .0039 equals the brightness
level; then
            (iii)   the brightness level, multiplied by the maximum brightness
of the specific sign measured in nits, equals the allowed sign brightness,
measured in nits. For example:
          32768   =   ambient light in luxes
         ÷ 256   
          128   =   dimming level   
         x .0039
          .4992   =   brightness level
         x 9000   =   (maximum brightness of the example sign)
         4492.8   =   allowed brightness in nits;
         (C)   must be turned off between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday
through Friday and 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday; and
         (D)   may not display light of such intensity or brilliance to cause
glare, impair the vision of an ordinary driver, or constitute a nuisance.
      (2)   Non-premise district activity videoboard signs:
         (A)   must have a full color display able to display a minimum of 281
trillion color shades; and
         (B)   must be able to display a high quality image with a minimum
resolution equivalent to the following table:
 
Non-Premise District Activity Videoboard Sign  Resolution Chart
Size of LED Panel    Maximum Pixel Size
100 s/f to 125 s/f      16 mm
Greater than 126 s/f    19 mm
 
   (b)   Light intensity. Before the issuance of a videoboard sign permit, the
applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that:
      (1)   the light intensity has been factory programmed to comply with the
maximum brightness and dimming standards in the table in Subparagraph (a)(1)
(B); and
      (2)   the light intensity is protected from end-user manipulation by
password-protected software, or other method satisfactory to the building
official.
   (c)   Change of message. Except as provided in this section, changes of
message must comply with the following:
      (1)   Each message must be displayed for a minimum of eight seconds.
      (2)   Changes of message must be accomplished within two seconds.
      (3)   Changes of message must occur simultaneously on the entire sign
face.
      (4)   No flashing, dimming, or brightening of message is permitted except
to accommodate changes of message.
   (d)   Streaming information. If a special events permit has been issued for
district activities, streaming video and audio is permitted, except that ticker
tape streaming is permitted at all times when the videoboard sign is operating.
Ticker tape streaming must be located within the bottom 10 percent of the
effective area.
   (e)   Malfunction. Videoboard sign operators must respond to a malfunction
or safety issue within one hour after notification. (Ord. Nos. 27481; 27572)
SEC. 51A-7.911.   ATTACHED PREMISE SIGNS.
   (a)   Attached signs in general.
      (1)   Attached signs must be securely attached.
      (2)   Attached signs overhanging the public way are permitted, except
that no sign may project closer than two feet to the vertical plane extending
through the back of a street curb.
      (3)   The total effective area for all signs on a facade, excluding media
wall signs in the Discovery Subdistrict, may not exceed:
         (A)   30 percent of the area in the lower level sign area;
         (B)   20 percent of the area in the middle level sign area; and
         (C)   30 percent of the area in the upper level sign area.
Projecting attached signs are not included in these effective area
calculations. See additional restrictions on sign area in the provisions for
specific sign types.
      (4)   Except as provided in this paragraph, attached signs may not
project more than four feet above the roof line. Attached signs in the
Convention Center Subdistrict may not project more than nine feet above the
roof line.
      (5)   Attached premise signs may be videoboard signs, provided that the
message content concerns businesses on the premise which are open for business
for a minimum of 50 weeks per year with employees present a minimum of 30 hours
per week. For operational and maintenance requirements, see Section
51A-7.910.
   (b)   Arcade signs.
      (1)   An arcade sign must be located at least 15 feet from any other
arcade sign.
      (2)    No arcade sign may exceed six square feet in effective area.
      (3)   No arcade sign may be lower than 10 feet above grade.
   (c)   Awning signs.
      (1)   Awning signs in the general CBD and convention center subdistricts.
         (A)   No awning sign may:
            (i)   project more than two inches from the surface of the awning;
or
            (ii)   be lower than 10 feet above grade.
         (B)   The total effective area for any one awning sign may not exceed
six square feet.
         (C)   The total effective area for all awning signs combined on each
street frontage may not exceed 150 square feet.
      (2)   Awning Signs in the Main Street Subdistrict, Retail Subdistrict A,
and Retail Subdistrict B.
         (A)   No awning sign may:
            (i)   project more than two inches from the surface of the awning;
or
            (ii)   be lower than 10 feet above grade.
         (B)   The total effective area for each awning sign may not exceed
eight square feet.
         (C)   The total effective area for all awning signs combined on each
premise may not exceed 180 square feet on each street frontage.
   (d)   Canopy signs.
      (1)   Canopy signs in the general CBD and convention center subdistricts.
         (A)   No canopy sign may:
            (i)   exceed 50 percent of the length of the canopy facade to which
it is attached;
            (ii)   project horizontally more than two inches from the surface
of the canopy; or
            (iii)   be lower than 10 feet above grade.
         (B)   The total effective area for all canopy signs combined on each
street frontage may not exceed 150 square feet.
         (C)   No canopy sign may project vertically above the surface of the
canopy if a lower level flat attached sign is maintained at that occupancy on
the same facade.
         (D)   No canopy sign may project vertically above the surface of the
canopy more than 15 percent of the overall length of the sign.
         (E)   A canopy sign may only be located over a pedestrian entrance to
a premise.
      (2)   Canopy Signs in the Main Street Subdistrict, Retail Subdistrict A,
and Retail Subdistrict B.
         (A)   No canopy sign may:
            (i)   exceed 60 percent of the length of the canopy facade to which
it is attached;
            (ii)   project horizontally more than 12 inches from the surface of
the canopy; or
            (iii)   be lower than 10 feet above grade.
         (B)   The total effective area for all canopy signs combined on each
street frontage may not exceed 180 square feet.
         (C)   No canopy sign may project vertically above the surface of the
canopy if a lower level flat attached sign is maintained at that occupancy on
the same facade.
         (D)   No canopy sign may project vertically above the surface of the
canopy more than 20 percent of the overall length of the sign.
         (E)   Canopy signs may only be located over a pedestrian entrance to a
premise.
   (e)   Flat attached signs.
      (1)   Lower level flat attached signs.
         (A)   Except as provided in this paragraph, the maximum number of
lower level flat attached signs permitted on a facade is the sum obtained by
counting all of the street entrances and first floor occupants with windows on
that facade with no street entrances.
         (B)   In the general CBD and convention center subdistricts, the
maximum effective area for a lower level flat attached sign is:
            (i)   30 square feet if the sign is within 15 feet of the right-of-
way; and
            (ii)   50 square feet if the sign is more than 15 feet from the
right-of-way.
         (C)   Except as provided in this paragraph, in the Main Street
Subdistrict, Retail Subdistrict A, and Retail Subdistrict B, the maximum
effective area for a lower level flat attached sign is:
            (i)   40 square feet if the sign is within 15 feet of the right-of-
way; or
            (ii)   60 square feet if the sign is more than 15 feet from the
right-of-way.
         (D)   In Retail Subdistrict B, if retaining wall signs are erected
pursuant to Section
51A-7.912, a maximum of one flat attached sign is permitted per building entry
with a maximum effective area of 10 square feet per sign. The provisions of
Subparagraph (C) apply in the absence of retaining wall signs.
      (2)   Middle level flat attached signs.
         (A)   Each middle level flat attached sign may have a maximum of eight
words that contain any character of a height equal to or exceeding four inches.
         (B)   Middle level flat attached signs must be wholly or partially
located within the middle level sign area.
         (C)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, the maximum effective
area for a middle level flat attached sign is 500 square feet. In the Whitacre
Tower Subdistrict the maximum effective area for a middle level flat attached
sign is 784 square feet.
         (D)   Middle level flat attached signs may only display the names or
symbols or a combination thereof representing tenants occupying one or more
full floors or 20,000 square feet or more of leasable building area, whichever
is greater.
         (E)   Middle level flat attached signs are only permitted on buildings
with 10 or more stories.
         (F)   One middle level flat attached sign is permitted for every 100
feet of building height or portion thereof, up to a maximum of three signs, per
facade.
         (G)   Middle level flat attached signs must have a vertical separation
of 75 feet from any other flat attached sign on the same facade in the lower,
middle, or upper level sign area.
      (3)   Upper level flat attached signs.
         (A)   Each upper level flat attached sign may have a maximum of eight
words that contain any character of a height equal to or exceeding four inches.
         (B)   Upper level flat attached signs must be wholly located within
the upper level sign area.
   (f)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   No marquee sign may:
         (A)   exceed 225 square feet for buildings with an entertainment
facility housing 150 seats or less; or
         (B)   exceed 375 square feet for buildings with an entertainment
facility housing more than 150 seats.
      (2)   No marquee sign may be longer than two-thirds of the length of the
frontage of the building to which the marquee is attached.
      (3)   The message area on any marquee sign may not exceed 60 percent of
the effective area of the sign.
      (4)   Marquee signs must have a height dimension of not less than two
feet.
      (5)   No premise may have more than one marquee sign per street frontage.
      (6)   Only an entertainment facility may have a marquee sign.
   (g)   Projecting attached signs.
      (1)   Lower projecting attached signs.
         (A)   No premise may have more than one lower projecting attached sign
per pedestrian entrance.
         (B)   No lower projecting attached sign may exceed 15 square feet in
effective area in the general CBD and convention center subdistricts, or 30
square feet in effective area in the Main Street Sub-district, Retail
Subdistrict A, and Retail Subdistrict B.
         (C)   No lower projecting attached sign may be lower than 10 feet
above grade, or project vertically above the roof of a building, or 25 feet
above grade, whichever is lower.
         (D)   No lower projecting attached sign may project more than five
feet into the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Upper projecting attached signs.
         (A)   No premise may have more than one upper projecting attached
sign.
         (B)   No upper projecting attached sign may project more than five
feet into the public right-of-way.
         (C)   An upper projecting attached sign:
            (i)   may be located outside the upper level sign area; and
            (ii)   may not be lower than 12 feet above grade.
         (D)   The lowest point of an upper projecting attached sign must be
located within 36 feet above grade.
         (E)   No upper projecting attached sign may exceed 180 square feet in
effective area.
      (3)   The board of adjustment may authorize a special exception to the
effective area, height, or location restrictions for a projecting attached sign
if the board finds, after a public hearing, that the special exception will not
be contrary to the public interest, adversely affect neighboring properties, or
create a traffic hazard and that the special exception will be in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this division. In no event may a special
exception granted under this paragraph authorize a sign to exceed 300 square
feet in effective area or 45 feet in height.
      (4)   All projecting attached videoboard signs must have videoboard
displays on both sides of the sign.
   (h)   Media wall signs.
      (1)   One media wall sign is permitted in the Discovery Subdistrict only.
      (2)   A media wall sign may be located no lower than 15 feet from grade
and may be located no higher than 125 feet from grade.
      (3)   Non-premise messages are permitted only when streaming live or pre-
recorded media content that is not simply an advertisement or commercial.
      (4)   For purposes of a media wall sign, PREMISE means the property
within the Discovery Subdistrict and the property within the Media Center Plaza
abutting the Discovery Subdistrict.
      (5)   For purposes of a media wall sign, PREMISE SIGN means any sign that
contains content that relates to the premise and referring exclusively to the
following:
         (A)   the name, trade name, or logo of the owner or occupant of the
premises, or the identification of the premise;
         (B)   accommodations, services, or activities offered or conducted on
the premise;
         (C)   products or media content sold, other than incidentally, on the
premise, the intent of which is not to promote third-party advertising but to
allow the products and media content of the premise, but does not include
monetization from third-party advertising;
         (D)   the sale, lease, or construction of the premise;
         (E)   products or media content owned by the owner or its affiliates,
or by the occupant of the premise;
         (F)   public service or sponsorship announcements; and
         (G)   the streaming of live or pre-recorded content.
      (6)   Media wall signs may be a maximum 9,300 square feet in effective
area. For a media wall sign that wraps around the side of a building, a maximum
of 6,650 square feet in effective area is permitted on the north/Jackson Street
side of the building, and a maximum of 2,650 square feet in effective area is
permitted on the west/Akard Street side of the building.
      (7)   A media wall sign:
         (A)   must contain a default mechanism that freezes the image in one
position in case of a malfunction.
         (B)   must automatically adjust the sign brightness based on natural
ambient light conditions in compliance with the following formula:
            (i)   the ambient light level measured in luxes, divided by 256 and
then rounded down to the nearest whole number, equals the dimming level; then
            (ii)   the dimming level, multiplied by .0039 equals the brightness
level; then
            (iii)   the brightness level, multiplied by the maximum brightness
of the specific sign measured in nits, equals the allowed sign brightness,
measured in nits. For example:
   32,768 (ambient light in luxes) ÷ 256 = 128 (dimming level)
   128 (dimming level) x .0039 = 0.4992 (brightness level)
   0.4992 (brightness level) x 9,000 (maximum brightness of the example sign) =
4492.8 (allowed brightness in nits);
         (C)   between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and
between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday,
            (i)   must display at no more than 300 nits or five percent of the
total brightness of the sign capabilities, whichever is less; and
            (ii)   may utilize no more than 50 percent of the sign's total
diodes and display no text;
         (D)   may not display light of such intensity or brilliance as to
cause glare, impair the vision of an ordinary driver, or constitute a nuisance;
         (E)   must have a color display able to display a minimum of 281
trillion color shades; and
         (F)   must be able to display a high-quality image with a minimum
pixel pitch of six mm.
      (8)   Before the issuance of a media wall sign permit, the applicant
shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer or vendor that:
         (A)   the light intensity has been programmed to comply with the
maximum brightness and dimming formula in Section 51A-7.911(h)(7)(B); and
         (B)   the light intensity is protected from end-user manipulation by
password-protected software, or other method satisfactory to the building
official.
      (9)   Media wall sign operators must respond to a malfunction or safety
issue within one hour after notification.  (Ord. 20927; 21404; 21694; 24606;
24925; 27481; 27795; 28346; 29227; 30685; 31191; 31374 ; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.912.   DETACHED PREMISE SIGNS.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided, all detached premise signs must be monument
signs or landscape signs.
   (b)   No detached premise sign may be located within five feet of a public
right-of-way, except for monument signs or landscape signs, which may be
located at the building line.
   (c)   Except as provided in this section, detached premise signs located
within 15 feet of a public right-of-way may not exceed 20 square feet in
effective area, or five feet in height.
   (d)   Except as provided in this section, detached premise signs with a
setback of 15 feet or greater from a public right-of-way may not exceed 50
square feet in effective area, or 15 feet in height.
   (e)   A detached premise sign may contain only the name, logo, and address
of the premise building and its occupants.
   (f)   Section
51A-7.304(c) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended, does not apply to
monument signs or landscape signs in this district.
   (g)   A premise having more than 450 feet of frontage along a street may
have no more than one additional detached premise sign for each additional 100
feet of frontage or fraction thereof. For purposes of the subsection, “street”
means a right-of-way that provides primary access to adjacent property.
   (h)   The following additional regulations apply in Retail Subdistrict B.
      (1)   Campus identification sign.
         (A)   One campus identification sign is permitted if the building site
contains a single building with a floor area of 1.5 million square feet or
greater.
         (B)   This sign must be located within 15 feet of the right-of-way.
         (C)   Maximum height is four feet, six inches.
         (D)   Maximum effective area is 77 square feet.
         (E)   The message area cannot exceed 70 percent of the effective area.
         (F)   Push-through acrylic lettering is required. No other lettering
is permitted.
      (2)   Additional monument signs.
         (A)   Three additional monument signs are permitted if the building
site contains a single building with a floor area of 1.5 million square feet or
greater.
         (B)   Maximum height is four feet, six inches.
         (C)   Maximum effective area of each sign is 45 square feet.
         (D)   The message area cannot exceed 60 percent of the effective area.
         (E)   These signs may be located along any street, provided there are
no more than five detached premise signs oriented toward any street.
         (F)   The 200-foot spacing provision in Section
51A-7.304, “Detached Signs,” for detached signs on the same premise does not
apply to additional monument signs permitted by this paragraph.
      (3)   Retaining wall signs.
         (A)   A maximum of four retaining wall signs are permitted.
         (B)   Maximum effective area of each sign is 40 square feet.
      (4)   Pedestrian-oriented concession signs.
         (A)   A maximum of three pedestrian-oriented concessions signs are
permitted.
         (B)   These signs may contain campus and associated identification.
         (C)   Minimum setback is 15 feet.
         (D)   Maximum height is eight feet, eight inches.
         (E)   Maximum effective area of each sign is 30 square feet.
         (F)   There is no message area restrictions for these signs.
         (G)   Push-through acrylic lettering is required. No other lettering
is permitted.
      (5)   Illumination.
         (A)   Except as provided in this paragraph, internal sources of
illumination may only be used if the internal source is an integral part of the
sign’s design, such as the use of light emitting diodes (LED) or small
individual incandescent lamps.
         (B)   Except as provided in this paragraph, detached premise signs
must not have a plastic translucent cover.
         (C)   Retaining wall signs and pedestrian-oriented concession signs
may be externally lit, or internally lit with a translucent or transparent
cover, without limitation to the type of lighting or cover materials. (Ord.
Nos. 20167; 21404; 22425; 24606; 24925; 29227 ; 31374 ; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.913.   CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGNS.
   (a)   The director shall review all construction barricade signs for
consistency with the construction fence requirements of the Dallas Central
Business District Streetscape plan. Upon approval of the signs by the director,
a sign permit for the signs may be issued. This review is a condition precedent
for any permit issued for a construction barricade. No additional sign permits
for the barricade may be issued after the barricade permit is issued.
   (b)   A construction barricade sign may not project more than two inches
from the surface of the construction barricade.
   (c)   A construction barricade sign may neither be lighted nor contain any
moving parts.
   (d)   A construction barricade sign must be removed when the construction
barricade is removed.
   (e)   A minimum of ten percent of the effective area of a construction
barricade sign must display city park names, city activities, district
activities, or the names of the owner, occupant, or district sponsor of the
construction site.
   (f)   A construction barricade sign may not exceed eight feet in height.
   (g)   A construction barricade may be fully decorated or graphically
designed if:
      (1)   no decoration or graphic horizontally projects more than two inches
from the surface of the barricade; or
      (2)   no decoration or graphic vertically projects more than four feet
above the top of the barricade.
   (h)   A construction barricade sign may contain one non-premise message per
street frontage. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20167; 21404; 24606; 24925; 25047; 28073;
28347; 28553)
SEC. 51A-7.914.   BANNERS ON STREETLIGHT POLES.
   Banners on streetlight poles are subject to the following regulations:
   (a)   A banner must display a promotional message, a welcome message, or
generic graphics.
   (b)   No more than 10 percent of the effective area of a banner may contain
a welcome message that identifies and greets a group using city property in
accordance with a contract, license, or permit.
   (c)   Up to 10 percent of the effective area of a banner may contain the
word(s) or logo(s) that identify a sponsor of a cultural event or activity if
the sponsor’s name is part of the name of the activity or event.
   (d)   A banner having either a promotional message or a welcome message may
not be erected more than 90 days prior to the beginning of the advertised
activity or event, and must be removed no later than 15 days after that
activity or event has ended. The sign hardware for a banner may be left in
place between displays of a banner.
   (e)   A banner and its sign hardware must:
      (1)   be mounted on a streetlight pole;
      (2)   meet the sign construction and design standards in the Dallas
Building Code;
      (3)   be at least 12 feet above grade, unless it overhangs a roadway, in
which case it must be at least 15 feet above grade;
      (4)   be made out of weather-resistant and rust-proof material;
      (5)   not project more than three feet from the pole onto which it is
mounted; and
      (6)   not exceed 20 square feet in effective area.
   (f)   No sign permit or certificate of appropriateness is required to erect
or remove a banner. (Ord. Nos. 21404; 24606; 24925)
SEC. 51A-7.915.   WINDOW ART DISPLAYS IN VACANT BUILDINGS.
   Window art displays on the ground floor of a vacant building are allowed
subject to the following regulations:
   (a)   A window art display may contain only a promotional message, generic
graphics (including three-dimensional artifacts), a message identifying the
sponsor of the display, or a message referring to the sale or lease of the
premises.
   (b)   Window signs in a window art display may not:
      (1)   cover more than 25 percent of the surface area of a window;
      (2)   contain a logo or word that has any character that exceeds five
inches in height;
      (3)   advertise a specific product or service other than the cultural
event or activity; or
      (4)   have more than 10 percent or four square feet, whichever is less,
of its effective area devoted to sponsorship identification.
   (c)   No sign permit or certificate of appropriateness is required to erect
or remove a window art display. (Ord. Nos. 21404; 24606; 24925)
SEC. 51A-7.916.   NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE NONDISCRIMINATION.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, any sign that may
display a type of noncommercial message may display in place of that message
any other type of noncommercial message, so long as the sign complies with
other requirements of this article and other ordinances that do not pertain to
the content of the message displayed. Section
51A-7.209 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended, applies to this district.
(Ord. Nos. 21404; 24606; 24925)
SEC. 51A-7.917.   ACTIVITY DISTRICT CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGNS.
   (a)   No more than six activity district changeable message signs may be
located in this district.
   (b)   Activity district changeable message signs in the general CBD and
convention center subdistricts:
      (1)   may be attached or detached signs;
      (2)   must be located at least 1500 feet apart;
      (3)   if attached signs, must be located on separate facades; and
      (4)   may not exceed 450 square feet in effective area.
   (c)   Activity district changeable message signs in the Main Street
Subdistrict, Retail Subdistrict A, and Retail Subdistrict B:
      (1)   must be attached signs;
      (2)   must be located at least 300 feet apart;
      (3)   must be located on separate facades; and
      (4)   may not exceed 200 square feet in effective area.
   (d)   A maximum of four activity district changeable message signs may be
located in the general CBD and convention center subdistricts collectively, and
a maximum of two activity district changeable message signs may be located in
the Main Street Subdistrict, Retail Subdistrict A, and Retail Subdistrict B,
collectively.
   (e)   Activity district changeable message signs may not exceed 60 feet in
height.
   (f)   Activity district changeable message signs may only promote district
activities within this district or West End Special Provision Sign District,
Deep Ellum Special Provision Sign District, Arts District Special Provision
Sign District, and Farmers Market Special Provision Sign District.
   (g)   No more than 10 percent of the effective area of a district changeable
message sign may be devoted to sponsorship identification.
   (h)   No more than eight permanent words may be located on an activity
district changeable message sign.
   (i)   There is no limit to the number of words on the changeable message
portion of an activity district changeable message sign.
   (j)   No attached activity district changeable message sign may project
above the roof.
   (k)   Activity district changeable message signs must be securely anchored
and meet design standards approved by the Special Sign District Advisory
Committee. (Ord. Nos. 24606; 24925; 28346; 29227)
SEC. 51A-7.918.    KIOSKS.
   (a)   Kiosks for which permits were issued after March 9, 2005.
      (1)   Kiosks may only be erected as part of a city-wide kiosk program
approved by the city council.
      (2)   Kiosks are not subject to this section, and must meet the design
standards of a city-wide kiosk program approved by the city council.
   (b)   Kiosks for which permits were issued on or before March 9, 2005.
      (1)   Kiosks may display premise or non-premise messages.
      (2)   Kiosks must be spaced at least 300 feet apart.
      (3)   No kiosk may be illuminated by a detached, independent external
light source.
      (4)   Kiosks may not be located on sidewalks unless:
         (A)   an unobstructed sidewalk width of 10 feet is maintained on any
side with a message area; or
         (B)   an unobstructed sidewalk width of seven feet is maintained with
no message area.
      (5)   Kiosks must be securely anchored.
      (6)   Except as provided in this section, kiosks must meet the design
standards of a city-wide kiosk program approved by the city council.
      (7)   Kiosks may contain coin-operated public toilets.
      (8)   Kiosks may not exceed:
         (A)   10 feet in height;
         (B)   80 square feet in effective area; or
         (C)   100 square feet in effective area if a kiosk contains a coin-
operated public toilet.
      (9)   The effective area of a kiosk is measured using the rule for
measuring the effective area of detached signs.
      (10)   The message area of a kiosk may not exceed 60 percent of the
effective area of the kiosk.
         (A)   One-third of the message area of a kiosk must identify a
district activity or be an area way-finding map. The message area identifying a
district activity or containing an area way-finding map must be oriented to be
visible from a sidewalk within the public right-of-way.
         (B)   There is no limit as to the number of words containing
characters of a height equal to or exceeding four inches on a kiosk.
      (11)   Kiosks with area way-finding maps must have the word “information”
or an information symbol above the message area.
      (12)   Kiosks may be relocated within this district, provided the new
location and kiosk design complies with this section. (Ord. Nos. 24606; 24925;
25926)
SEC. 51A-7.919.    MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGNS.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, movement control signs must direct
vehicular or pedestrian movement within this district or to adjacent districts
and may include the name or logo of any premise located in this district or the
name or logo of any adjacent district.
   (b)   Movement control signs that include the name or logo of two or more
premises may:
      (1)   be attached or detached signs;
      (2)   not exceed 30 square feet in effective area;
      (3)   be located in a public right-of-way; or
      (4)   be erected anywhere within the district without limit as to number.
   (c)   Movement control signs that include the name or logo of one premise
may:
      (1)   be attached or detached signs;
      (2)   be erected on the premise without limit as to number;
      (3)   not exceed two square feet in effective area; and
      (4)   not be located in the public right-of-way.
   (d)   The following additional regulations apply in Retail Subdistrict B.
      (1)   Movement control signs cannot include the name or logo of any
premise located in this subdistrict or adjacent subdistricts.
      (2)   Pedestrian movement control signs may:
         (A)   be attached or detached signs;
         (B)   not exceed 10 square feet in effective area;
         (C)   not exceed a message area of 75 percent;
         (D)   not exceed a maximum letter height of five inches;
         (E)   not be located in a public right-of-way; and
         (F)   be erected anywhere in this subdistrict without limitation as to
number.
      (3)   Vehicular movement control signs may:
         (A)   be attached or detached signs;
         (B)   not exceed two square feet in effective area;
         (C)   not be located in a public right-of-way; and
         (D)   be erected anywhere in this subdistrict without limitation as to
number.  (Ord. Nos. 24606; 24925; 29227 ; 31374 ; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.920.   DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   (a)   A district identification sign may only:
      (1)   identify the name or logo of the Main Street Subdistrict, Retail
Subdistrict A, or Retail Subdistrict B as approved by the city council; and
      (2)   be located in the subdistrict it identifies.
   (b)   A district identification sign may be located in the right-of-way.
   (c)   No district identification sign may be a changeable message sign.
   (d)   A district identification sign may only be a monument sign, a banner
sign, or be located on a structure that spans a right-of-way or on a
nonenclosing wall.
   (e)   A maximum of six district identification signs are allowed in the Main
Street Subdistrict, Retail Subdistrict A, and Retail Subdistrict B,
collectively.
   (f)   No district identification sign may exceed 50 square feet in effective
area.
   (g)   No district identification sign may exceed five words.
   (h)   A structure that spans a right-of-way or a nonenclosing wall
containing a district identification sign:
      (1)   may not exceed 900 square feet in effective area;
      (2)   must be at least 15 feet above grade; and
      (3)   may not exceed 25 feet in height.
   (i)   Monument identification signs located within 15 feet of a public
right-of-way may not exceed 20 square feet in effective area, or five feet in
height.
   (j)   Monument identification signs located more than 15 feet from a public
right-of-way may not exceed 50 square feet in effective area, or 15 feet in
height.
   (k)   Banner district identification signs and their hardware must meet the
sign construction and design standards contained in the Dallas Building Code,
and be at least 12 feet above grade, unless they overhang a roadway, in which
case they must be at least 15 feet above grade;
      (1)   No banner district identification sign and its hardware may exceed
25 feet in height;
      (2)   No banner district identification sign and its hardware may project
more than three feet from the pole on which they are mounted;
      (3)   A banner district identification sign and its hardware must be
spaced at least 100 feet from other banner district identification signs;
      (4)   A banner district identification sign and its hardware may not
exceed 24 square feet in effective area; and
      (5)   A banner district identification sign and its hardware must be made
of weather-resistant and rust proof material. (Ord. Nos. 24606; 24925; 29227)
SEC. 51A-7.921.    PROTECTIVE SIGNS.
   (a)   The occupant of a premise may erect no more than two detached
protective signs in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   No sign may exceed 700 square inches in effective area.
      (2)   No detached sign may exceed two feet in height.
      (3)   No word may exceed four inches in height, unless otherwise required
by law.
   (b)   The occupant of a premise may erect attached protective signs at each
entrance to a premise in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   No sign may exceed 700 square inches in effective area.
      (2)   The cumulative messages may not exceed 1,300 square inches per
entrance.
      (3)   No word may exceed four inches in height, unless otherwise required
by law. (Ord. Nos. 24606; 24925)
SEC. 51A-7.922.    SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGNS.
   (a)   Illumination. Special purpose signs may be externally or internally
illuminated.
      (1)   Attached signs.
         (A)   Only one attached premise special purpose sign may be located on
each facade per premise up to four times within any 12-month period as long as:
            (i)   the sign is maintained for no more than 45 days each time
during that 12-month period;
            (ii)   the sign conforms to all other regulations for attached
signs; and
            (iii)   the effective area of the sign does not exceed:
               (aa)   30 percent of the building facade for an entertainment
facility; or
               (bb)   10 percent of the building facade for other uses.
         (B)   There is no limit to the number of words permitted on an
attached premise special purpose sign.
      (2)   Detached special purpose signs are prohibited in this district.
(Ord. Nos. 24606; 24925)
SEC. 51A-7.923.   OTHER TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (a)   In addition to the protective signs permitted under Section
51A-7.921, temporary protective signs may be erected anywhere on a construction
site at anytime during construction subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   There is no limit on the number of temporary protective signs on a
construction site.
      (2)   No sign may exceed 20 square feet in effective area, or eight feet
in height.
      (3)   Temporary protective signs may be illuminated, but no lighting
source may project more than three inches from the vertical surface, or six
inches above the top, of the sign.
      (4)   All temporary protective signs must be removed upon completion of
the construction.
   (b)   “For Sale,” “For Lease,” “Remodeling,” and “Under Construction” signs.
Signs that relate exclusively to the sale, lease, remodeling, or construction
of the premises on which they are located are permitted subject to the
following provisions:
      (1)   Attached signs.
         (A)   There is no limit on the number of attached signs permitted.
         (B)   If the sign is attached to a window, the maximum effective area
of the sign is 16 square feet.
         (C)   If the sign is attached to other portions of a facade, the
maximum effective area of the sign is 32 square feet.
      (2)   Detached signs.
         (A)   Detached signs are limited to one for each 100 feet of frontage
on a public street or private access easement.
         (B)   No detached sign may exceed 128 square feet in effective area,
or 16 feet in height. (Ord. Nos. 24606; 24925)
SECS. 51A-7.924 THRU 51A-7.929.   RESERVED.
SEC. 51A-7.930.   SUPERGRAPHIC SIGNS.
   (a)   Definitions.   In this section:
      (1)   AFFILIATE means any person who is an owner, shareholder, member,
partner, agent, officer, or director of an applicant for a supergraphic sign
location permit pursuant to this section or a person who has a contractual
relationship with an applicant related to supergraphic signs.
      (2)   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT WALLSCAPE SIGN means a supergraphic sign
located in the inner loop area that is neither a promotional wallscape nor a
civic center wallscape.
      (3)   CIVIC CENTER WALLSCAPE SIGN means a supergraphic sign located on a
city-owned performance venue with a minimum 1,000 person seating capacity,
convention center, or library.
      (3.1)   EXPOSED PARTY WALL means the remaining outer wall of a structure
that formally was a part of a common wall between two adjoining structures.
      (4)   INNER LOOP AREA means the Main Street Subdistrict, Retail
Subdistrict A, Retail Subdistrict B, the Convention Center Subdistrict, the
General CBD Subdistrict, the Akard Station Subdistrict, and the Whitacre Tower
Subdistrict.
      (5)   LOCATION PERMIT means a sign permit to erect a supergraphic sign in
a specific location.
      (6)   PROMOTIONAL WALLSCAPE SIGN means a supergraphic sign that
identifies or promotes a cultural activity or sporting event that significantly
benefits the city.
      (7)   QUALIFIED APPLICANT means any person who has been qualified by the
director to apply for a location permit.
      (8)   SUPERGRAPHIC SIGN means a large attached premise or non-premise
sign on a mesh or fabric surface, or a projection of a light image onto a wall
face without the use of lasers.
      (9)   WALL FACE means an uninterrupted blank plane of a wall, from
vertical edge to vertical edge, from its highest edge to its lowest edge. Edges
can be established by a distinct change in materials or off-set which runs
across (transects) the entire wall in a straight line.
   (b)   Visual display and coverage.
      (1)   Except as provided in this paragraph, a supergraphic sign must have
one large visual display with a minimum of 80 percent non-textual graphic
content (no more than 20 percent text).
         (A)   Multiple displays giving an appearance of multiple signs are
prohibited.
         (B)   The effective area of text is the sum of the areas within
minimum imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which
fully contains a word.
         (C)   A promotional wallscape sign may contain 10 percent text or logo
related to sponsorship. The remainder of the promotional wallscape sign must
promote the special event.
      (2)   Subject to the maximum effective area in Subsection (c), a central
business district wallscape sign must cover at least 60 percent of the wall
face of the building to which it is attached. The lower 10 feet of the wall
face may not be covered and is disregarded in calculating the coverage area.
      (3)   Supergraphic signs are intended to be creative and artful and not
strictly a representation of an advertised product. It is the intent of this
provision to:
         (A)   encourage the use of illustrative images or other non-repetitive
design elements;
         (B)   encourage visually interesting, vibrant, and colorful designs;
         (C)   discourage use of solid colors or repetitive design elements;
and
         (D)    discourage an image of a single product or product logo without
other graphic elements.
      (4)   Supergraphic signs may be externally illuminated.
      (5)   No building may have more than two central business district
wallscape signs. The two central business district wallscape signs must be
oriented a minimum of 90 degrees from each other.
   (c)   Effective area. Minimum permitted effective area of a central business
district wallscape sign is 2,500 square feet. This subsection controls over
Paragraph (b)(2).
   (d)   Height. No central business district wallscape sign or civic center
wallscape sign may exceed 450 feet in height. There is no maximum height for
promotional wallscape signs.
   (e)   Number of sign locations permitted.
      (1)   No more than 22 central business district wallscape locations are
permitted within the inner loop area.
      (2)   No more than four civic center wallscape locations are permitted
within the inner loop area.
      (3)   No supergraphic signs are permitted outside of the inner loop area.
   (f)   Extensions.
      (1)   Except as provided in Paragraph (2), a supergraphic sign may not
extend beyond the edge of the face of the building to which it is attached.
      (2)   A supergraphic sign may wrap around the edge of a building if:
         (A)   both building facades to which the supergraphic sign is attached
are otherwise eligible facades; and
         (B)   the supergraphic sign is one continuous image.
   (g)   Location.
      (1)   A central business district wallscape sign may only be located on a
blank wall face.
      (2)   A central business district wallscape sign on a federal-, state-,
or city- designated historic or landmark structure may only be located on a
blank exposed party wall. For a central business district wallscape sign
located on a city-designated historic or landmark structure, the installation
mechanism must be approved by the landmark commission.
      (3)   No supergraphic sign may:
         (A)   cover any window or architectural or design feature of the
building to which it is attached;
         (B)   be attached to a federal-, state-, or city-designated historic
or landmark structure unless it complies with Paragraph (2);
         (C)   be attached to a facade erected or altered after June 1, 2005;
         (D)   be attached to a facade on Pacific Avenue between Akard Street
and Ervay Street;
         (E)   be attached to a facade facing Main Street Garden or Belo
Garden.
      (4)   Except as provided in Paragraph(5), central business district
wallscape signs are only permitted on parking structures or buildings with
lodging, residential, retail and personal service, or office uses occupying at
least 75 percent of the leasable ground floor area and an overall building
occupancy of at least 50 percent of the floor area.
      (5)   The director may waive the requirements in Paragraph(4) for up to
one year if the director determines that the building or multi- building
complex is currently being redeveloped. The director may revoke this waiver if
redevelopment stops or is inactive for 90 days or more.
   (h)    Message duration. A supergraphic sign location may not display the
same message for more than four consecutive months in any 12-month period.
   (i)    Hardware fasteners. All hardware fasteners for a supergraphic sign
must comply with the Dallas Building Code and all other ordinances, rules, and
regulations of the City of Dallas.
   (j)    HBA signs prohibited. No supergraphic sign may be a Highway
Beautification Act (HBA) sign as defined in Section
51A-7.102.
   (k)    Permits.
      (1)   Application to be a qualified applicant.
         (A)   An applicant shall submit an application to the director for the
purpose of qualifying as an applicant. The application must include:
            (i)   the name, address, phone number, and other pertinent
information of the applicant, and if the applicant is a business entity, the
names and business addresses of the principal officers, managers, and other
persons who own more than five percent of the entity; and
            (ii)   an affidavit stating that the applicant is in good standing
with the city on all code enforcement matters related to supergraphic signs.
         (B)   A person may not qualify as an applicant if that person:
            (i)   has any outstanding code violations related to supergraphic
signs;
            (ii)   has previously displayed a non-permitted supergraphic sign
within the previous 12 month period; or
            (iii)   is an affiliate of another qualified applicant.
      (2)   Location permit.
         (A)    Qualified applicants must submit a separate location permit
application for each location. The director shall time stamp all applications
upon receipt.
         (B)   The director shall review location permit applications in order
of submittal. If the director determines that a location permit application is
incomplete or does not meet the guidelines, the director shall reject the
application and then review the next location permit application. If the
initial number of location permit applications exceeds the number of location
permits available, the director shall provide for a lottery to distribute the
location permits.
         (C)   An application for a supergraphic sign location permit must
contain:
            (i)   a memorandum of lease, sworn to by affidavit, that shows that
the qualified applicant has an enforceable lease for a supergraphic location;
            (ii)   an affidavit stating that the property where the
supergraphic sign will be located has no outstanding code enforcement matters;
            (iii)   a current tax certificate and affidavit stating that there
are no unpaid governmental liens for the supergraphic sign location; and
            (iv)   an affidavit stating that the building meets the occupancy
requirements in Paragraph (g)(3).
         (D)   Location permit holders may not be an affiliate of any other
location permit holder.
         (E)   A person may not have more than nine pending or active location
permits combined at any one time.
         (F)   A person shall not obtain a location permit for use by another
person.
         (G)   A location permit expires four years after the date of issuance.
         (H)   The director shall revoke a location permit if the location has
displayed obsolete supergraphic advertising or has been without supergraphic
advertising matter for six months or more.
         (I)   A holder of a location permit may apply for renewal of the
location permit by filing a complete application for renewal with the director
no more than 180 days before the expiration of the current permit. To be
eligible for a renewal of a location permit, an applicant must meet the
qualification criteria under Paragraph (1).
      (3)   Promotional wallscape signs. An application for a promotional
wallscape must be supported by a resolution of the city council that recognizes
the activity or event as significantly benefiting the city. A promotional
wallscape may not be erected more than 60 days before the beginning of the
activity or event and must be removed not later than 30 days after the activity
or event has ended.
      (4)   Review procedure. The director shall review all applications for
location permits and copy change permits using the director procedure in
Section
51A-7.505.
   (l)   Mandatory removal in 2027. All supergraphic signs must be removed on
or before August 31, 2027. This section does not confer a nonconforming or
vested right to maintain a supergraphic sign after August 31, 2027, and all
permits authorizing supergraphic signs shall automatically expire on that date
   (m)   Sunset. This section expires on August 31, 2027, unless re-enacted
with amendment before that date. The city plan commission and city council
shall review this section before its expiration date. (Ord. Nos. 24717; 24925;
24926; 25291; 25995; 27300; 27587; 28346; 28347; 28553; 29227; 31229)
SEC. 51A-7.931.   CONVENTION CENTER COMPLEX ACCENT LIGHTING.
   (a)   The convention center complex may have building accent lighting
consisting of LED or similar technology that changes colors and brightness.
   (b)   Convention center complex accent lighting may display images, symbols,
logos, or words that are associated with
      (1)   a convention or event taking place within the convention center
complex or;
      (2)   an event or activities taking place within the Downtown Special
Provision Sign District. (Ord. 28346)
SEC. 51A-7.932.    AKARD STATION SUBDISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the intent of this subdistrict to:
      (1)   create an aesthetically pleasing environment that promotes an
atmosphere of vitality appropriate for a place where thousands of citizens
gather for living, working, commuting, entertainment, and celebration;
      (2)   encourage the use of innovative, colorful, and entertaining signs,
and signs that bring a distinctive character and attract people to downtown;
      (3)   identify and promote Akard Station as a vibrant centerpiece of
ingress and egress in the heart of the Central Business District;
      (4)   encourage signs with a style, orientation, and location that take
into consideration the high number of pedestrians and commuters expected within
this district;
      (5)   communicate clear directions to and through the subdistrict; and
      (6)   promote the economic success of businesses within the subdistrict.
   (b)   In general. Except as provided in this section, signs must comply with
the Downtown Special Provision Sign District in Division 51A-7.900. If there is
a conflict between the text of this section and this division, the text of this
section controls.
   (c)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN means a sign identifying a building
within the subdistrict.
      (2)    FACADE-INTEGRATED SIGN means a sign that is part of a skin system
for a portion of a building facade, has no fenestration, projects no more than
12 inches from the building facade, and the sign hardware is visually concealed
from public rights-of-way.
      (3)   MIDDLE-LEVEL SIGN AREA means that portion of a building facade that
is between the lower-level sign area and the upper-level sign area not to
exceed 100 feet above grade.
      (4)   UPPER-LEVEL SIGN AREA means that portion of a building facade 36
feet or less from the top of a building.
   (d)   Special provisions for all signs.
      (1)   The maximum effective area of all signs combined is 10 percent of
the total area of all building facades within this subdistrict.
      (2)   Permits for all signs in the Akard Station Subdistrict are subject
to the director procedure in Section 51A-7.505(4).
      (3)   Except as otherwise limited by maximum effective areas allowed in
this subdistrict, there is no maximum size or number of individual signs.
   (e)   Non-premise signs.
      (1)   Non-premise signs are only allowed on a building constructed before
1970 that contains at least 1,000,000 square feet of floor area.
      (2)   Non-premise signs may only be located in the middle-level sign
area.
      (3)   Maximum total effective area of non-premise signs is 19,100 square
feet. Minimum effective area of a single non-premise sign is 3,000 square feet.
A message that wraps a building corner is considered one sign.   
      (4)   Not more than 50 percent of all non-premise signage may be digital.
      (5)   The portion of a non-premise facade-integrated sign not devoted to
building identification must be one large visual display with a minimum of 80
percent non-textual graphic content (no more than 20 percent text).
      (6)   A maximum of six signs may display non-premise messages at one
time.
      (7)   No more than two non-premise signs may be displayed on a facade at
one time.
      (8)   The same non-premise sign message may not be displayed for a period
longer than 12 consecutive months.
   (f)   Digital signs.
      (1)   Digital signs must be facade-integrated signs and may only be
located in the middle-level sign area.
      (2)   Digital signs must comply with the operational requirements for
attached videoboard signs in Section 51A-7.910.
   (g)   HBA signs. No sign may be a Highway Beautification Act (HBA) sign as
defined in Section 51A-7.102.
   (h)   Lower-level sign area.
      (1)   The total effective area for all signs in the lower-level sign area
is 7,500 square feet.
      (2)   Premise signs located behind a window with at least 75 percent non-
textual graphic content are not included in the calculation of effective area
of signage within the lower-level sign area.
      (3)   Signs may be attached to a window or glass door and may exceed 15
percent of the area of that window or glass door or be located within the upper
two-thirds of that window or glass door if the building official determines
that the proposed signs do not eliminate visibility into or out of the premise.
A sign authorized by this paragraph:
         (A)   must be made of translucent vinyl or a similar material with at
least a 65/35 perforation pattern (a maximum of 65 percent of the area is
closed, a minimum of 35 percent of the area is open); and
         (B)   may only have images; any text or characters on the sign are
limited to 15 percent of the window area and are only permitted in the lower
one-third of the window.
      (4)   Facade-integrated signs are not allowed in the lower-level sign
area.
   (i)   Middle-level sign area.
      (1)   The total effective area for all signs in the middle-level sign
area is 30,000 square feet.
      (2)   Middle-level signs must be facade-integrated signs. Facade-
integrated signs may be digital signs or static signs with a light source that
is not directly visible.
      (3)   To effectively balance the desire for significant signage and
vibrancy within this subdistrict, a minimum of 1,400 square feet of effective
area must display promotional messages in the Central Business District. An
additional minimum of 1,500 square feet of effective area must display:
         (A)   promotional messages in the Central Business District, or
         (B)   images of artwork, historically significant buildings, or events
within the city.
      (4)   A minimum of 1,800 square feet of the effective area of facade-
integrated signs must be a building identification signage. Building
identification signage may be included within or as a portion of any other
sign.
      (5)   Digital signs are prohibited on a building facade facing Akard
Street.
      (6)   Each new non-premise sign permit application for signs in the
middle-level sign area must be submitted with a form provided by the department
of development services detailing compliance with this section.
   (j)   Upper-level sign area.
      (1)   The total effective area for all signs in the upper-level sign area
is 6,500 square feet.
      (2)   Facade-integrated signs are not allowed in the upper-level sign
area.
   (k)   Signage study.
      (1)   Property owner or operator shall submit a signage study evaluating
the types and ratio of signs in this subdistrict. The signage study must be in
writing, must be submitted to the director between 60 and 90 days before
December 31, 2021, and must include:
         (A)   a summary of all middle-level sign permit applications,
including the forms submitted detailing compliance with this section; and
         (B)   the total number of notices of violation and citations issued by
the City of Dallas for violating this section since May 27, 2015.
      (2)   Within 30 days after submission of the signage study, the director
shall forward to the city council. If no signage study is submitted by the
deadline, the director shall notify city council.
   (j)   Nonconforming or vested rights. This section does not confer a
nonconforming or vested right to maintain a non-premise sign after the maximum
period allowed for a non-premise message has expired. (Ord. Nos. 29751; 32002)
Division 51A-7.1000. West End Historic Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.1001.   DESIGNATION OF WEST END HISTORIC SIGN DISTRICT.
   (a)   The West End Historic Sign District is hereby recognized as that area
of the city within the boundaries described in the Exhibit A attached to
Ordinance No. 30139, passed by the Dallas City Council on June 22, 2016.
   (b)   The Purse Building subdistrict is hereby created within the West End
Historic Sign District. The boundaries of the Purse Building subdistrict are
described in Exhibit B attached to Ordinance No. 30139, passed by the Dallas
City Council on June 22, 2016.
   (c)   The Antioch Church subdistrict is hereby created within the West End
Historic Sign District. The boundaries of the Antioch Church subdistrict are
described in Exhibit C attached to Ordinance No. 30663, passed by the Dallas
City Council on September 27, 2017.
   (d)   The MKT subdistrict is hereby created within the West End Historic
Sign District. The boundaries of the MKT subdistrict are described in Exhibit D
attached to Ordinance No. 32817, passed by the Dallas City Council on August
14, 2024.
   (e)   The Lawyers Building subdistrict is hereby created within the West End
Historic Sign District. The boundaries of the Lawyers Building subdistrict are
described in Exhibit E attached to Ordinance No. 33011, passed by the Dallas
City Council on February 12, 2025. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 21404; 22112; 26027;
30139; 30663; 32817; 33011)
SEC. 51A-7.1002.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to regulate the construction of new signage
and alterations made to existing signage with a view towards preserving the
historic nature of this district. The general objectives of this division
include those listed in Section
51A-7.101 as well as aesthetic considerations to insure that new signage is of
appropriate historical design and does not visually obscure significant
architectural features of a building or the district in general. (Ord. Nos.
19455; 21404; 22112; 26027)
SEC. 51A-7.1003.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   BANNER means a sign attached to or applied on a strip of cloth and
temporarily attached to a building or structure. Canopy signs and political
flags are not banners.
      (2)   CANOPY SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by a
canopy or awning.
      (3)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting four or less
inches from a building.
      (4)   GENERIC GRAPHICS means any pattern of shapes, colors, or symbols
that does not commercially advertise.
      (5)   LOWER LEVEL SIGN means a sign partially or wholly situated below
the top of the first floor windows or, if there are no first floor windows,
below a point 12 feet above grade.
      (6)   MARQUEE means a permanent canopy projecting over the main entrance
of a building. A marquee is considered to be part of the building.
      (7)   MARQUEE SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by
a marquee.
      (8)   NIGHT means the time period from one-half hour after sunset to one-
half hour before sunrise.
      (9)   PAINTED APPLIED SIGN means a sign painted directly on to the
exterior facade of a building, not including doors and windows.
      (10)   PROJECTING ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign, other than a roof
sign, projecting 18 or more inches from a building.
      (11)   PROMOTIONAL MESSAGE means a message that identifies or promotes a
cultural activity or event that benefits the city. Benefit to the city is
established by:
         (A)   use of city property in accordance with a contract, license, or
permit;
         (B)   the receipt of city monies for the activity or event; or
         (C)   resolution of the city council that recognizes the activity or
event as benefitting the city.
      (12)   ROOF SIGN means a sign that is attached by sign supports to the
roof of a building.
      (13)   SIGN HARDWARE means the structural support system for a sign,
including the fastening devices that secure a sign to a building facade or
pole.
      (14)   THIS DISTRICT means the West End Historic Sign District.
      (15)   TYPE A FACADE means a facade with a total window area comprising
between 30 and 50 percent (inclusive) of the total facade area.
      (16)   TYPE B FACADE means a facade with a total window area comprising
less than 30 or more than 50 percent of the total facade area.
      (17)   UPPER LEVEL SIGN means a sign wholly situated above the top of the
first floor windows or, if there are no first floor windows, above a point 12
feet above grade.
      (18)   WELCOME MESSAGE means a message that identifies and greets heads
of state, foreign dignitaries, groups using city property in accordance with a
contract, license, or permit, or government organizations.
      (19)   WINDOW ART DISPLAY means an exhibit or arrangement placed within a
storefront window of a building and designed to be viewed from a street.
      (20)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign painted on or affixed to a window. (Ord.
Nos. 19455; 21404; 22112; 26027)
SEC. 51A-7.1004.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   (a)   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the rules relating to the erection of all signs in
the West End Historic Sign District are as follows:
      (1)   No illuminated sign may contain flashing or moving elements or
change its brightness, except as otherwise provided in this division.
      (2)   Except for a marquee sign or a sign constructed of fiberglass, no
sign may be illuminated by fluorescent or back lighting. The use of indirect
lighting is allowed.
      (3)   The use of neon and single incandescent bulbs is allowed.
      (4)   Except for a marquee sign, the use of plastic on the exterior of a
sign is prohibited. For purposes of this provision, fiberglass is not
considered to be plastic.
      (5)   The use of a fluorescent color on a sign is prohibited.
      (6)   No sign or part of a sign may move or rotate, with the exception of
a wind device, the motion of which is not restricted.
      (7)   Except as provided in Sections
51A-7.1008 and
51A-7.1009, all signs must be premise signs or convey a noncommercial message.
      (8)   No sign may cover or obscure any portion of a major decorative
cornice of a building.
   (b)   The following typestyles are suggested, but not required, for signs in
this district: Americana Extra Bold, Aster Bold, Baskerville Bold, Bodoni Bold,
Bookman Bold, Caslon No. 3, Cheltenham Bold, Copperplate Gothic 31, Craw
Modern, Egyptian 505 Bold, Garamond Bold, Gothic 13, Goudy Extra Bold, Times
Roman Bold. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 21404; 21626; 22112; 22392; 26027)
SEC. 51A-7.1005.   ATTACHED SIGNS.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the rules relating to the erection of attached signs
in the West End Historic Sign District are as follows:
   (a)   Attached signs in general.
      (1)   Attached signs must be securely attached.
      (2)   Attached signs overhanging the public way are permitted, except
that no sign may project closer than two feet to the vertical plane extending
through the back of a street curb.
      (3)   Attached signs projecting horizontally more than 18 inches from a
vertical building surface are prohibited.
      (4)   Except for a painted applied sign or a marquee sign, no attached
sign may exceed 30 square feet in effective area unless it is:
         (A)   attached to a building having more than six stories; and
         (B)   at least 36 feet above grade.
      (5)   An attached sign, other than a roof sign, must be mounted parallel
to the facade and may not project more than six feet above the surface to which
it is attached.
   (b)   Canopy signs.
      (1)   No canopy sign may:
         (A)   be lower than 10 feet above grade, except that a sign may be as
low as eight feet above grade if it does not project more than one-half inch
from the surface of the canopy; or
         (B)   project vertically above the surface of the canopy or awning.
      (2)   The total effective area permitted for all canopy signs combined on
a premise is the product obtained by multiplying 20 square feet times the
number of street entrances to the premise.
   (c)   Flat attached signs on Type A facades.
      (1)   The maximum number of lower level flat attached signs permitted on
a Type A facade is the sum obtained by counting all of the street entrances and
first floor windows on that facade.
      (2)   No lower level flat attached sign on a Type A facade may exceed six
feet in effective area.
      (3)   The maximum permitted effective area for all upper level flat
attached signs combined on each Type A facade is 30 square feet.
      (4)   No upper level flat attached sign on a Type A facade may contain
more than eight words. All words must:
         (A)   consist of characters eight inches or more in height; and
         (B)   read horizontally from left to right.
   (d)   Flat attached signs on Type B facades.
      (1)   No premise may have more than three flat attached signs on each
Type B facade.
      (2)   No flat attached sign on a Type B facade may contain more than
eight words with characters four or more inches in height. Words consisting of
characters less than four inches in height may be used without limit.
   (e)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   No marquee sign may exceed 90 square feet in effective area unless
it is for a theater, in which case it may not exceed 400 square feet in
effective area.
      (2)   Marquee signs must:
         (A)   be parallel to the surface to which they are attached; and
         (B)   have a minimum height dimension of two feet.
      (3)   Except for a marquee sign for a theater, all words on a marquee
sign must consist of changeable individual characters.
      (4)   Marquee signs may have flashing lights.
      (5)   The following provisions apply to a marquee sign for a theater:
         (A)   No more than 10 percent of its effective area may contain fixed
characters.
         (B)   No more than 75 percent of its effective area may contain
changeable characters.
         (C)   It may contain an unlimited number of words consisting of
changeable characters.
   (f)   Painted applied signs on Type A facades.
      (1)   No lower level painted applied signs on a Type A facade may contain
words consisting of characters more than eight inches in height.
      (2)   No upper level painted applied sign on a Type A facade may contain
more than eight words. All words must:
         (A)   consist of characters eight or more inches in height; and
         (B)   read horizontally from left to right.
   (g)   Painted applied signs on Type B facades.
      (1)   No painted applied sign on a Type B facade may contain more than
eight words consisting of characters exceeding four inches in height. Words
consisting of characters four or less inches in height may be used without
limit.
      (2)   No more than 60 percent of a Type B facade may be covered by
painted applied signs.
   (h)   Projecting attached signs.
      (1)   No premise may have more than one projecting attached sign per
street entrance.
      (2)   No projecting attached sign may:
         (A)   exceed 20 square feet in effective area;
         (B)   be lower than 10 feet above grade; or
         (C)   project vertically above the second story or the roof of the
building, whichever is lower.
   (i)   Window signs. No window sign may:
      (1)   contain words consisting of characters eight or more inches in
height;
      (2)   have a painted background; or
      (3)   cover more than 25 percent of the window surface area.
   (j)   Roof signs.
      (1)   Only buildings having six or more stories may have roof signs.
      (2)   No more than one roof sign may be located above each facade.
      (3)   No roof sign may be erected on a roof:
         (A)   lower than the sixth story ceiling;
         (B)   that is not the main roof of a building; or
         (C)   of a penthouse.
      (4)   A roof sign and its sign supports may not be located within four
feet of a parapet wall or the outer edge of a building.
      (5)   The sign supports for a roof sign must consist of open, exposed
metal framing. The metal must be painted, coated, or of a material that will
not rust or corrode.
      (6)   No roof sign may project above the roof more than one-fourth of the
building height.
      (7)   The effective area of a roof sign may not exceed 800 square feet.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 20927; 21404; 21626; 22112; 26027)
SEC. 51A-7.1006.   DETACHED SIGNS.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the rules relating to the erection of detached signs
in the West End Historic Sign District are as follows:
      (1)   No premise which maintains an attached sign of any type may have a
detached sign.
      (2)   No detached sign may:
         (A)   have an effective area greater than 12 square feet;
         (B)   have a total height greater than 15 feet; or
         (C)   be located less than five feet from a public right-of-way. (Ord.
Nos. 19455; 21404; 22112; 26027)
SEC. 51A-7.1007.   SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGNS.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the rules relating to the erection of special
purpose signs in the West End Historic Sign District are as follows:
   (a)   Attached special purpose signs.
      (1)   Attached special purpose signs may be displayed on a premise a
maximum of ten time periods in each calendar year for a maximum of 15 days per
time period. No more than one attached special purpose sign may be displayed on
a premise at any given time.
      (2)   Special purpose signs attached to a window may not cover more than
25 percent of the window surface area.
      (3)   No more than one banner may be displayed on a premise in each
calendar year. The maximum permitted period of display is 30 consecutive days.
   (b)   Detached special purpose signs.
      (1)   No detached special purpose sign is permitted on a sidewalk less
than seven feet wide. All detached special purpose signs must be placed so that
a minimum seven-foot wide clear passageway is maintained for pedestrian
traffic.
      (2)   No detached special purpose sign may:
         (A)   be displayed at night;
         (B)   be more than 30 inches from a building; or
         (C)   exceed a height of four feet.
      (3)   No more than one detached special purpose sign may be displayed on
a premise at any given time. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 21404; 22112; 26027)
SEC. 51A-7.1007.1.   PURSE BUILDING SUBDISTRICT.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this division, the provisions of the
West End Historic Sign District apply in this subdistrict.
   (b)   Definitions. In this subdistrict:
      (1)   SUPERGRAPHIC SIGN means a large attached premise or non-premise
sign on a mesh or fabric surface, or a projection of a light image onto a wall
face without the use of lasers.
      (2)   WALL FACE means an uninterrupted blank plane of a wall, from
vertical edge to vertical edge, from its highest edge to its lowest edge. Edges
can be established by a distinct change in materials or off-set which runs
across (transects) the entire wall in a straight line.
   (c)   Supergraphic sign.
      (1)   Number. A maximum of one supergraphic sign is permitted.
      (2)   Visual display and coverage.
         (A)   The supergraphic sign must have one large visual display with a
minimum of 80 percent non-textual graphic content (no more than 20 percent
text).
            (i)   Multiple displays giving an appearance of multiple signs are
prohibited.
            (ii)   The effective area of text is the sum of the areas within
minimum imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which
fully contains a word.
         (B)   The supergraphic sign is intended to be creative and artful and
not strictly a representation of an advertised product. It is the intent of
this provision to:
            (i)   encourage the use of illustrative images or other non-
repetitive design elements;
            (ii)   encourage visually interesting, vibrant, and colorful
designs;
            (iii)   discourage use of solid colors or repetitive design
elements; and
            (iv)   discourage an image of a single product or product logo
without other graphic elements.
         (C)   The supergraphic sign may be internally or externally
illuminated. If internally illuminated, the supergraphic sign may consist of
translucent materials, but not transparent materials.
         (D)   The supergraphic sign may not extend beyond the edge of the face
of the building to which it is attached.
      (3)   Effective area. Minimum permitted effective area is 2,500 square
feet. Maximum permitted effective area is 6,500 square feet.
      (4)   Height. The supergraphic sign may not be lower than 10 feet above
grade level.
      (5)   Location. The supergraphic sign may only be located on the east
facade of the building.
      (6)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   All hardware fasteners for the supergraphic sign must comply
with the Dallas Building Code and all other ordinances, rules, and regulations
of the City of Dallas.
         (B)   The supergraphic sign may not be a Highway Beautification Act
(HBA) sign as defined in Section
51A-7.102.
         (C)   The existing painted sign on the east facade must remain
uncovered and visible.
(Ord. Nos. 30139; 31204)
SEC. 51A-7.1007.2.      ANTIOCH CHURCH SUBDISTRICT.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this division, the provisions of the
West End Historic Sign District apply in this subdistrict.
   (b)   Definitions. In this subdistrict:
      (1)   SUPERGRAPHIC SIGN means a large attached premise or non-premise
sign on a mesh or fabric surface, a projection of a light image onto a wall
face without the use of lasers, or painted or vinyl adhesive signage.
      (2)   WALL FACE means an uninterrupted blank plane of a wall, from
vertical edge to vertical edge, from its highest edge to its lowest edge. Edges
can be established by a distinct change in materials or off-set which runs
across (transects) the entire wall in a straight line.
   (c)   Supergraphic sign.
      (1)   Number. A maximum of one supergraphic sign is permitted.
      (2)   Visual display and coverage.
         (A)   The supergraphic sign must have one large visual display with a
minimum of 80 percent non-textual graphic content (no more than 20 percent
text).
            (i)   Multiple displays giving an appearance of multiple signs are
prohibited.
            (ii)   The effective area of text is the sum of the areas within
minimum imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which
fully contains a word.
         (B)   The supergraphic sign is intended to be creative and artful and
not strictly a representation of an advertised product. It is the intent of
this provision to:
            (i)   encourage the use of illustrative images or other non-
repetitive design elements;
            (ii)   encourage visually interesting, vibrant, and colorful
designs;
            (iii)   discourage use of solid colors or repetitive design
elements; and
            (iv)   discourage an image of a single product or product logo
without other graphic elements.
         (C)   The supergraphic sign may be internally or externally
illuminated. If internally illuminated, the supergraphic sign may consist of
translucent materials, but not transparent materials.
         (D)   The supergraphic sign may not extend beyond the edge of the face
of the building to which it is attached.
      (3)   Effective area. Minimum permitted effective area is 2,500 square
feet. Maximum permitted effective area is 6,500 square feet.
      (4)   Height. The supergraphic sign may not be lower than 10 feet above
grade level.
      (5)   Location. The supergraphic sign may only be located on the east
facade of the building.
      (6)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   All hardware fasteners for the supergraphic sign must comply
with the Dallas Building Code and all other ordinances, rules, and regulations
of the City of Dallas.
         (B)   The supergraphic sign may not be a Highway Beautification Act
(HBA) sign as defined in Section
51A-7.102.
         (C)   The supergraphic sign may not display the same message for more
than six consecutive months in any 12-month period.
         (D)   The supergraphic sign must be removed on or before September 27,
2027. This section does not confer a nonconforming or vested right to maintain
a supergraphic sign after September 27, 2027, and all permits authorizing a
supergraphic sign automatically expire on that date.
   (d)   This section expires on September 27, 2027, unless re-enacted before
that date. The city plan commission and city council shall review this section
before its expiration date. (Ord. Nos. 30663; 31203)
SEC. 51A-7.1007.3.   MKT SUBDISTRICT.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this division, the provisions of the
West End Historic Sign District apply in this subdistrict.
   (b)   Definitions. In this subdistrict:
      (1)   SUPERGRAPHIC SIGN means a large attached premise or non-premise
sign on a mesh or fabric surface, a projection of a light image onto a wall
face without the use of lasers, or painted or vinyl adhesive signage.
      (2)   WALL FACE means an uninterrupted blank plane of a wall, from
vertical edge to vertical edge, from its highest edge to its lowest edge. Edges
can be established by a distinct change in materials or off-set which runs
across (transects) the entire wall in a straight line.
   (c)   Supergraphic sign.
      (1)   Number. A maximum of one supergraphic sign is permitted.
      (2)   Visual display and coverage.
         (A)   The supergraphic sign must have one large visual display with a
minimum of 70 percent non-textual graphic content (no more than 30 percent
text).
            (i)   Multiple displays giving an appearance of multiple signs are
prohibited.
            (ii)   The effective area of text is the sum of the areas within
minimum imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which
fully contains a word.
         (B)   The supergraphic sign is intended to be creative and artful and
not strictly a representation of an advertised product. It is the intent of
this provision to:
            (i)   encourage the use of illustrative images or other non-
repetitive design elements;
            (ii)   encourage visually interesting, vibrant, and colorful
designs; and
            (iii)   discourage use of solid colors or repetitive design
elements.
         (C)   The supergraphic sign may be internally or externally
illuminated. If internally illuminated, the supergraphic sign may consist of
translucent materials, but not transparent materials.
         (D)   The supergraphic sign may not extend beyond the edge of the face
of the building to which it is attached.
      (3)   Effective area. Minimum permitted effective area is 2,500 square
feet. Maximum permitted effective area is 6,500 square feet.
      (4)   Height. The supergraphic sign may not be lower than 10 feet above
grade level.
      (5)   Location. The supergraphic sign may only be located on the east
facade of the building.
      (6)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   All hardware fasteners for the supergraphic sign must comply
with the Dallas Building Code and all other ordinances, rules, and regulations
of the City of Dallas.
         (B)   The supergraphic sign may not be a Highway Beautification Act
(HBA) sign as defined in Section
51A-7.102.
         (C)   The supergraphic sign may not display the same message for more
than six consecutive months in any 12-month period. (Ord. No. 32817)
SEC. 51A-7.1007.4.   LAWYERS BUILDING SUBDISTRICT.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this division, the provisions of the
West End Historic Sign District apply in this subdistrict.
   (b)   Definitions. In this subdistrict:
      (1)   SUPERGRAPHIC SIGN means a large attached premise or non-premise
sign on a mesh or fabric surface, a projection of a light image onto a wall
face without the use of lasers, or painted or vinyl adhesive signage.
      (2)   WALL FACE means an uninterrupted blank plane of a wall, from
vertical edge to vertical edge, from its highest edge to its lowest edge. Edges
can be established by a distinct change in materials or off-set which runs
across (transects) the entire wall in a straight line.
   (c)   Supergraphic sign.
      (1)   Number. A maximum of one supergraphic sign is permitted.
      (2)   Visual display and coverage.
         (A)   The supergraphic sign must have one large visual display with a
minimum of 70 percent non-textual graphic content (no more than 30 percent
text).
            (i)   Multiple displays giving an appearance of multiple signs are
prohibited.
            (ii)   The effective area of text is the sum of the areas within
minimum imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which
fully contains a word.
         (B)   The supergraphic sign is intended to be creative and artful and
not strictly a representation of an advertised product. It is the intent of
this provision to:
            (i)   encourage the use of illustrative images or other non-
repetitive design elements;
            (ii)   encourage visually interesting, vibrant, and colorful
designs; and
            (iii)   discourage use of solid colors or repetitive design
elements.
         (C)   The supergraphic sign may be internally or externally
illuminated. If internally illuminated, the supergraphic sign may consist of
translucent materials, but not transparent materials.
         (D)   The supergraphic sign may not extend beyond the edge of the face
of the building to which it is attached.
      (3)   Effective area. Minimum permitted effective area is 2,500 square
feet. Maximum permitted effective area is 6,500 square feet.
      (4)   Height. The supergraphic sign may not be lower than 10 feet above
grade level.
      (5)   Location. The supergraphic sign may only be located on the east
facade of the building.
      (6)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   All hardware fasteners for the supergraphic sign must comply
with the Dallas Building Code and all other ordinances, rules, and regulations
of the City of Dallas.
         (B)   The supergraphic sign may not be a Highway Beautification Act
(HBA) sign as defined in Section 51A-7.102.
         (C)   The supergraphic sign may not display the same message for more
than six consecutive months in any 12-month period. (Ord. No. 33011)
SEC. 51A-7.1008.   BANNERS ON STREETLIGHT POLES.
   Banners may be mounted on streetlight poles subject to the following
regulations:
   (a)   A banner must display a promotional message, a welcome message, or
generic graphics. No sponsorship identification is permitted on a banner.
   (b)   No more than 10 percent of the effective area of a banner may contain
a welcome message that identifies and greets a group using city property in
accordance with a contract, license, or permit.
   (c)   Up to 10 percent of the effective area of a banner may contain the
words or logos that identify a sponsor of a cultural event or activity if the
sponsor’s name is part of the name of the activity or event.
   (d)   A banner having either a promotional message or a welcome message may
not be erected more than 90 days prior to the beginning of the advertised
activity or event, and must be removed no later than 15 days after that
activity or event has ended. The sign hardware for a banner may be left in
place between displays of a banner.
   (e)   A banner and its sign hardware must:
      (1)   be mounted on a streetlight pole;
      (2)   meet the sign construction and design standards in the Dallas
Building Code;
      (3)   be at least 12 feet above grade, unless it overhangs a roadway, in
which case it must be at least 15 feet above grade;
      (4)   be made out of weather-resistant and rust-proof material;
      (5)   not project more than three feet from the pole onto which it is
mounted; and
      (6)   not exceed 20 square feet in effective area.
   (f)   If a banner overhangs the public right-of-way, a license must be
obtained in accordance with the requirements of the City Charter and the Dallas
City Code.
   (g)   No sign permit or certificate of appropriateness is required to erect
or remove a banner. (Ord. Nos. 21404; 22112; 26027)
SEC. 51A-7.1009.   WINDOW ART DISPLAYS IN VACANT BUILDINGS.
   Window art displays on the ground floor of a vacant building are allowed
subject to the following regulations:
   (a)   A window art display may contain only a promotional message, generic
graphics (including three-dimensional artifacts), or messages identifying the
sponsor of the display.
   (b)   Window signs in a window art display may not:
      (1)   cover more than 25 percent of the surface area of a window;
      (2)   contain a logo or word that has any character that exceeds five
inches in height;
      (3)   advertise a specific product or service other than the cultural
event or activity; or
      (4)   have more than 10 percent or four square feet, whichever is less,
of its effective area devoted to sponsorship identification.
   (c)   No sign permit or certificate of appropriateness is required to erect
or remove a window art display. (Ord. Nos. 21404; 22112; 26027)
SEC. 51A-7.1010.   SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the sign permit requirements for signs in the West
End Historic Sign District are as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in Sections
51A-7.1008 and
7.1009, a person shall not alter, place, maintain, expand, or remove a sign in
the West End Historic Sign District without first obtaining a sign permit from
the city.
      (2)   The procedure for obtaining a sign permit is outlined in Section
51A-7.505 of this article. Section
51A-7.602(a) and (c) of this article does not apply to signs in the West End
Historic Sign District.
      (3)   A person who violates Paragraph (1) above is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
continued. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 21404; 22112; 26027; 29208)
SEC. 51A-7.1011.   NONDISCRIMINATION BETWEEN NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGES.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, any sign that may
display a type of noncommercial message may display in place of that message
any other type of noncommercial message, so long as the sign complies with
other requirements of this article and other ordinances that do not pertain to
the content of the message displayed. (Ord. Nos. 21404; 22112; 26027)
Division 51A-7.1100. Provisions for Uptown Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.1101.   DESIGNATION OF UPTOWN SIGN DISTRICT.
   A special sign provision district is hereby created to be known as the
Uptown Sign District. For purposes of this division, the Uptown Sign District
of the City of Dallas is that area of the city within the following described
boundaries:
   Being a tract or parcel of land situated in the John Grigsby Survey,
Abstract No. 495 and being part of City of Dallas Blocks 2/929, J/929, 1/929,
I/942, 5/944, 948, l/949, 949, 3/950 and all of Blocks A/540, 3/929, 2/933, 3/
933 and 2/948 and also being part of the following dedicated streets: Yeargan
Street, Leonard Street, Howell Street, Bookout Street, Maple Avenue, McKinney
Avenue, Pearl Street, McKinnon Street, and the North Dallas Tollway and being
more particularly described as follows:
      BEGINNING at a point for corner in the centerline of Leonard Street (50
feet wide), said point being North 45°11'10" West, a distance of 243.15 feet
from the intersection of the centerline of Thomas Avenue (variable width) and
the centerline of said Leonard Street;
      THENCE South 44°50'21" West, a distance of 68.00 feet to a point for
corner;
      THENCE South 14°42'00" West, a distance of 243.37 feet to a point for
corner;
      THENCE South 45°11'00" West, a distance of 269.95 feet to a point for
corner in the centerline of North Pearl Street (variable width) and the
beginning of a curve to the left;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along said centerline of North Pearl
Street and along said curve to the left whose chord bears North 50°55'28" West,
and having a radius of 547.63 feet, a central angle of 16°06'58" and an arc
length of 154.04 feet to a point for corner in the centerline of McKinney
Avenue (60 feet wide) and the end of said curve to the left;
      THENCE South 15°00'00" West along the centerline of McKinney Avenue, a
distance of 106.93 feet to a point for corner;
      THENCE South 89°15'32" West, a distance of 667.47 feet to a point for
corner in the centerline of Cedar Springs Road (variable width);
      THENCE North 03°02'00" West along the centerline of Cedar Springs Road, a
distance of 149.72 feet to a point for corner in the centerline of said Pearl
Street;
      THENCE South 82°27'00" West along the centerline of Pearl Street and
along the centerline of the North Dallas Tollway (variable width), a distance
of 122.00 feet to a point for corner and the beginning of a curve to the right;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction continuing along the centerline of
said Dallas North Tollway and along said curve to the right having a radius of
124.57 feet, a central angle of 51°00'00" and an arc length of 110.88 feet to a
point for corner and the end of said curve to the right;
      THENCE North 46°33'00" West continuing along the centerline of said
Dallas North Tollway, a distance of 207.54 feet to a point for corner in the
centerline of Yeargan Street (variable width);
      THENCE North 42°06'27" East along the centerline of Yeargan Street, a
distance of 94.48 feet to a point for corner;
      THENCE North 0°31'00" West continuing along the centerline of said
Yeargan Street, passing at 224.36 feet the centerline of North Pearl Street (50
feet wide) and at 555.72 feet the centerline of Bookout Street to the east (33
feet wide) and continuing a total distance of 577.98 feet to a point for corner
in the centerline of Bookout Street to the west (50 feet wide);
      THENCE North 45°31"00" West along the centerline of Bookout Street, a
distance of 329.67 feet to a point for corner;
      THENCE North 44°24'15" East passing at 146.20 feet the most westerly
corner of the Cedar Maple Addition, an addition to the City of Dallas as
recorded in Volume 83097, Page 1486 of the Deed Records of Dallas County, Texas
and continuing along the northwest line of said Cedar Maple Addition, a total
distance of 436.46 feet to a point for corner in the centerline of Maple Avenue
(70 feet wide);
      THENCE North 45°39'00" West along the centerline of Maple Avenue, a
distance of 247.10 feet to a point for corner;
      THENCE North 44°21'00" East passing at 35.0 feet the most westerly corner
of the North Dallas Improvement Co. Addition, an addition to the City of Dallas
as recorded in Volume 88143, Page 2123 of the Deed Records of Dallas County,
Texas and continuing along the northwest line of said addition, a total
distance of 197.40 feet to the centerline of a 16 foot wide alley;
      THENCE South 45°39'00" East along the centerline of said alley passing at
248.30 feet the centerline of Cedar Springs Road and continuing along said
line, a total distance of 309.76 feet to an intersection of same with the
easterly line of said Cedar Springs Road;
      THENCE South 5°02'55" East along said easterly line, a distance of 51.25
feet to the intersection of same with the northwest line of Howell Street;
      THENCE North 45°08'50" East along said northwest line of Howell Street, a
distance of 33.36 feet to a point for corner;
      THENCE South 45°39'00" East, passing at 20.0 feet the centerline of said
Howell Street and continuing along the centerline of a 16 foot wide alley, a
total distance of 722.46 feet to a point for corner in the terminus of said 16
foot wide alley;
      THENCE North 44°21'00" East, a distance of 20.50 feet to a point for
corner;
      THENCE South 45°39'00" East, a distance of 516.07 feet to a point for
corner in the centerline of said McKinney Avenue;
      THENCE North 15°00'00" East along the centerline of said McKinney Avenue,
a distance of 21.49 feet to a point for corner in the centerline of said
Leonard Street;
      THENCE South 45°11'10" East along the centerline of said Leonard Street,
a distance of 355.51 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING and containing 36.76 acres
of land. (Ord. Nos. 19649; 20037; 20378)
SEC. 51A-7.1101.1.   DESIGNATION OF A SUBDISTRICT.
   The 23 Springs Subdistrict is hereby created within the Uptown Sign District
generally bounded by Cedar Springs Road, Bookout Street, Maple Avenue, and
properties to the northwest. The boundaries of the 23 Springs subdistrict are
described in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 33060, passed by the Dallas
City Council on March 26, 2025. (Ord. No. 33060)
SEC. 51A-7.1102.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to regulate both the construction of new
signs and the alterations of existing signs with a view towards enhancing,
preserving and developing the unique character of this district. The general
objectives of this division include those listed in Section
51A-7.101 as well as aesthetic considerations to insure that signs are
appropriate to the architecture of the district, do not obscure significant
architectural features of its buildings, and lend themselves to the developing
character of the area. (Ord. Nos. 19649; 20037)
SEC. 51A-7.1103.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
   (a)   ARCADE means any walkway which is attached to a building and not fully
enclosed on all sides, covered with a roof structure having the primary
function of weather protection and which is not structural to the building
itself.
   (b)   BANNER means a sign attached to or applied on a strip of cloth and
temporarily attached to a building or structure. Canopy signs and political
flags are not banners.
   (c)   CANOPY SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by a
canopy or awning.
   (d)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting from a building
and parallel to the building facade.
   (e)   LOWER LEVEL SIGN means a sign partially or wholly situated below the
top of the first floor windows or below a point 16 feet above grade, whichever
is lower.
   (f)   MARQUEE means a permanent canopy projecting over the main entrance of
a building. A marquee is considered to be part of the building.
   (g)   MARQUEE SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by a
marquee.
   (h)   PAINTED APPLIED SIGN means a sign painted directly onto the exterior
facade of a building, not including doors or windows.
   (i)   PROJECTING ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting from a
building.
   (j)   THIS DISTRICT means the Uptown Sign District.
   (k)   TYPE A FACADE means a facade with a total window area comprising
between 20 to 50 percent (inclusive) of the total facade area.
   (l)   TYPE B FACADE means a facade with a total window area comprising less
than 20 or more than 50 percent of the total facade area.
   (m)   UPPER LEVEL SIGN means a sign wholly situated above the top of the
first floor windows or above a point 16 feet above grade, whichever is lower.
   (n)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign painted or affixed onto a window. (Ord. Nos.
19649; 20037)
SEC. 51A-7.1104.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   (a)   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the rules relating to the erection of all signs in
the Uptown Sign District are expressly modified as follows:
      (1)   No illuminated sign may contain flashing or moving elements or
change its brightness, except as otherwise provided in this division.
      (2)   Except as provided in this paragraph, signs may be illuminated by
fluorescent back lighting or indirect lighting. Signs in the 23 Springs
subdistrict may also be illuminated by LED.
      (3)   The use of neon or single incandescent bulbs is allowed.
      (4)   The use of fiberglass as a sign material is allowed.
      (5)   Except as provided in this subsection, the use of plastic as an
exterior face of a sign is prohibited. Plastic may be used as a backing for
routed letters in a sign can or as decorative ornaments.
      (6)   For signs located within the 23 Springs subdistrict, plastic may be
used for faces of individual channel letters. Channel letters must be either
visually trim capless or use metal fabricated trim caps. No plastic trim caps
are allowed.
      (7)   The use of fluorescent color on a sign is prohibited.
      (8)   No sign or part of a sign may move or rotate, with the exception of
a wind device, the motion of which is not restricted.
   (b)   The following typestyles are suggested, but not required, for signs in
this district: Americana Extra Bold, Aster Bold, Avante Garde, Baskerville
Bold, Bookman Bold, Caslon No. 3, Century Bold Condensed, Cheltenham Bold,
Univers 67. (Ord. Nos. 19649; 20037; 33060)
SEC. 51A-7.1105.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ATTACHED SIGNS.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the rules relating to the erection of attached signs
in the Uptown Sign District are expressly modified as follows:
   (a)   Attached signs in general.
      (1)   Attached signs must be securely attached.
      (2)   Except as provided in this subsection, attached signs projecting
horizontally and either parallel or perpendicular to a building facade are
permitted except no sign can extend above the highest point of the building
roof.
      (3)   Attached signs in the 23 Springs subdistrict may extend above the
highest point of the roof but not extend above the parapet wall to which it is
attached.
      (4)    Attached signs overhanging the public right-of-way are permitted
except that no sign may project closer than two feet to the vertical plane
extending through the back of a street curb.
      (5)    Attached signs projecting horizontally more than eight inches but
less than 18 inches from a vertical building surface are prohibited.
      (6)   Except as provided in this subsection, no attached sign other than
a painted applied sign, an upper-level flat attached sign, a marquee sign, or a
banner may exceed 30 square feet in effective area.
      (7)   Attached upper level signs in the 23 Springs subdistrict may exceed
30 square feet in effective area per sign with the following restrictions:
         (A)   signs within the top 50 feet of the top of building may not
exceed a cumulative effective area of 450 square feet;
         (B)   signs below 50 feet from the top of the facade may not exceed a
cumulative effective area of 100 square feet;
         (C)   signs must be spaced vertically at least 260 feet apart;
         (D)   signs must be spaced horizontally at least 150 feet apart; and
         (E)   the combined effective area of all signs may not exceed five
percent of the total area of the facade.
      (8)   In the 23 Springs subdistrict, attached signs located on the front
facade of the first and second floors of a building:
         (A)   may not exceed 30 square feet in effective area per sign for
individual tenant signs 90 square feet in effective area per sign for
multitenant signs;
         (B)   in aggregate, may not exceed 10 percent of the total area of the
facade;
         (C)   may be located without separation; and
         (D)   cannot be located more than 36 feet above grade when measured
vertically.
      (9)    Projecting attached signs may have one double faced copy area
which is perpendicular to the building facade.
      (10)   Attached signs may be placed above an arcade.
      (11)   Banner signs may be constructed of either synthetic or natural
cloth.
   (b)   Canopy signs.
      (1)   No canopy sign may:
         (A)   project horizontally more than two inches from the surface of
the canopy or awning;
         (B)   be lower than 10 feet above grade, except that a sign may be as
low as eight feet above grade if it does not project more than one-half inch
from the surface of the canopy; or
         (C)   project vertically above the surface of the canopy or awning.
      (2)   The total effective area permitted for all canopy signs combined on
a facade is the product obtained by multiplying 20 square feet times the number
of street entrances to the premise.
      (3)   The maximum size of each canopy sign is limited to 30 square feet.
   (c)   Flat attached signs on Type A facade.
      (1)   No flat attached sign may project more than eight inches from a
building.
      (2)   The maximum number of lower level flat attached signs permitted on
Type A facade is the sum obtained by multiplying two times the number of street
entrances on that facade.
      (3)   No lower level flat attached sign on a Type A facade may contain
more than eight words. All words must:
         (A)   consist of characters eight inches or less in height; and
         (B)   read horizontally from left to right.
      (4)   The maximum size of a lower level flat attached sign on Type A
facade is limited to eight square feet.
      (5)   No premise may have more than one upper level flat attached sign
per street entrance.
      (6)   No upper level flat attached sign on a Type A facade may contain
more than eight words. All words must:
         (A)   consist of characters four inches or more in height; and
         (B)   read horizontally from left to right.
   (d)   Flat attached signs on Type B facades.
      (1)   No flat attached sign may project more than eight inches from a
building.
      (2)   Except as provided in this paragraph, no premise may have more than
one flat attached sign on each Type B facade. In the 23 Springs subdistrict, a
Type B facade may have up to three signs per facade.
      (3)   No flat attached sign on any Type B facade may contain more than
eight words with characters four or more inches in height. Words consisting of
characters less than four inches in height may be used without limit.
   (e)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   No marquee sign may exceed 90 square feet in effective area.
      (2)   Marquee signs must:
         (A)   be parallel to the surface to which they are attached; and
         (B)   have a minimum height dimension of two feet.
      (3)   All words on a marquee sign must consist of changeable individual
characters.
      (4)   Marquee signs may have flashing lights.
      (5)   The maximum number of marquee signs shall be limited to one per
facade.
   (f)   Projecting attached signs.
      (1)   Projecting attached signs on any facade must be 16 feet apart
measured in any direction.
      (2)   No projecting attached sign may:
         (A)   exceed 20 square feet in effective area of the face of the sign;
         (B)   be lower than 10 feet above grade;
         (C)   project vertically above the third level window sill or 32 feet
above grade whichever is less;
         (D)   project vertically above the highest surface of the building
roof; or
         (E)   project less than 18 inches from a building.
   (g)   Window signs.
      (1)   No window sign may:
         (A)   contain words consisting of characters more than eight inches in
height;
         (B)   cover more than 25 percent of the window surface area; or
         (C)   be affixed to the window by tape.
      (2)   A window sign may be hand painted or silk screened onto a window,
or made of self-adhesive vinyl. (Ord. Nos. 19649; 20037; 20927; 33060)
SEC. 51A-7.1106.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DETACHED SIGNS.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the rules relating to the erection of detached signs
in the Uptown Sign District are expressly modified as follows:
   (a)   No detached sign may:
      (1)   have an effective area greater than 120 square feet;
      (2)   have a total height greater than 15 feet; or
      (3)   be located less than five feet from a public right-of-way.
   (b)   The maximum number of signs permitted shall be one for every 220
linear feet of frontage on the public right-of-way, or fraction thereof. (Ord.
Nos. 19649; 20037)
SEC. 51A-7.1107.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR NON-PREMISE DETACHED SIGNS IN THE
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the rules relating to the erection of non-premise
detached signs in the Uptown Sign District are expressly modified as follows:
   (a)   Non-premise detached signs may be located within the public right-of-
way subject to the franchise requirements of Chapter XIV of the city charter,
Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, as amended, and the requirements of this
section.
   (b)   Non-premise detached signs may be located in the public right-of-way
only when the distance from the back of the curb to the property line is 13
feet or greater.
   (c)   Non-premise detached signs may be placed in the public right-of-way
only within five feet of a motor vehicle entrance to a premise shared by two or
more uses whose front doors are not visible from the street.
   (d)   Signs erected pursuant to this section must identify use categories
and not particular business establishments. Examples of permitted messages are:
“OFFICES”, “SHOPS”, “PARKING”, “RESTAURANTS”, “HOTEL”, alone or in combination.
Signs that say “EXIT” or “ENTRANCE” are also permitted.
   (e)   No more than two signs may be erected pursuant to this section at each
motor vehicle entrance to a premise.
   (f)   No non-premise detached sign may contain more than eight words. All
words must:
      (1)   consist of characters eight inches or less in height; and
      (2)   read horizontally from left to right.
   (g)   No non-premise detached sign located within the public right-of-way
may:
      (1)   have an effective area greater than four square feet;
      (2)   have a total height of greater than two feet, six inches;
      (3)   be located less than five feet from the back of a street curb;
      (4)   be located so as to obstruct sidewalk passage;
      (5)   be located within a visibility triangle as defined in this chapter;
      (6)   interfere with utilities or traffic signage and signals;
      (7)   contain the colors red or green; or
      (8)   be spot lit or directly lit from outside the sign.
   (h)   Plants must be kept trimmed so as to clearly expose non-premise
detached signs in the public right-of-way. (Ord. Nos. 19649; 20037)
SEC. 51A-7.1108.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGNS.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the rules relating to the erection of special
purpose signs in the Uptown Sign District are expressly modified as follows:
   (a)   Attached or window special purpose signs.
      (1)   Attached special purpose signs may be displayed on a premise a
maximum of three 30 day time periods and one 45 day time period in each
calendar year. No more than one attached special purpose may be displayed on a
facade at any given time.
      (2)   Window special purpose signs may be displayed on a premise a
maximum of three 30 day time periods and one 45 day time period in each
calendar year. No more than one attached special purpose sign may be displayed
on a window at any given time.
      (3)   No more than 25 percent of a window surface may be covered by
either window signs or special purpose window signs, alone or in combination.
      (4)   The size of an attached or window special purpose sign is limited
to 30 square feet.
      (5)   A window special purpose sign may not be affixed to a window by
tape.
   (b)   Detached special purpose signs.
      (1)   Detached special purpose signs may be displayed on a premise a
maximum of three 30 day time periods and one 45 day time period in each
calendar year.
      (2)   The maximum number of detached special purpose signs permitted on a
premise at any given time is the sum obtained by counting all of the street
entrances onto that premise, and multiplying by two.
      (3)   No detached special purpose sign may:
         (A)   exceed eight feet in height;
         (B)   contain more than eight words;
         (C)   be mounted on wheels;
         (D)   be a trailer sign with changeable copy; or
         (E)   contain flashing or blinking lights. (Ord. Nos. 19649; 20037)
SEC. 51A-7.1109.   SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   Pursuant to the authority of Section
51A-7.503 of this article, the sign permit requirements for signs in the Uptown
Sign District are expressly modified as follows:
   (a)   A person shall not alter, place, maintain, expand, or remove a sign in
the Uptown Sign District without first obtaining a sign permit from the city.
   (b)   The procedure for obtaining a sign permit is outlined in Section
51A-7.505 of this article. Section
51A-7.602 of this article does not apply to signs in the Uptown Sign District.
   (c)   A person who violates Subsection (a) is guilty of a separate offense
for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is continued.
   (d)   The erection of signs within the public right-of-way, as specified
herein, is permitted if the owner of the land as well as the owner of the
improvements agree in writing, prior to the issuance of a permit, that the
signs will be removed at no expense to the city upon notice from the city that
the street is to be widened or the license with the city is terminated or
expires, whichever occurs first. (Ord. Nos. 19649; 20037)
Division 51A-7.1200. Provisions for Arts District Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.1201.   DESIGNATION OF ARTS DISTRICT SIGN DISTRICT.
   (a)   A special provision sign district is hereby created to be known as the
Arts District Sign District. For purposes of this article, the boundaries of
the Arts District Sign District are described in the Exhibit A attached to
Ordinance No. 33252, passed by the Dallas City Council on September 24, 2025.
   (b)   The property described in Subsection (a), which was formerly part of
the Downtown Special Provision Sign District, is no longer considered to be
part of that district. This division completely supersedes Division 51A-7.900
with respect to the property described in Subsection (a). (Ord. Nos. 20345;
28471; 30731; 31079; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1202.   PURPOSE.
   The Dallas Arts District (Planned Development District No. 145) was
established by Ordinance No. 17710, which was passed by the Dallas City Council
on February 16, 1983. This approximately 22-block, 118-acre area in the
northeast section of the central business district represents a concerted
effort on the part of the city and arts organizations to consolidate major art
institutions in one mixed-use area.
   The guideline for development in the Arts District is an urban design plan
known as the “Connect Master Plan.” This plan is based on district-wide design
and land use concepts, which include the creation of a pedestrian-oriented
environment and a distinctive visual image for the district. Flora Street is
defined as the major pedestrian spine and focus of development in the district.
As a wide, tree-lined environment, Flora Street connects three subdistricts
(Museum Crossing, Concert Lights, and Fountain Plaza) and provides continuity
in a development framework for public institutions and private owners.
Similarly, Ross Avenue is defined as the primary mixed-use commercial corridor
and is another focus area for development in the district. Ross Avenue is a
high- quality streetscape that complements Flora Street with active street
frontages that accommodate pedestrians and transit.
   The sign regulations in this division have been developed with the following
objectives in mind:
      (1)   To protect the character of Flora Street, Ross Avenue, and the Arts
District from inappropriate signs in terms of number (clutter), size, style,
color, and materials.
      (2)   To enhance the image and liveliness of the Arts District by
encouraging compatible signs that are colorful, decorative, entertaining, and
artistic in style, while being functional and informative in purpose.
      (3)   To promote the commercial success of each individual tenant in the
Arts District and, in turn, the commercial success of all the tenants in the
district collectively.
      (4)   To create a sense of design uniformity between signs and the other
streetscape elements of the Arts District.
      (5)   To help make the Arts District an attractive place for the public
to frequent by providing ease of direction to specific cultural institutions.
      (6)   To create a means of identifying the various types or categories of
retail establishments along Flora Street and Ross Avenue.
      (7)   To identify and promote cultural events and activities consistent
with the purposes of the Arts District.
      (8)   To recognize that sign hardware is a part of the overall visual
design of a sign, and to ensure that investments in signs and other structures
in the Arts District are not devalued by inappropriate or poor quality sign
hardware. (Ord. Nos. 20345, 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1203.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this division:
      (1)   ARTS DISTRICT means Planned Development District No. 145 (the
Dallas Arts District) and Planned Development District No. 708 (the Dallas Arts
District Extension Area).
      (2)   ARTS DISTRICT OFFICIAL LOGO means the official logo of the Arts
District as depicted in Exhibit A, shown in Section 31 of Ordinance No. 33252,
passed by the Dallas City Council on September 24, 2025.
      (3)   AWNING SIGN means an attached sign that is or appears to be part of
an awning.
      (4)   BLOCK means an area bounded by streets on all sides.
      (5)   BLOCKFACE means all of the lots on one side of a block.
      (6)   BUILDING CORNICE AREA means that portion of a building facade above
the highest story, but below the actual roof structure.
      (7)   BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN means an attached or detached sign
composed of one or more characters that identify a specific building’s name.
      (8)   BUILDING PLAZA AREA means an open area near a building featuring
amenities, such as walkways, trees and shrubs, and seating.
      (9)   CANOPY means a permanent non-fabric architectural element
projecting from the face of a building.
      (10)   CANOPY FASCIA SIGN means an attached sign with a digital display
that is attached to, applied on, or supported by the fascia or soffit of a
canopy.
      (11)   CHARACTER means a symbol, as a letter or number, that represents
information.
      (12)   CONNECT MASTER PLAN means the urban design plan adopted by Dallas
City Council on January 27, 2021. The Connect Master Plan is intended to serve
as a guide and should be consulted for goals, objectives, policy statements,
and recommendations for development in the Dallas Arts District.
      (13)   CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGN means a temporary detached sign that
is affixed to a construction barricade.
      (14)   CULTURAL INSTITUTION means any facility used primarily for the
visual or performing arts; open to the public, such as a museum, concert hall,
theater, or similar facility; and established by a public or philanthropic
entity.
      (15)   CULTURAL INSTITUTION SIGN means cultural institution
identification signs, district information signs, facade mounted banner signs,
and pole mounted banner signs.
      (16)   CULTURAL INSTITUTION IDENTIFICATION SIGN means an attached or
detached premise sign that identifies the cultural institution; the district;
an arts organization such as a symphony, dance company, or theatre group that
uses that cultural institution; or otherwise promotes cultural events or
cultural activities in this district.
      (17)   DETACHED PREMISE SIGN means a sign that is both a detached sign
and a premise sign as defined in Section
51A-7.102.
      (18)   DIGITAL CULTURAL INSTITUTION SIGN means a cultural institution
sign with a digital display.
      (19)   DISTRICT INFORMATION means words or symbols that identify the
district; a cultural institution in the district; an arts organization such as
a symphony, dance company, or theatre group that uses a cultural institution in
the district; or otherwise promotes cultural events or cultural activities in
the district.
      (20)   FACADE MOUNTED BANNER SIGN means a sign that promotes a cultural
event or activity and that is attached to a building facade.
      (21)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign that is parallel to the
building facade.
      (22)   FLORA STREET FRONTAGE AREA means the “Flora Street Frontage Area”
as defined in the Arts District PD ordinance (Ordinance No. 17710, as amended).
      (23)   GENERIC RETAIL IDENTIFICATION SIGN means an attached or detached
sign identifying a type or category of retail establishment without identifying
a specific establishment.
      (24)   GOVERNMENTAL TRAFFIC SIGN means a detached sign, signal, or other
traffic control device installed by a governmental agency for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a public
highway. Examples of these signs include stop signs, one-way signs, no parking
signs, and electronic pedestrian and vehicular signalization devices and their
fixtures.
      (25)   INTEGRATED SIGN means a sign that is integrated into the design of
the building.
      (26)   KIOSK means a detached non-premise sign with one or more sides and
may include digital capabilities.
      (27)   MARQUEE SIGN means an attached sign that is affixed to, applied
on, or supported by a permanent canopy projecting over a pedestrian street
entrance of a building, and consisting primarily of changeable panels, words,
or characters.
      (28)   MONUMENT SIGN means a detached sign applied directly onto a grade
level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation between
the sign and grade.
      (29)    MOVEMENT INFORMATION SIGN means an attached or detached sign
showing the location of or route to a specific cultural institution or a
parking area serving that institution.
      (30)   PLAQUE means an attached or detached tablet, the contents of which
are either commemorative or identifying.
      (31)   POLE MOUNTED BANNER SIGN means a sign that promotes a cultural
institution or cultural event or activity and that is mounted to a streetlight
pole.
      (32)   PREMISE means the entire Arts District Sign District land area as
defined in Section
51A-7.1201(a).
      (33)   PRIVATE SIGNS means those signs that are not “public signs” as
defined in this section.
      (34)   PROJECTING ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign that is
perpendicular to a building facade.
      (35)   PUBLIC ART means art created with the intention of being viewed by
the public. Public art is not a sign.
      (36)   PUBLIC SIGNS means governmental traffic signs, movement
information signs, generic retail identification signs, plaques, or
construction barricade signs as defined in this section.
      (37)   RETAINING WALL SIGN means a sign that is integrated into a
retaining wall.
      (38)   ROSS AVENUE FRONTAGE AREA means the area of each building site
within 50 feet of Ross Avenue.
      (39)   SIGN HARDWARE means the structural support system for a sign,
including the fastening devices that secure a sign to a building facade or
pole.
      (40)   SPONSORSHIP INFORMATION means goods and services sold by the
sponsor of the cultural institution, district, or arts organization whether
sold on or off the premises.
      (41)   TENANT IDENTITY SIGN means an attached premise sign that
identifies a specific tenant of the premise on which the sign is located.
      (42)   THIS DISTRICT means the Arts District Sign District.
      (43)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign temporarily or permanently attached to,
applied on, or supported by a window.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the definitions
contained in Sections
51A-2.102 and
51A-7.102 apply to this division. In the event of a conflict, this section
controls. (Ord. Nos. 20345; 26768; 28071; 28471; 30731; 31079; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1204.   ARTS DISTRICT SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (a)   A person shall not alter, place, maintain, expand, or remove a sign in
this district without first obtaining a sign permit from the city, except that
no sign permit is required for:
      (1)   governmental traffic signs;
      (2)   cultural institution identification signs or district information
signs no larger than 30 inches by 40 inches;
      (3)   plaques;
      (4)   facade-mounted banner signs; and
      (5)   pole-mounted banner signs.
   (b)   The procedure for obtaining a sign permit is outlined in this section.
Section
51A-7.602 does not apply to signs in this district.
   (c)   No sign permit may be issued to authorize a sign in this district
unless the director has first issued a certificate of appropriateness in
accordance with this section.
   (d)   There is hereby created a committee to be known as the Arts District
Sign Review Committee (“the committee”). The committee shall be composed of
five members appointed by the city plan commission. One member of the committee
must be an architect or graphic designer. The commission shall solicit a list
of nominees from entities operating in the Arts District. Appointments to the
committee shall be for a term of two years ending on September 1 of each odd-
numbered year, and the members shall serve without compensation. The commission
may appoint up to three alternate members to the committee who serve in the
absence of one more regular members when requested to do so by the chairperson
or by the city manager. The alternate members serve for the same period and are
subject to removal the same as regular members. The commission shall fill
vacancies occurring in the alternate membership the same as in the regular
membership.
   (e)   The committee shall meet upon the call of the chair or a simple
majority of the committee members. A simple majority of members present shall
constitute a quorum, and issues shall be decided by a simple majority vote of
the members present. The department shall furnish staff support to the
committee.
   (f)   The function of the committee shall be to familiarize itself
thoroughly with the character, special conditions, and economics of the Arts
District. In addition, the committee shall provide guidance, advice, and
assistance to the director in reviewing applications for permits to authorize
signs in this district.
   (g)   Section
51A-7.504, which establishes the special sign district advisory committee for
special provision sign districts in the city generally, does not apply to this
district. The Arts District Sign Review Committee is the exclusive advisory
committee for reviewing and making recommendations to the director concerning
applications for permits to authorize signs in this district.
   (h)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit to authorize a sign in
this district, the building official shall refer the application and plans to
the director for a review to determine whether the work complies with this
ordinance. The director shall conduct his or her review so that a decision on
issuance of the permit can be made within 30 calendar days from the date the
completed application is submitted to the building official.
   (i)   The director shall solicit a recommendation from the committee before
making a decision to approve or disapprove a certificate of appropriateness.
The recommendation of the committee is not binding upon the director, and the
director may decide a matter contrary to the recommendation of the committee.
   (j)   A decision by the director to grant a certificate of appropriateness
may be appealed by the committee only. A decision to deny the certificate may
be appealed by either the applicant or the committee. An appeal is made by
filing a written request with the director for review by the city plan
commission. An appeal must be made within 10 days after notice is given to the
applicant of the director’s decision. In considering the appeal, the sole issue
shall be whether or not the director erred in making the decision, and, in this
connection, the commission shall consider the same standards that were required
to be considered by the director in making the decision. Decisions of the
commission are final as to available administrative remedies and are binding on
all parties.
   (k)   If the city plan commission fails to make a decision on an appeal by
the applicant within 30 calendar days of the date the written request for an
appeal is filed with the director, the application shall be considered approved
subject to compliance with all other applicable city codes, ordinances, rules,
and regulations.
   (l)   A person who violates Subsection (a) or any other provision in this
division is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of the day
during which the violation is continued. (Ord. Nos. 20345; 20927; 25047; 28073;
33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1205.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   (a)   This division does not apply to signs that are not visible from
outside the premise on which they are located.
   (b)   Signs in this district are permitted in or overhanging the public way
subject to city franchise requirements.
   (c)   No sign may obscure a window or a significant architectural element of
a building.
   (d)   Sign hardware may be visible if its structural elements have been
specifically devised for their intrinsic contribution to an overall artistic or
architectural effect. Utilitarian hardware intended only for functional
purposes must be concealed from normal view.
   (e)   Mounting devices supporting a projecting attached sign must be fully
integrated with the overall design of the sign.
   (f)   Materials, fasteners, and anchors used to manufacture and install
signs must be resistant to corrosion.
   (g)   Paints and coatings must contain a UV inhibitor to retard the
discoloration and fading effects of ultraviolet light. In addition to finish
coats, bare metals must have a primer coat or other surface pretreatment as
recommended by the paint or coating manufacturer.
   (h)   Electrical power required for signs must be supplied by means of
concealed conduit from an appropriate power source to the sign in accordance
with city codes and accepted practices of the trade. Electrical disconnects,
transformers, and related apparatus, including wiring and conduit, must be
concealed from normal view.
   (i)   No signs may be illuminated by an independent external light source,
unless the external light source is located on the ground and within four feet
of the sign.
   (j)   Burned out or defective lights in signs must be replaced within a
reasonable time. Failure to comply with this provision may result in sign
permit revocation.
   (k)   Only those signs exempt from the Highway Beautification Act are
permitted within 660 feet of a regulated highway. (Ord. Nos. 20345; 28471;
30731; 31079; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1205.1.   OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNS WITH DIGITAL DISPLAYS.
   (a)   Display. All signs with digital display:
      (1)   must contain a default mechanism that freezes the image in one
position in case of a malfunction;
      (2)   must automatically adjust the sign brightness based on natural
ambient light conditions in compliance with the standards required in the
central business district, or the following formula, whichever is less:
         (A)   the ambient light level measured in luxes, divided by 256 and
then rounded down to the nearest whole number, equals the dimming level; then
         (B)   the dimming level, multiplied by .0039 equals the brightness
level; then
         (C)   the brightness level, multiplied by the maximum brightness of
the specific sign measured in nits, equals the allowed sign brightness,
measured in nits. For example:
            32768 = natural ambient light conditions
            ÷ 256
            128 = dimming level
            x .0039
            .4992 = brightness level
            x 9000 = (maximum brightness of the example sign)
            4492.8 = allowed brightness in nits;
      (3)   may not display light of such intensity or brilliance to cause
glare, impair the vision of an ordinary driver, or constitute a nuisance;
      (4)   must have a full color display able to display a minimum of 281
trillion color shades; and
      (5)   must be able to display a high quality image with a minimum
resolution equivalent to the following table:
 
Digital Display Sign Resolution Chart
Size of LED Panel    Maximum Pixel Size
100 s/f to 125 s/f   16 mm
Greater than 126 s/f 19 mm
 
   (b)   Light intensity. Before the issuance of a sign permit for a sign with
a digital display, the applicant shall provide written certification from the
sign manufacturer that:
      (1)   the light intensity has been factory programmed to comply with the
maximum brightness and dimming standards in the formula in Subparagraph (a)(2);
and
      (2)   the light intensity is protected from end-user manipulation by
password-protected software, or other method satisfactory to the building
official.
   (c)   Change of message. Except as provided in this section, changes of
message must comply with the following:
      (1)   Each message must be displayed for a minimum of eight seconds.
      (2)   Changes of message must be accomplished within two seconds.
      (3)   Changes of message must occur simultaneously on the entire sign
face.
      (4)   No flashing, dimming, or brightening of message is permitted except
to accommodate changes of message.
   (d)   Streaming information. If a special events permit has been issued for
district activities, ticker tape streaming and streaming video are permitted.
   (e)   Malfunction. Digital display sign operators must respond to a
malfunction or safety issue within one hour after notification. (Ord. Nos.
28071; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1206.   PUBLIC SIGNS.
   (a)   Generic retail identification signs.
      (1)   These signs are only permitted on Flora Street.
      (2)   These signs must be one- eighth inch thick aluminum disks that are
12 inches in diameter.
      (3)   Messages on these signs must consist entirely of graphic symbols or
glyphs designed to identify a type or category of retail facility. They may not
identify specific retail establishments.
      (4)   These signs must be mounted on streetlight poles. No more than six
signs are allowed on a pole. When there is more than one sign, the second sign
must be the same height as the first sign and located on the other side of the
pole. Additional signs must be similarly paired and located immediately beneath
the first two signs. Thus, the proper maximum configuration will be symmetrical
and consist of three pairs of signs, with the second and third pairs being
located immediately below the first pair.
   (b)   Governmental traffic signs.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this division, these signs
must comply with applicable statutory specifications.
      (2)   On Flora and Crockett Streets these signs must be mounted on
streetlight poles, or on white cylindrical poles.
      (3)   The backs of these signs must be white in color.
   (c)   Movement information signs.
      (1)   On Flora and Crockett Streets these signs must be mounted on
streetlight poles or on white cylindrical poles. On other streets, they must be
mounted on white cylindrical poles.
      (2)   The backs of these signs must be white in color and incorporate the
Arts District official logo.
      (3)   Movement information signs may include district information.
   (d)   Plaques.
      (1)   Permanent plaques must be made of bronze or stone and contain an
inscription that relates to the Arts District.
      (2)   Temporary plaques are only permitted in conjunction with public
art, and must contain an inscription that relates to the public art.
   (e)   Construction barricade signs.
      (1)    A minimum 10 percent of the effective area of the sign must
display the names of the owner, occupant, district sponsor, district activity,
and/or Klyde Warren Park name or activity.
      (2)   Non-premise messages are permitted, provided only one non-premise
message consisting of a business name or logo may be located along each street
frontage.
      (3)   Construction barricade signs must be removed when the construction
barricade is removed.
      (4)   The message area on a construction barricade sign may be fully
decorated or graphically designed if:
         (A)   no decoration or graphic horizontally projects more than two
inches from the surface of the barricade; and
         (B)   no decoration or graphic vertically projects more than four feet
above the top of the barricade. (Ord. Nos. 20345, 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1207.   ATTACHED PRIVATE SIGNS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   No sign may project above the building cornice area.
      (2)   Except for retaining wall signs, at grade structural supports for
attached signs are prohibited.
      (3)   No establishment may have a mix of awning signs, projecting
attached signs, flat attached signs, and/or marquee signs, except that awning
signs may be mixed with flat attached signs.
      (4)   The total effective area of all private signs on one facade may not
exceed 30 percent of the facade area. Projecting attached signs are not
included in these effective area calculations.
   (b)   Awning signs.
      (1)   Letters and numbers on these signs must:
         (A)   be parallel or perpendicular to the front building facade; and
         (B)   not exceed 18 inches in height.
      (2)   No letters or numbers are allowed on the sloped top of an awning
except as part of an official corporate logo or registered trademark. No more
than 50 percent of the total sloped awning surface area may contain graphics.
      (3)   No words, other than those which are part of the basic awning
design pattern, are permitted on awnings located above the second story.
      (4)   No sign may have flashing or sequenced lighting.
   (c)   Flat attached signs.
      (1)   This subsection applies only to flat attached signs located at or
below the third story of a facade of a building with frontage on the Flora
Street Frontage Area.
      (2)   These signs may project a maximum of four inches from a building.
      (3)   Except for flat attached signs located at or above the highest
leasable floor, these signs are not permitted above the third story of a
building.
      (4)    No sign may have a length that exceeds 70 percent of the length of
the frontage of the establishment with which it is associated. Signs associated
with the same establishment must be spaced at least 30 feet apart. No sign may
exceed 60 square feet in effective area.
      (5)   The maximum character heights allowed on these signs are:
         (A)   18 inches for signs located below the third story; and
         (B)   24 inches for third-story signs.
      (6)   No sign cabinets are permitted. Adequate clear space for staging
characters must be provided. The character height may not exceed 60 percent of
the vertical dimension of the sign. The sides of three-dimensional characters,
if any, must be the same color as their faces.
      (7)   No sign may contain more than five words.
      (8)   Sources of sign illumination that are an integral part of the
design of the sign, such as neon or small individual incandescent lamps, are
permitted. These signs may be protected by transparent covers.
      (9)   Internally lit plastic translucent signs are prohibited.
      (10)   No sign may have flashing or sequenced lighting.
   (d)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   These signs are only allowed in conjunction with establishments
that have as their major use movies or live entertainment productions.
      (2)   The permanent canopy of which this sign is a part must:
         (A)   project no more than six feet from the building facade;
         (B)   be a minimum of 10 feet above the sidewalk grade;
         (C)   have a vertical dimension that does not exceed four feet; and
         (D)   have a horizontal dimension along the building facade that does
not exceed 30 feet.
      (3)   The total effective area of signs on the permanent canopy must not
exceed 120 square feet.
      (4)   No sign may:
         (A)   project more than three feet from the permanent canopy;
         (B)   extend vertically more than 30 feet above the canopy height; or
         (C)   be more than three feet in width.
      (5)   Messages with characters over eight inches in height are limited to
a maximum of five words on each canopy facade. Messages with characters under
eight inches in height have no limit on the number of words. Character height
must not exceed 60 percent of the vertical dimension of the permanent canopy,
or 24 inches, whichever is less.
      (6)   Only the name of the establishment with which the sign is
associated may appear on that portion of the sign located above the permanent
canopy.
      (7)   Display panels that announce a show or event may have plastic
characters on an internally-lit background.
      (8)   These signs may turn on or off or change their brightness. The
restrictions contained in Section
51A-7.303(b)(1) do not apply to these signs. Flashing and sequenced lighting
are permitted.
   (e)   Projecting attached signs.
      (1)   These signs must be a minimum of 10 feet above grade.
      (2)   These signs must be located in either the bottom, top, or combined
envelope depicted graphically in the diagram that is attached to and made a
part of this ordinance as Exhibit B. Restrictions on the size and location of
each sign depend on which envelope the sign is located in as follows:
 
                               Bottom Envelope Top Envelope Combined Envelope
Maximum projection allowed from 6 ft.           3 ft.        3 ft.
building facade
Maximum vertical dimension      10 ft.          20 ft.       30 ft.
allowed
Maximum effective area allowed  30 sq. ft.      40 sq. ft.   45 sq. ft.
for each sign face*
*Double this amount to compute the total effective area allowed for both sides
of the sign.
 
      (3)   If their characters are eight inches or less in height, these signs
are not restricted as to the number of words permitted. Signs with characters
more than eight inches in height are limited to five words. No character may
exceed 12 inches in height if the message area exceeds 60 percent of the sign
surface area.
      (4)   One sign is allowed above each entrance provided that signs
associated with the same establishment are spaced at least 30 feet apart.
      (5)   No sign may be more than 12 inches thick. All messages on these
signs must be located on a sign face that is perpendicular to the front
building facade.
      (6)   No illuminated sign or element of a sign may turn on or off or
change its brightness.
      (7)   Sources of sign illumination that are an integral part of the
design of the sign, such as neon or small individual incandescent lamps, are
permitted. These signs may be protected by transparent covers.
      (8)   Internally lit plastic translucent signs are prohibited.
   (f)   Window signs.
      (1)   This subsection applies only to window signs as defined in Section
51A-7.1203.
      (2)   Window signs may only consist of a business name, business logo,
cultural institution information, or address.
      (3)   No character of a window sign may exceed 12 inches in height.
      (4)   The maximum amount of window area that may be utilized as sign
space varies depending on the location of the window as follows:
 
Window Location Maximum Window Coverage Allowed
First Story     15 percent
Second Story    20 percent
Third Story     25 percent
 
      (5)   No establishment may have more than four window signs.
      (6)   Hanging neon signs are allowed if their transformers are concealed
from normal view.
      (7)   Opaque painted backgrounds on windows are permitted during
permitted construction.
   (g)   Canopy fascia signs.
      (1)   Canopy fascia signs must comply with the operational requirements
in Section
51A-7.1205.1.
      (2)   Canopy fascia signs may only be located on buildings with frontage
on Flora Street.
      (3)   A maximum of two canopy fascia signs are allowed per building. Only
one canopy fascia sign is allowed on a building facade.
      (4)   Maximum height of a canopy fascia sign is four feet.
      (5)   [Reserved.]
      (6)   Maximum length of a canopy fascia sign is 74 feet.
      (7)   Maximum effective area of a canopy fascia sign is 296 square feet.
      (8)   Canopy fascia signs may only display premise and sponsorship
content.
   (h)   Integrated signs.
      (1)   The following four integrated signs are the only integrated signs
permitted:
         (A)   One integrated sign may be located on Ross Avenue a minimum of
10 feet from Olive Street and 260 feet from Harwood Street.
         (B)   One integrated sign that may only identify the building may be
located on Ross Avenue a minimum of 280 feet from Olive Street and 20 feet from
Harwood Street.
         (C)   One integrated sign may be a monument sign located on Pearl
Street a minimum of 15 feet from Woodall Rodgers Freeway and 100 feet from
Munger Avenue. The portion of the sign that contains the address and that does
not contain tenant names must have a clear or transparent appearance.
         (D)   One integrated sign may be attached to a wall or a monument sign
and must be located on a building site on Crockett Street and Leonard Street,
east of Ross Avenue.
            (i)    If the integrated sign is attached to a wall, it must be
located on Crockett Street.
            (ii)   If the integrated sign is a monument sign, it may be two-
sided but must be located in a building plaza area.
      (2)   The maximum height for an integrated sign is eight feet, measured
from the bottom of the sign face to the top of the sign face.
      (3)   The maximum effective area for an integrated sign is 60 square
feet.
      (4)   A single contiguous integrated sign that is able to be viewed from
more than one street is considered one integrated sign.
      (5)   Integrated signs may be located at the building line or within five
feet of a public right-of-way.
      (6)   All elements of an integrated sign must be consistent in color and
material.
   (i)   Tenant identity signs.
      (1)   Tenant identity signs are prohibited on facades with frontage on
the following:
         (A)   Munger Avenue.
         (B)   Crockett Street, unless the building site is adjacent to the
Ross Avenue Frontage Area.
         (C)   Leonard Street, unless the building site is adjacent to the
Flora Street Frontage Area.
      (2)   Tenant identity signs must be the same color and composed of
individual letters or symbols only.
      (3)   Illumination of tenant identity signs, if any, must be internal to
illuminate the building facade and produce a “halo” around the characters. No
illuminated sign or element of a sign may turn on or off or change its
brightness.
      (4)   Tenant identity signs may not exceed four percent of the facade to
which it is affixed.
   (j)   Building identification signs.
      (1)   On each facade, one building identification sign is permitted:
         (A)   below the third story of a building, provided the sign is
located above a building entrance and contains only the building name and/or
street address.
         (B)   at or above the highest leasable floor of a building.
      (2)   Building identification signs are prohibited on facades with
frontage on the following:
         (A)   Munger Avenue.
         (B)   Crockett Street, unless the building site is adjacent to the
Ross Avenue Frontage Area.
         (C)   Leonard Street, if the building site is adjacent to the Flora
Street Frontage Area.
      (3)   A building identification sign located below the third story of a
building may have a maximum of 50 square feet of effective area allocated to
the building name, and a maximum of 25 square feet of effective area allocated
to the building address. The maximum permitted heights of characters on these
signs are 24 inches for the building name, and 12 inches for the building
address.
      (4)   A building identification sign located at or above the highest
leasable floor of a building may not exceed four percent of the facade to which
it is affixed.
      (5)   Building identification signs must be the same color and composed
of individual letters or symbols only.
      (6)   Illumination of building identification signs, if any, must be
internal to illuminate the building facade and produce a “halo” around the
characters. No illuminated sign or element of a sign may turn on or off or
change its brightness. (Ord. Nos. 20345; 26768; 28071; 28471; 30731; 31079;
33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1208.   DETACHED PRIVATE SIGNS.
   (a)   Detached non-premise signs. Detached non-premise signs are prohibited
in this district. This provision does not apply to:
      (1)   kiosks that are located in the public right-of-way or on a private
building site; or
      (2)   non-premise messages allowed on construction barricade signs.
   (b)   Detached premise signs.
      (1)   Maximum number. Each premise may have no more than one detached
premise sign on each blockface.
      (2)   Size. No detached premise sign may exceed 30 square feet in
effective area, a maximum height of 13 feet six inches, and a maximum depth of
12 inches.
      (3)   Lighting. Illumination of detached premise signs, if any, must be
from within to illuminate the building facade or monument and produce a “halo”
around the characters. No illuminated sign or element of a sign may turn on or
off or change its brightness.
      (4)   Monument signs.
         (A)   A maximum of two monument signs are permitted per building site.
         (B)   Monument signs must be freestanding.
         (C)   Monument signs may be two sided but must be located in a
building plaza area.
         (D)   Monument signs may identify a building’s original owner,
architect and developer and/or a building’s multiple current tenants.
         (E)   Monument signs may be located at the building line.
         (F)   Monument signs may be located within five feet of the public
right-of- way.
         (G)   The maximum height for a monument sign is eight feet measured to
the top of the sign face.
         (H)   Except as otherwise provided, the maximum effective area for a
monument sign is 50 square feet.
         (I)   All elements of a monument sign must be consistent in color and
material.
      (5)   Retaining wall signs. 
         (A)   A maximum of two retaining wall signs are permitted per building
site.
         (B)   Retaining wall signs must be mounted on a perimeter retaining
wall facing a right-of-way.
         (C)   Retaining wall signs may identify the building’s owner or
developer and multiple tenants.
         (D)   Retaining wall signs may be located within five feet of the
public right-of- way.
         (E)   The maximum height for a retaining wall sign is eight feet
measured to the top of the sign face.
         (F)   The maximum effective area for a retaining wall sign is 50
square feet.
         (G)   All elements of a retaining wall sign must be consistent in
color and material. (Ord. Nos. 20345; 26768; 28071; 28471; 30731; 31079; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1209.   BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   (a)   This subsection applies to building identification signs that are part
of a landscape design that creates a base for the sign in conjunction with a
retaining wall or an open space created with the use of water or planting
material.
      (1)   A building identification sign must be located on a monument in a
landscaped area between a building facade and the property line.
      (2)   The maximum effective area of a building identification sign is 50
square feet.
      (3)   A maximum of one building identification sign is permitted per
building site.
      (4)   These signs must be composed of individual characters made of
bronze, brass, or stainless steel, or be engraved in stone.
      (5)   A building identification sign may be located within five feet of a
public right- of-way.
   (b)   This subsection applies to freestanding building identification signs.
      (1)   A maximum of three freestanding building identification signs are
allowed in the district.
      (2)   Maximum height is 20 feet.
      (3)   Maximum width is eight feet.
      (4)   A freestanding building identification sign may be located within
the public right-of-way if a license has been granted by the city.
      (5)   Freestanding building identification signs may be double-sided.
      (6)   Freestanding building identification signs may only display the
building name. (Ord. Nos. 20345; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1210.   CULTURAL INSTITUTION SIGNS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Cultural institution identification signs may only be located on:
         (A)   a building facade;
         (B)   a lower-level roof line as shown on Exhibit B; or
         (C)   a monument in a landscaped area between a building facade and
the property line.
      (2)   Cultural institution identification signs on a building facade may
not have an effective area greater than five percent of that building facade.
      (3)   Cultural institution identification signs on a lower-level roof
line may not have an effective area greater than five percent of the facade
segment located beneath that lower-level roof line. No portion of the sign on a
lower-level roof line may project above the structure’s highest roof line.
      (4)   Cultural institution identification signs that are monument signs
must comply with the setback and effective area regulations for detached
premise signs in this chapter.
      (5)   Sign cabinets are not permitted.
      (6)   Cultural institution identification signs may be illuminated,
provided the illuminated sign elements do not turn on or off, but may go
through cycles of dimming and brightening to create a slow pulsing effect. Each
cycle of dimming and brightening must exceed five seconds.
      (7)   Cultural institution identification signs must be compatible with
the architectural design and contribute to the visual effect of the building.
      (8)   Characters may not exceed 24 inches in height.
      (9)   Cultural institution identification signs are not considered a
business identification sign.
      (10)   Cultural institution identification signs may not have a
changeable message.
   (b)   Digital cultural institution signs.
      (1)   Digital cultural institution signs must comply with the operational
requirements in Section
51A-7.1205.1.
      (2)   The following six digital cultural institution signs are the only
digital cultural institution signs allowed:
         (A)   One digital cultural institution sign is allowed at the
southwest corner of the intersection of Woodall Rodgers Freeway and Jack Evans
Street.
            (i)   Maximum height is 50 feet.
            (ii)   Maximum width is 20 feet.
            (iii)   Total maximum effective area is 1,000 square feet per side.
Maximum effective area for identification of sponsor is 400 square feet per
side.
            (iv)   Minimum setback from back of curb is 12 feet.
         (B)   One digital cultural institution sign is allowed at the
northeast corner of the intersection of Ross Avenue and Leonard Street.
            (i)   Maximum height is 35 feet.
            (ii)   Maximum width is 12 feet.
            (iii)   Total maximum effective area is 420 square feet, per side.
Maximum effective area for identification of sponsor is 144 square feet, per
side.
            (iv)   Minimum setback from back of curb is 35 feet.
         (C)   Four digital cultural institution signs are allowed along Flora
Street.
            (i)   Maximum height is seven feet.
            (ii)   Maximum width is three feet six inches.
            (iii)   Total maximum effective area is eight square feet, per
side. Maximum effective area for identification of sponsor is 1.25 square feet,
per side.
            (iv)   Minimum setback from back of curb is 30 feet.
      (3)   Digital cultural institution signs may only display premise and
sponsorship information.
   (c)   Facade mounted banner signs.
      (1)   Facade mounted banner signs may not exceed 2,205 square feet in
effective area.
      (2)   Facade mounted banner signs may include sponsorship information.
The portion of a sign devoted to sponsorship information, if any, must not
exceed 10 percent of its effective area. No sign or portion of a sign may be
used to advertise a specific product or service other than the cultural event
or activity.
      (3)   A banner must be flat against a building facade.
      (4)   A facade mounted banner sign must be removed no later than 30 days
after its specific advertised event or activity has ended.
   (d)   Pole mounted banner signs.
      (1)   Pole mounted banner signs may not exceed 20 square feet in
effective area.
      (2)   Pole mounted banner signs may include sponsorship information. The
portion of a sign devoted to sponsorship information, if any, must not exceed
10 percent of its effective area. No sign or portion of a sign may be used to
advertise a specific product or service other than the cultural event or
activity.
      (3)   A pole mounted banner sign must be removed no later than 30 days
after its specific advertised event or activity has ended. (Ord. Nos. 26768;
33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1211.   APPLICATION OF THE HIGHWAY BEAUTIFICATION ACTS.
   For purposes of applying the Federal and Texas Highway Beautification Acts,
this district is considered to be a commercial zone. (Ord. Nos. 28071; 33252)
SEC. 51A-7.1212. THRU 51A-7.1215. RESERVED.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33252)
EXHIBIT A - ORD. 33252
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10394.jpg]
Division 51A-7.1300. Provisions for Deep Ellum/Near East Side Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.1301.   DESIGNATION OF SIGN DISTRICT.
   A special provision sign district is hereby created to be known as the Deep
Ellum/Near East Side Sign District. The boundaries of the Deep Ellum/Near East
Side Sign District are the same as those of the Deep Ellum/Near East Side
District (Planned Development District No. 269). (Ord. 20596)
SEC. 51A-7.1302.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to promote signage that is compatible with
the architectural character and design guidelines of the Deep Ellum/Near East
Side Planned Development District while encouraging artistic, creative, and
innovative signs which are reflective of themes that have grown and developed
in the Deep Ellum area. (Ord. 20596)
SEC. 51A-7.1303.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this division:
      (1)   A-FRAME SIGN means a premise sign that is a portable detached
structure that is hinged at the top and is made of durable, rigid materials
such as wood, plastic, or metal.
      (2)   ARTWORK means any pictorial or image presentation or design.
      (3)   AWNING means a fabric or vinyl surface supported by a metal
structure, which is applied to the face of a building.
      (4)   AWNING SIGN means a sign attached to, painted on, or otherwise
applied to an awning.
      (5)   DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGN means an attached or detached sign
identifying only this district.
      (6)   MARQUEE SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by
a permanent canopy projecting over a pedestrian street entrance of a building,
and consisting primarily of changeable panels or words.
      (7)   PAINTED APPLIED SIGN means a sign that is painted, or that is made
to look painted, directly onto the face of the exterior facade of a building
not including doors and windows. Signs of this type must naturally conform to
the textured surface of the facade.
      (8)   THIS DISTRICT means the Deep Ellum/Near East Side Sign District.
       (9)   WALLSCAPE SIGN means a sign meeting the requirements set forth in
Section
51A-7.1306(g).
      (10)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign painted or affixed onto a window.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the definitions
contained in Sections
51A-2.102 and
51A-7.102 apply to this division. In the event of a conflict, this section
controls. (Ord. Nos. 20596; 24984; 31494)
SEC. 51A-7.1304.   SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person may alter, place, maintain, expand, or remove a sign in this
district without first obtaining a sign permit from the city. This section does
not apply to government signs described in Section
51A-7.207.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in Section
51A-7.1306(f), the procedure for obtaining a sign permit is outlined in Section
51A-7.505.
   (c)   Section
51A-7.602 does not apply to signs in this district. (Ord. Nos. 20596; 24984)
SEC. 51A-7.1305.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   (a)   Signs in this district are permitted to overhang the public right-of-
way subject to city franchising requirements.
   (b)   Except for wallscape signs, painted applied signs, and district
identification signs, no sign may exceed 150 square feet unless it is located
more than 65 feet above grade, at which point no sign may exceed 300 square
feet.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsections (d) and (e), the maximum
effective area of all signs combined on a premise, not including A-frame signs,
painted applied signs on certain facades, and district identification signs, is
10 percent of the total area of all building facades facing public right-of-way
that is adjacent to the premise, not to exceed 1,200 square feet. Where a
premise has only one facade facing an adjacent public right-of-way, the maximum
effective area can be increased to 15 percent of that facade, not to exceed 500
square feet.
   (d)   Excluding A-frame signs, painted applied signs on certain facades, and
district identification signs, when more than 50 percent of the total effective
area of all signs combined on a premise is devoted to artwork, and there is no
wallscape sign on the premise, the maximum effective area of all signs combined
on a premise is 15 percent of the total area of all building facades facing
public right-of-way that is adjacent to the premise, not to exceed 1,400 square
feet. Where a premise has only one facade facing an adjacent public right-of-
way, the maximum effective area can be increased to 20 percent of that facade,
not to exceed 600 square feet.
   (e)   When there is a wallscape sign on the premise, the maximum effective
area of all signs combined on a premise is 90 percent of the total area of all
building facades facing a public right-of-way that is adjacent to the premise.
   (f)   Except for wallscape signs, all signs must be premise signs or convey
a noncommercial message.
   (g)   Special purpose signs may be erected on a premise no more than twice
each calendar year. The maximum number of consecutive days that a special
purpose sign may be maintained is 45. Special purpose signs may not exceed 10
percent of the facade to which they are attached. Detached special purpose
signs are prohibited.
   (h)   The use of neon or single incandescent bulbs is permitted.
   (i)   Digital displays are prohibited.
   (j)   No portions of a sign other than the words themselves may be
illuminated by back-lighting.
   (k)   No portion of a sign may have a luminance greater than 200
footlamberts.
   (l)   The following materials are suggested, but not required, for signs in
this district:
      (1)   Metal.
      (2)   Glass.
      (3)   Wood. (Ord. Nos. 20596; 24984; 31494)
SEC. 51A-7.1306.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ATTACHED SIGNS.
   The regulations relating to the erection of attached signs in this district
are hereby expressly modified as follows:
   (a)   Attached signs in general.
      (1)   No portion of an attached sign may be located:
         (A)   more than 10 feet from the facade to which it is attached; or
         (B)   less than two feet from the back of a street curb.
      (2)   Although not required, the use of three-dimensional projecting
attached signs is encouraged.
   (b)   Cultural event or activity signs.
      (1)   Cultural event or activity signs are permitted in this district to
promote cultural events or activities happening within the district and within
one-half mile of the district.
      (2)   Cultural event or activity signs are temporary signs that may only
be displayed up to 45 days prior to the event or activity being promoted and
must be removed no later than 45 after the event or activity.
      (3)   If the cultural event or activity has a sponsor, no more than 10
percent of the effective area of a cultural event or activity sign may be
utilized for sponsor identification.
      (4)   No portion of a cultural event or activity sign may be used to
advertise a specific product or service other than the cultural event or
activity.
   (c)   Awning signs. Awning signs must be flat attached, imprinted, painted
on the face of an awning, or attached to and hanging from the bottom of an
awning. Signs hanging from the bottom of an awning must meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   The bottom of the awning sign must be a minimum of 10 feet above
the ground surface when projecting over a private or public walkway.
      (2)   Awning signs must project no more than five feet into a public
right-of-way and must project no closer than two feet from the face of the curb
line without projecting past the edge of the awning. All necessary city
licenses and permits must be obtained.
   (d)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   No premise may have more than one marquee sign.
      (2)   The length of a marquee sign must not exceed two-thirds of the
length of the facade to which it is attached.
      (3)   Marquee signs may incorporate moving patterns or bands of light,
except that the use of illumination to produce apparent motion of a visual
image, such as expanding or contracting shapes, rotation, or similar effects of
animation, is prohibited.
   (e)   Window sign. No window sign may cover more than 25 percent of the
window surface area.
   (f)   Painted applied signs.
      (1)   On facades where less than 10 percent of the facade is comprised of
windows, painted applied signs may cover up to 40 percent of the facade.
      (2)   No portion of a painted applied sign, on any facade, may cover a
significant decorative feature of the facade.
   (g)   Wallscape signs.
      (1)   Definitions. In this section, WALLSCAPE SIGN means an attached
premise or non-premise sign on a mesh type surface or painted directly onto the
face of a building.
      (2)   Visual display and coverage.
         (A)   A wallscape sign must have at least 84 percent of non-textual
graphic content (a maximum of 16 percent of the effective area of the sign may
contain text).
         (B)   A wallscape sign must have a single message; it may not have
multiple messages or function as multiple signs.
         (C)   The lower 15 feet of the face may not be covered.
      (3)   Minimum effective area. Minimum effective area of a wallscape sign
is 1,200 square feet.
      (4)   Location. The building to which a wallscape sign is attached or
applied must be more than 80 feet in height, and only those portions of a
building covering at least 1,100 square feet in floor area may be used to
determine the height of the building for the purpose of this paragraph. No
wallscape sign may be attached to a building or structure erected after June 1,
2005.
      (5)   Number of signs permitted, and spacing requirement. One wallscape
per face is permitted in this district. The signs may be spaced immediately
adjacent to each other on different faces of the building.
      (6)   Removal of wallscape sign. If a wallscape sign is proposed that
will be painted onto the face of a building, the applicant must provide a bond
in the amount of the cost of removal of the wallscape sign, that provides that
the wallscape sign will be removed within 30 days of the expiration of the
permitted message duration.
      (7)   Sign permit application review. All applications for sign permits
for wallscape signs shall be reviewed using the director procedure in Division
51A-7.500.
      (8)   Mandatory removal in 2030. All wallscape signs must be removed on
or before July 1, 2030. This section does not confer a nonconforming or vested
right to maintain a wallscape sign after July 1, 2030, and all permits
authorizing wallscape signs shall automatically expire on that date.
      (9)   Sunset. This section expires on July 1, 2030, unless reenacted with
amendment prior to that date. The city plan commission and city council shall
review this section prior to its expiration date.
   (h)   District identification signs.
      (1)   Recognizing the historical, cultural, artistic, and architectural
importance and significance of this district to the citizens of the City of
Dallas, the provisions in this subsection are specifically tailored to preserve
and enhance the district, and to strengthen district identity.
      (2)   There is no limit to the number of attached district identification
signs. (Ord. Nos. 20596; 24984; 25996; 27284; 31494)
SEC. 51A-7.1307.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DETACHED SIGNS.
   The regulations relating to the erection of detached signs in this district
are hereby expressly modified as follows:
      (1)   No premise having an attached sign of any type, except for cultural
event or activity signs, special purpose signs, or district identification
signs, may have a detached sign, except for A-frame signs, unless the maximum
effective area for all signs on the premise, as established in
51A-7.1305(c),
51A-7.1305(d), or
51A-7.1305(e), is reduced by 25 percent for each detached sign located on the
premise not to exceed a total reduction of 75 percent of the maximum effective
area. Where the premise has only one facade facing an adjacent public right-of-
way, the maximum effective area is to be reduced by 75 percent.
      (2)   A premise may have no more than one detached sign along each street
frontage.
      (3)   No detached sign support may be located in the public right-of-way.
      (4)   A-frame signs.
         (A)   Only one A-frame sign is permitted for each business use.
         (B)   The maximum size of an A-frame sign is 32 inches wide and 36
inches tall.
         (C)   An A-frame sign may only be displayed when the business it
identifies is open.
         (D)   A-frame signs may be located on the sidewalk if a minimum of
four feet of unobstructed sidewalk area is provided and all necessary city
licenses and permits have been obtained.
         (E)   A-frame signs may not be located within 25 feet of an
intersection or within a visibility triangle.
      (5)   District identification signs. Recognizing the historical,
cultural, artistic, and architectural importance and significance of this
district to the citizens of the City of Dallas, the provisions in this
paragraph are specifically tailored to preserve and enhance the district, and
to strengthen district identity.
         (A)   The maximum number of district identification signs is nine.
         (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, district
identification signs may only be located in or over and span across the rights-
of-way at the following locations:
            (i)   Four of the district identification signs are limited to
1,000 square feet in effective area and may be located at any of the following
locations:
               (aa)    Along Hall Street, between Crutcher Street and Elm
Street.
               (bb)    Main Street & Deep Ellum Trailhead.
               (cc)    Exposition Avenue & 1st Avenue.
               (dd)    Malcolm X Boulevard & Hall Street.
               (ee)    Elm Street & Interstate-345.
            (ii)   Four other district identification signs are limited to 250
square feet in effective area and may be located at any of the previously
stated locations that do not already have a district identification sign or at
any of the following locations:
               (aa)    Canton Street & Henry Street.
               (bb)    Main Street & Malcolm X Boulevard.
               (cc)    Main Street & Good-Latimer Expressway.
            (iii)   The final district identification sign is limited to 250
square feet in effective area and may be located at any location within the
district that does not already have a district identification sign.
         (C)   Minimum clearance for a district identification sign located in
or over and spanning across a right-of-way must be determined by the director
before a district identification sign permit may be issued and all necessary
city licenses and permits are obtained.
         (D)   A district identification sign that is located over and spanning
across a right-of-way may not resemble or obstruct traffic control devices.
         (E)   A district identification sign may not be located in or visually
obstruct a visibility triangle as defined in the visual obstructions
regulations in Section
51A-4.602(d). (Ord. Nos. 20596; 31494)
SEC. 51A-7.1308.   COMMERCIAL PARKING LOTS.
   For commercial parking lots, one sign is permitted for each street frontage.
Commercial parking lot signs are limited to 20 square feet in effective area
and 15 feet in height. (Ord. Nos. 26066; 31494)
Division 51A-7.1400. Jefferson Boulevard Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.1401.   DESIGNATION OF SIGN DISTRICT.
   A special provision sign district is hereby created to be known as the
Jefferson Boulevard Sign District. The Jefferson Boulevard Sign District is
that area within the following described boundaries:
   BEGINNING at a point being the northwestern corner of Lot 9A, Block 189/
3248;
   THENCE easterly along the northern lot line of Lot 9A, Block 189/3248,
crossing Polk Street and extending along the center line of the alley between
Sunset Street and Jefferson Boulevard to the center line of the alley between
Polk Street and Tyler Street;
   THENCE northerly along the alley center line to the projected northern lot
line of Lot 3, Block 178/3237;
   THENCE easterly along the northern lot line of Lot 3, Block 178/3237
crossing Tyler Street and extending along the northern lot lines of Lots 11 and
12, Block 157/3226 and extending along the center line of the alley between
Sunset Street and Jefferson Boulevard to the center line of the alley between
Zang Boulevard and Beckley Avenue;
   THENCE northerly along the center line of the alley between Zang Boulevard
and Beckley Avenue to the projected northern lot line of Lot 10, Block 49/3169;
   THENCE easterly along the northern lot line of Lot 10, Block 49/3169 to the
center line of Beckley Avenue;
   THENCE southerly along the center line of Beckley Avenue to the projected
northern lot line of Lot 12, Block 50/3170;
   THENCE westerly along the northern lot line of Lot 12, Block 50/3170 and
continuing along the center line of the alley between Jefferson Boulevard and
Center Street continuing and crossing Polk Street to the northeast corner of
Lot 10, Block 188/3247 and continuing along the northern lot lines of Lots 9
and 10, Block 188/3247 to the center line of the alley between Willomet Street
and Polk Street;
   THENCE northerly along the center line of the alley between Willomet Street
and Polk Street crossing Jefferson Boulevard and continuing along the western
lot line of Lot 9A, Block 189/3248 to the PLACE OF BEGINNING. (Ord. Nos. 21114;
22019)
SEC. 51A-7.1402.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to regulate both the construction of new
signs and the alterations of existing signs with a view towards enhancing,
preserving, and developing the unique character of this district. These sign
regulations have been developed with the following objectives in mind:
      (1)   To protect the historical and architectural character of this
district from inappropriate signs in terms of number (clutter), style, color
and materials.
      (2)   To ensure that significant architectural features in this district
or of a building within this district are not obscured.
      (3)   To promote the economic success of each business within this
district and, in turn, the collective success of this district.
      (4)   To ensure that the size and orientation of signs are geared toward
the high number of pedestrians in this district.
      (5)   To enhance the aesthetics of this district.
      (6)   To promote safety, communications efficiency, and landscape quality
and preservation as described in Section
51A-7.101. (Ord. Nos. 21114; 22019)
SEC. 51A-7.1403.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this division:
      (1)   ARTWORK means any pictorial or image presentation or design.
      (2)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting from a
building and parallel to the building facade.
      (3)   MARQUEE SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by
a permanent canopy projecting over a pedestrian street entrance of a building,
and consisting primarily of changeable panels, words, or characters.
      (4)   PAINTED APPLIED SIGN means a sign painted directly onto the
exterior facade of a building, not including doors or windows.
      (5)   THIS DISTRICT means the Jefferson Boulevard Sign District.
      (6)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign painted or affixed to a window.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the definitions
contained in Sections
51A-2.102 and
51A-7.102 apply to this division. In the event of a conflict, this section
controls. (Ord. Nos. 21114; 22019)
SEC. 51A-7.1404.   SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person may alter, erect, maintain, expand, or remove a sign in this
district without first obtaining a sign permit from the city. This section does
not apply to government signs described in Section
51A-7.207.
   (b)   The procedure for obtaining a sign permit is outlined in Section
51A-7.505. Section
51A-7.602 does not apply to signs in this district. (Ord. Nos. 21114; 22019)
SEC. 51A-7.1405.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   (a)   Signs in right-of-way. Signs in this district are permitted to
overhang the public right-of-way subject to city franchising requirements.
   (b)   Materials. Although not required, painted applied signs and enameled
metal signs are encouraged.
   (c)   Lighting.
      (1)   No sign may be illuminated by an independent, external fluorescent
light source.
      (2)   The only light sources that may be used to illuminate a sign are
cold cathode tube (neon), mercury vapor bulbs, or incandescent bulbs. (Ord.
Nos. 21114; 22019)
SEC. 51A-7.1406.   ATTACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   Attached signs in general.
      (1)   Except for marquee signs and as specified in Paragraphs (2) and
(3), all attached signs must be mounted parallel to the building surface to
which they are attached and may not project more than 18 inches from that
building.
      (2)   One attached sign that projects up to four feet from a vertical
building surface may be erected at a nonresidential occupancy if:
         (A)   the sign does not exceed 20 square feet in effective area;
         (B)   no portion of the sign is lower than 10 feet above grade; and
         (C)   there is no detached sign on the premise.
      (3)   No portion of a sign may be located less than two feet from the
back of a street curb.
      (4)   The use of artwork on signs is encouraged.
      (5)   Signs may not be mounted on or project above roofs.
   (b)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   No premise may have more than one marquee sign.
      (2)   The length of the marquee sign must not exceed two-thirds of the
length of the facade to which it is attached.
      (3)   Marquee signs may incorporate moving patterns or bands of light,
except that the use of illumination to produce apparent motion of a visual
image, such as expanding or contracting shapes, rotation, or similar effects of
animation, is prohibited.
   (c)   Window signs. No window sign may:
      (1)   have a painted or opaque background; or
      (2)   cover more than 25 percent of the window surface area. (Ord. Nos.
21114; 22019; 22392)
SEC. 51A-7.1407.   DETACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   Detached signs may not exceed the height of the tallest building on
the premise or 30 feet, whichever is less.
   (b)   Detached signs may not exceed 150 square feet in effective area.
   (c)   Detached non-premise signs are prohibited in this district. (Ord. Nos.
21114; 22019)
Division 51A-7.1500. Provisions for McKinney Avenue Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.1501.   DESIGNATION OF SIGN DISTRICT.
   A special provision sign district is hereby created to be known as the
McKinney Avenue Sign District. The McKinney Avenue Sign District is that area
within the following described boundaries:
   BEGINNING at a point on the northwest line of McKinney Avenue, said point
being 166.84 feet southwest of the southwest line of Fairmount Street;
   THENCE in a northwesterly direction along a line, said line being
approximately 142 feet southwest of and parallel to the southwest line of
Fairmount Street, a distance of approximately 482.05 feet to a point for corner
on the common line between City Blocks 949 and 1/949;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said common block line, a distance
of approximately 20.4 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of a 16 feet
wide public alley adjacent to Lots 13 and 15 in City Block 1/949;
   THENCE in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of said alley and
its northwestward prolongation across Mahon Street and continuing along the
centerline of a 16 feet wide public alley in City Block 3/950 and continuing
along the northwestward prolongation of the centerline of said alley, a
distance of approximately 705 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of
Howell Street;
   THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Howell Street, a
distance of approximately 400.4 feet to a point for corner on the southeastward
prolongation of the centerline of a 20 feet wide public alley in City Blocks
952 and 953;
   THENCE in a northwesterly direction along said line and continuing along the
centerline of said alley in City Blocks 952 and 953, a distance of
approximately 403 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line being 30 feet
northwest of and parallel to the southeast line of Lot 10 in City Block 952;
   THENCE in a northeasterly direction along said line and its northeastward
prolongation across Routh Street and continuing along the centerline of Laclede
Street, a distance of approximately 1,060 feet to a point for corner on the
centerline of Vine Street;
   THENCE in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Vine Street, a
distance of approximately 245 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of
Cole Avenue;
   THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Cole Avenue, a
distance of approximately 793 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line
being 118.0 feet northeast of and parallel to the northeast line of Sneed
Street;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said line, continuing along the
northeast boundary of Lot 1-A in City Block 17/965, a distance of approximately
156.40 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of a 15 feet wide public
alley in City Block 17/965;
   THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of said alley, a
distance of approximately 315 feet to a point on the southwest line of Bowen
Street;
   THENCE in a northeasterly direction, continuing along the northeastward
prolongation of the centerline of the 15 feet wide public alley in City Block
17/965, crossing Bowen Street and continuing along the centerline of a 15 feet
wide alley in City Block 12/970 and its northeastward prolongation, crossing
Hall Street, and continuing along the centerline of a 15 feet wide public alley
in City Block 9/972, a total distance of approximately 940 feet to a point for
corner on a line, said line being the southeasterly prolongation of the common
line between Lots 3 and 4 in City Block 9/972;
   THENCE in a northwesterly direction along said line and continuing along
said common line between Lots 3 and 4 and continuing along the northwestward
prolongation of said common lot line, a distance of approximately 202.5 feet to
a point for corner on the centerline of Cole Avenue;
   THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Cole Avenue, a
distance of approximately 338 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of
Lemmon Avenue;
   THENCE in a northeasterly direction along a line, said line being 224.7 feet
southeast of and parallel to the southeast line of Cole Avenue, a distance of
approximately 130 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line being the
northwestward prolongation of the common line between Lots 2 and 3 in City
Block 978;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said line, and continuing along
said common line in City Block 978, and continuing along the southeastward
prolongation of said line, crossing McKinney Avenue a total distance of
approximately 360 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of McKinney
Avenue;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said centerline of McKinney
Avenue, a distance of approximately 131 feet to a point at the intersection of
said centerline of McKinney Avenue and the centerline of Lemmon Avenue;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said centerline of Lemmon Avenue,
a distance of approximately 198 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line
being approximately 198 feet southeast of and parallel to said centerline of
McKinney Avenue;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line, crossing Lemmon Avenue,
and continuing into City Block 11/971, a distance of approximately 474.51 feet
to a point for corner on a line, said line being approximately 146 feet
northeast of and parallel to the northeast line of Hall Street;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 295 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of Oak Grove
Avenue;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Oak Grove
Avenue, a distance of approximately 1,356 feet to a point for corner on the
centerline of McKinney Avenue;
   THENCE in a southerly direction along the centerline of McKinney Avenue, a
distance of approximately 115 feet to a point for corner on the northwestward
prolongation of the centerline of Clyde Lane;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said line and continuing along the
centerline of Clyde Lane, a distance of approximately 320 feet to a point for
corner on a line, said line being the northeastward prolongation of the common
line between Lots 18 and 19 in City Block B/578;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line and continuing along
said common line between Lots 18 and 19, a distance of approximately 90 feet to
a point for corner on the southwest line of Lot 18 in City Block B/578;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said lot line, a distance of
approximately 40 feet to a point for corner on the common line between Lots 1
and 2 in City Block A/578;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said common lot line and its
southwestward prolongation, a distance of approximately 155 feet to a point for
corner on the centerline of Allen Street;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Allen Street, a
distance of approximately 100 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line
being perpendicular to the southwest line of Allen Street;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 22.5 feet to a point for corner on the southwest line of Allen
Street, said point also being the northernmost corner of Lot 5 in City Block
577;
   THENCE in a southerly direction along the western boundary of said Lot 5 and
continuing in a southeasterly direction along the southwestern boundary of Lots
6 and 7, and continuing along the southeastward prolongation of the
southwestern boundary of said Lot 7, a distance of approximately 277.5 feet to
a point for corner on the centerline of a 15 feet wide public alley adjacent to
City Block A/577;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of said alley and
its southwestward prolongation, a distance of approximately 190 feet to a point
for corner on the centerline of Worthington Street;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Worthington
Street, a distance of approximately 50 feet to a point for corner on a line,
said line being perpendicular to the southwest line of Worthington Street;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 24 feet to a point for corner on the southwest line of
Worthington Street, said point also being the most northerly corner of Lot 5-
A in City Block A/561;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the northwest line of said Lot 5-
A, a distance of 158.69 feet to a point for corner;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the southwest line of Lot 5-A in
City Block A/561, a distance of 48.3 feet to a point for corner;
   THENCE South 39°38'00" West along a common property line, a distance of
approximately 172 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of Boll Street;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Boll Street, a
distance of approximately 80 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line
being perpendicular to the southwest line of Boll Street;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 25 feet to a point for corner on the southwest line of Boll
Street, said point also being the most easterly corner of Lot 4 in City Block
A/554;
   THENCE in a southerly and southwesterly direction along the southeasterly
boundary of Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 in City Block A/554, and continuing along the
southwestward prolongation of the southeast boundary of Lot 1 in City Block A/
554, a distance of approximately 355 feet to a point for corner on the
centerline of Routh Street;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Routh Street, a
distance of approximately 120 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line
being perpendicular to the southwest line of Routh Street;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 25 feet to a point for corner on the southwest line of Routh
Street, said point also being the centerline of a 15 feet wide public alley in
City Block C/549;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of said alley and
its southwestward prolongation, a distance of approximately 375 feet to a point
for corner on the centerline of Fairmount Street;
   THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Fairmount
Street, a distance of approximately 30 feet to a point for corner on a line,
said line being the northeastward prolongation of the centerline of a 20 feet
wide public alley in City Block B/548;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of said alley and
its southwestward prolongation, a distance of approximately 210 feet to a point
for corner on the centerline of Leonard Street;
   THENCE in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Leonard Street,
a distance of approximately 120 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of
McKinney Avenue;
   THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of McKinney Avenue,
a distance of approximately 40 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line
being approximately 142 feet southwest of and parallel to the southwest line of
Fairmount Street;
   THENCE in a northwesterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 35 feet to a point on the northwest line of McKinney Avenue, the
PLACE OF BEGINNING.
(Ord. Nos. 21145; 31265)
SEC. 51A-7.1502.   DESIGNATION OF SUBDISTRICTS.
   (a)   This district is hereby divided into three subdistricts, which shall
be known as the Spine, Quadrangle, and Peripheral Subdistricts.
   (b)   The Spine Subdistrict is that area of the city within the following
described boundaries:
      BEGINNING at a point on the northwest line of McKinney Avenue, said point
being 166.84 feet southwest of the southwest line of Fairmount Street;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along a line, said line being
approximately 142 feet southwest of and parallel to the southwest line of
Fairmount Street, a distance of approximately 317.05 feet to a point for corner
on a line, said line being approximately 165 feet southeast of and parallel to
the common line between City Blocks 949 and 1/949;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 167 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of Fairmount
Street;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along a line, said line being the
southwestward prolongation of the centerline of Howland Street and continuing
along the centerline of Howland Street and its northeastward prolongation, a
distance of approximately 458 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of
Routh Street;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Routh Street,
a distance of 90 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line being the
southwestward prolongation of the centerline of Howland Street in City Block 3/
955;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along said line and continuing along
the centerline of Howland Street to a point for corner on the centerline of
Boll Street;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Boll Street
to a point for corner on a line, said line being 105 feet northwest of and
parallel to the northwest line of Howland Street;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along said line to a point for corner
on the common line between Lots 6 and 6A in City Block 2/955;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along said common lot line to a point
for corner on the north/south common line between Lots 6 and 6A in City Block
2/955;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said common lot line and its
southwestward prolongation to a point for corner on the centerline of Boll
Street;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Boll Street
to a point for corner on the centerline of Howell Street;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Howell Street
to a point for corner on the centerline of Worthington Street;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Worthington
Street to a point for corner on a line, said line being the southwestward
prolongation of the common line between Lots 1 and 10 in City Block 1/955;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along said line, and continuing along
said common lot line, a distance of approximately 195.86 feet to a point for
corner on the south line of Lot 1 in City Block 955;
      THENCE in a westerly direction along the south line of said Lot 1, a
distance of approximately 67 feet to a point for corner on the southeast line
of Howell Street;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along a line, said line being
perpendicular to the southeast line of Howell Street, a distance of
approximately 25 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of Howell Street;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Howell Street
to a point for corner on the centerline of Vine Street;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Vine Street
to a point for corner on the centerline of Cole Avenue;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Cole Avenue
to a point for corner on a line, said line being the northwestward prolongation
of the southwest line of Lot 3 in City Block 963;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said line, and continuing along
the southwest line of said Lot 3 to a point for corner on the southeast line of
said Lot 3;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the southeast line of said Lot
3 to a point for corner on the northeast line of said Lot 3;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along the northeast line of said Lot
3 and its northwestward prolongation to a point for corner on the centerline of
Cole Avenue;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Cole Avenue
to a point for corner on a line, said line being the northwestward prolongation
of the northeast line of Lot 1A in City Block 963;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said line, and continuing along
the northeast line of said Lot 1A to a point for corner on the northwest line
of said Lot 1A;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the northwest line of said Lot
1A and its northeastward prolongation to a point for corner on the centerline
of Allen Street;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Allen Street
to a point for corner, said point being approximately 169.5 feet southeast of
the northeastward prolongation of the southeast line of Laclede Street;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along a line parallel with the
southwest line of McKinney Avenue, a distance of approximately 495 feet to a
point for corner on the centerline of Sneed Street, with said point being
approximately 122.77 feet southeast of the southeast line of Cole Avenue, said
point also being at the intersection of the southwestward prolongation of the
centerline of a 15-foot-wide public alley in City Block 17/965;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of said alley, a
distance of approximately 458 feet to a point on the southwest line of Bowen
Street;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction, continuing along the northeastward
prolongation of the centerline of the 15 foot wide public alley in City Block
17/965, crossing Bowen Street and continuing along the centerline of a 15 foot
wide alley in City Block 12/970 and its northeastward prolongation, crossing
Hall Street, and continuing along the centerline of a 15 foot wide public alley
in City Block 9/972, a total distance of approximately 1,278 feet to a point
for corner on the centerline of Lemmon Avenue;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Lemmon
Avenue, a distance of approximately 30 feet to a point for corner on a line,
said line being the southwestward prolongation of the common line between Lots
1 and 2 in City Block 978;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction along said line and continuing along
the common line between said Lots 1 and 2, a distance of approximately 138 feet
to a point for corner on the common line between Lots 2 and 3 in City Block
978;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said common lot line and
continuing along the southeastward prolongation of said line, crossing McKinney
Avenue a total distance of approximately 200 feet to a point for corner on the
centerline of McKinney Avenue;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said centerline of McKinney
Avenue, a distance of approximately 131 feet to a point at the intersection of
said centerline of McKinney Avenue and the centerline of Lemmon Avenue;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said centerline of Lemmon
Avenue, a distance of approximately 198 feet to a point for corner on a line,
said line being approximately 198 feet southeast of and parallel to said
centerline of McKinney Avenue;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line, crossing Lemmon
Avenue, and continuing into City Block 11/971, a distance of approximately
474.51 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line being approximately 146
feet northeast of and parallel to the northeast line of Hall Street;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 85 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of Noble Street;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Noble Street
and its southwestward prolongation, a distance of approximately 171 feet to a
point for corner on the centerline of Hall Street;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Hall Street,
a distance of approximately 205 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of
Oak Grove Avenue;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Oak Grove
Avenue, a distance of approximately 1,185 feet to a point for corner on the
centerline of McKinney Avenue;
      THENCE in a southerly direction along the centerline of McKinney Avenue,
a distance of approximately 115 feet to a point for corner on the northwestward
prolongation of the centerline of Clyde Lane;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said line and continuing along
the centerline of Clyde Lane, a distance of approximately 320 feet to a point
for corner on a line, said line being the northeastward prolongation of the
common line between Lots 18 and 19 in City Block B/578;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line and continuing along
said common line between Lots 18 and 19, a distance of approximately 90 feet to
a point for corner on the southwest line of Lot 18 in City Block B/578;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along said lot line, a distance of
approximately 40 feet to a point for corner on the common line between Lots 1
and 2 in City Block A/578;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said common lot line and its
southwestward prolongation, a distance of approximately 155 feet to a point for
corner on the centerline of Allen Street;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Allen Street,
a distance of approximately 100 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line
being perpendicular to the southwest line of Allen Street;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 22.5 feet to a point for corner on the southwest line of Allen
Street, said point also being the northernmost corner of Lot 5 in City Block
577;
      THENCE in a southerly direction along the western boundary of said Lot 5
and continuing in a southeasterly direction along the southwestern boundary of
Lots 6 and 7, and continuing along the southeastward prolongation of the
southwestern boundary of said Lot 7, a distance of approximately 277.5 feet to
a point for corner on the centerline of a 15-foot-wide public alley adjacent to
City Block A/577;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of said alley
and its southwestward prolongation, a distance of approximately 190 feet to a
point for corner on the centerline of Worthington Street;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Worthington
Street, a distance of approximately 50 feet to a point for corner on a line,
said line being perpendicular to the southwest line of Worthington Street;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 24 feet to a point for corner on the southwest line of
Worthington Street, said point also being the most northerly corner of Lot 5-
A in City Block A/561;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the northwest line of said Lot
5-A, a distance of 158.69 feet to a point for corner;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the southwest line of Lot 5-
A in City Block A/561, a distance of 48.3 feet to a point for corner;
      THENCE South 39°38'00" West along a common property line, a distance of
172.0 feet to a point for corner on the centerline of Boll Street;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Boll Street,
a distance of approximately 80 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line
being perpendicular to the southwest line of Boll Street;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 25 feet to a point for corner on the southwest line of Boll
Street, said point also being the most easterly corner of Lot 4 in City Block
A/554;
      THENCE in a southerly and southwesterly direction along the southeasterly
boundary of Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 in City Block A/554 and continuing along the
southwestward prolongation of the southeast boundary of Lot 1 in City Block A/
554, a distance of approximately 355 feet to a point for corner on the
centerline of Routh Street;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Routh Street,
a distance of approximately 120 feet to a point for corner on a line, said line
being perpendicular to the southwest line of Routh Street;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 25 feet to a point for corner on the southwest line of Routh
Street, said point also being the centerline of a 15-foot-wide public alley in
City Block C/549;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of said alley
and its southwestward prolongation, a distance of approximately 375 feet to a
point for corner on the centerline of Fairmount Street;
      THENCE in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Fairmount
Street, a distance of approximately 30 feet to a point for corner on a line,
said line being the northeastward prolongation of the centerline of a 20-foot-
wide public alley in City Block B/548;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of said alley
and its southwestward prolongation, a distance of approximately 210 feet to a
point for corner on the centerline of Leonard Street;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Leonard
Street, a distance of approximately 120 feet to a point for corner on the
centerline of McKinney Avenue;
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of McKinney
Avenue, a distance of approximately 40 feet to a point for corner on a line,
said line being approximately 142 feet southwest of and parallel to the
southwest line of Fairmount Street;
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction along said line, a distance of
approximately 35 feet to a point on the northwest line of McKinney Avenue, the
PLACE OF BEGINNING.
   (c)   The Quadrangle Subdistrict is that area of the city within the
following described boundaries:
      Being all of City Block 956 bounded by Laclede Street on the northwest,
Vine Street on the northeast, Howell Street on the southeast, and Routh Street
on the southwest.
   (d)   The Peripheral Subdistrict is that area within the McKinney Avenue
Sign District that is not in either the Spine Subdistrict or the Quadrangle
Subdistrict. (Ord. Nos. 21145; 24132; 31265)
SEC. 51A-7.1503.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to regulate both the construction of new
signs and the alterations of existing signs with a view towards enhancing,
preserving, and developing the unique character of this district. These sign
regulations have been developed with the following objectives in mind:
   (a)   To protect the historical and architectural character of this district
from inappropriate signs in terms of number (clutter), style, color, and
materials.
   (b)   To ensure that significant architectural features in this district are
not obscured.
   (c)   To encourage signs that are complimentary to the architectural styles
and historical nature of the buildings and trolley in this district.
   (d)   To ensure that the size and orientation of signs are geared toward the
high number of pedestrians in this district.
   (e)   To attract the public to the goods and services available in the
district by enhancing the aesthetic quality of signs in this district.
   (f)   To encourage artistic, creative, and innovative signs that reflect the
themes of the area.
   (g)   To promote safety, communications efficiency, and landscape quality
and preservation as described in Section
51A-7.101. (Ord. 21145)
SEC. 51A-7.1504.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, in this division:
      (1)   ARCADE means any structure that is attached to a building and
neither fully enclosed on all sides nor structural to the building itself,
which is covered by a roof having the primary function of weather protection
for a walkway.
      (2)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting from a
building and parallel to the building facade.
      (3)   HIGHRISE BUILDING means a building that has a height of more than
36 feet.
      (4)   LOWER FACADE means the area of a highrise building facade that is
36 feet or less above grade when measured vertically.
      (5)   LOWRISE BUILDING means a building that has a height of 36 feet or
less.
      (6)   MARQUEE SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by
a permanent canopy projecting over a pedestrian street entrance of a building,
and consisting primarily of changeable panels, words, or characters.
      (7)   PAINTED APPLIED SIGN means a sign painted directly onto the
exterior facade of a building, not including doors and windows.
      (8)   PROJECTING ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting 18 or
more inches from a building.
      (9)   SMALL WORD means a word with no character that exceeds four inches
in height.
      (10)   THIS DISTRICT means the McKinney Avenue Sign District.
      (11)   UPPER FACADE means the area of a highrise building facade that is
more than 36 feet above grade when measured vertically.
      (12)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign painted or affixed to a window.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the definitions
contained in Sections
51A-2.102 and
51A-7.102 apply to this division. In the event of a conflict, this section
controls. (Ord. 21145)
SEC. 51A-7.1505.   SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   The regulations relating to the erection of all signs in this district are
expressly modified as follows:
   (a)   No person may alter, erect, maintain, expand, or remove a sign in this
district without first obtaining a sign permit from the city. This section does
not apply to government signs described in Section
51A-7.207.
   (b)   The procedure for obtaining a sign permit is outlined in Section
51A-7.505. Section
51A-7.602 does not apply to signs in this district. (Ord. 21145)
SEC. 51A-7.1506.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   The regulations relating to the erection of all signs in this district are
expressly modified as follows:
   (a)   Signs in right-of-way. Signs in this district are permitted to
overhang the public right-of-way subject to city franchising requirements.
   (b)   Materials.
      (1)   The use of plastic is prohibited, except when it is:
         (A)   used as a decoration (as opposed to a character) on the exterior
face of a sign, in which case no more than five percent of the effective area
of the sign may consist of plastic;
         (B)   placed behind the exterior face of a sign in places where that
face has been cut in the shape of a character; or
         (C)   used in or on a marquee sign.
      (2)   Although not required, painted applied signs and enameled metal
sheet signs are encouraged.
   (c)   Lighting.
      (1)   The only light sources that may be used to illuminate a sign are
cold cathode, neon, and incandescent lamps.
      (2)   A light source external to a sign may illuminate a sign if the
light does not cross into either a public right-of-way or a residential zoning
district.
      (3)   Illuminated signs on translucent fabric are encouraged.
      (4)   No light used to illuminate a sign may turn on or off, or change
its brightness more than twice a day.
   (d)   Colors. Fluorescent and neon colors on signs are prohibited. (Ord.
21145)
SEC. 51A-7.1507.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ATTACHED SIGNS.
   The regulations relating to the erection of attached signs in this district
are expressly modified as follows:
   (a)   Location restrictions.
      (1)   No attached sign may be erected on a facade unless it faces a
public right-of-way that is adjacent to the lot where the sign is proposed to
be located.
      (2)   No small words may be on an attached sign erected partially or
totally within an upper facade in either the Spine or Quadrangle Subdistricts.
      (3)   In the Peripheral Subdistrict, no attached sign may be erected on:
         (A)   an upper facade; or
         (B)   a lot where a detached sign is erected.
   (b)   Effective area.
      (1)   Spine and Quadrangle Subdistricts. In the Spine and Quadrangle
Subdistricts, the combined effective area of all attached signs:
         (A)   on a lowrise building or a lower facade may not exceed ten
percent of the total area of the building facade or the lower facade, as the
case may be; and
         (B)   on an upper facade may not exceed five percent of the total area
of the lower facade.
      (2)   Peripheral Subdistrict. In the Peripheral Subdistrict, the combined
effective area of all attached signs on a lowrise building or a lower facade
may not exceed eight percent of the total area of the building facade or the
lower facade, as the case may be.
   (c)   Flat attached signs.
      (1)   No flat attached sign may project more than eight inches from a
building.
      (2)   A flat attached sign may be erected on an arcade, but it may not
project above the roof of the attached building.
   (d)   Projecting attached signs.
      (1)   A projecting attached sign may be erected on an arcade, but it may
not project above the roof of the attached building.
      (2)   No projecting attached sign may be erected partially or totally
within an upper facade.
      (3)   No face of a projecting attached sign erected below the bottom of a
second story window may exceed eight square feet.
      (4)   No face of a projecting attached sign erected above the bottom of a
second story window may exceed 15 square feet.
   (e)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   No marquee sign may:
         (A)   exceed 100 square feet in effective area;
         (B)   be longer than one-half of the length of the frontage of the
building to which the marquee is attached; and
         (C)   be located above the bottom of a second story window.
      (2)   A marquee sign must:
         (A)   be parallel to the surface to which it is attached; and
         (B)   have a height dimension between two and six feet.
      (3)   No premise may have more than one marquee sign.
      (4)   A marquee sign may be erected only on a building that contains a
theater use.
      (5)   A marquee sign may consist of up to 100 percent plastic.
   (f)   Window signs.
      (1)   Except as modified by Paragraph (2), the effective area of a window
sign may not exceed more than 25 percent of the area of a window or 10 percent
of the facade area, whichever is less.
      (2)   If a window sign uses neon bulbs, the effective area of that sign
may not exceed more than 15 percent of the area of a window.
      (3)   No window sign may be erected on an upper facade. (Ord. 21145)
SEC. 51A-7.1508.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DETACHED SIGNS.
   The regulations relating to the erection of detached signs in this district
are expressly modified as follows:
   (a)   No detached sign may:
      (1)   exceed 20 feet in height; or
      (2)   be located within five feet of any public right-of-way.
   (b)   If a detached sign has an effective area of more than 10 square feet,
it must be located at least 10 feet from any public right-of-way.
   (c)   No detached sign may have an effective area of more than:
      (1)   150 square feet if the sign is located in the Quadrangle
Subdistrict;
      (2)   20 square feet if the sign is located in the Spine Subdistrict; and
      (3)   15 square feet if the sign is located in the Peripheral
Subdistrict.
   (d)   In the Peripheral Subdistrict, no detached sign may be erected on a
lot where an attached sign is erected.
   (e)   Detached non-premise signs are prohibited in this district. (Ord.
21145)
Division 51A-7.1600. Farmers Market Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.1601.   DESIGNATION OF SIGN DISTRICT.
   A special provision sign district is hereby created to be known as the
Farmers Market Sign District. The boundaries of the Farmers Market Sign
District are the same as those of the Farmers Market Special Purpose District
(Planned Development District No. 357). (Ord. Nos. 22097; 29233)
SEC. 51A-7.1601.1.   DESIGNATION OF SIGN SUBDISTRICTS.
   (a)   Camden Sign Subdistrict. The Camden Sign Subdistrict is that area of
the Farmers Market Sign District within the following described boundaries:
      TRACT 1:
      BEING all of Lot 2B in City Block 40/164.
      TRACT 2:
      BEING all of Lot 1A in City Block 7/153.
      TRACT 3:
      BEING a tract of land situated in the John Grigsby Survey, Abstract No.
495, in the City of Dallas, Dallas County, Texas and being a portion of Blocks
142, 5/155/4/156, 36/168 and 37/167, a portion of a 200-foot-wide H. & T.C.
Railroad right-of-way, a portion of a 150-foot-wide T. & N.O. Railroad spur
right-of-way, all as dedicated on the Final Plat of Railroad Addition, an
Addition to the City of Dallas according to the Map or Plat thereof recorded in
Volume 4 at Page 350 of the Map Records of Dallas County, Texas, a portion of a
20- foot-wide alley situated in Block 4/156 abandoned in Ordinance No. 8234, a
portion of St. Louis Street, Paris Street and a w-foot wide alley abandoned in
Ordinance No. 11472, a portion of St. Louis Street and 20-foot-wide alleys
situated in Blocks 36/168 and 37/167 abandoned Ordinance No. 1570 and a portion
of Central Expressway as abandoned on Ordinance No. 23588, same being a portion
of Tract “O” conveyed to Camden Property Trust as evidence by a Special
Warranty Deed recorded in Volume 98040 at Page 02379 of the Deed Records of
Dallas County, Texas (D.R.D.C.T.) and being more particularly described by
metes and bounds as follows (bearing based on the southwest right-of-way line
of Good-Latimer Expressway as described in Ordinance No. 21092, recorded in
Volume 91249 at Page 4100 D.R.D.C.T., said bearing being North 36°50'46" West):
      BEGINNING at a nail found for the east corner of aforesaid Tract “O,”
same being the north corner of a tract of land conveyed to Graybar Electric,
Inc., as evidenced in a deed recorded in Volume 3502 at Page 282 D.R.D.C.T.,
said nail also being on the southwest right-of-way line of Good-Latimer
Expressway (a variable width right-of-way);
      THENCE in a southwesterly direction, departing the southwest right-of-way
line of said Good-Latimer Expressway and along the southwest line of said Tract
“O,” the following:
      South 53°05'14" West, a distance of 219.11 feet to the point of curvature
of a corner to the left;
      Along the arc of said curve to the left, through a central angle of
28°50'05", having a radius of 219.64 feet and an arc length of 111.05 feet to a
1/2-inch rod found for the end of said curve;
      South 36°29'26" East, a distance of 29.78 feet to a 1/2- inch rod found
for corner;
      South 53°10'39" West, a distance of 424.89 feet to a corner;
      South 36°45'09" East, a distance of 93.67 feet to a corner;
      South 52°02'59" West, a distance of 350.00 feet to the south corner of
said Tract “O,” same being on the northeast right-of-way line of Cesar Chavez
Boulevard (formerly Central Expressway) (a variable width right-of-way);
      THENCE in a northwesterly direction, along the southwest line of said
Tract “O” and the northeast right-of-way line of said Cesar Chavez Boulevard
(formerly Central Expressway), the following:
      North 27°01'56" West, a distance of 201.55 feet to a chiseled cross found
for the point of curvature of a curve to the left;
      Along the arc of said curve to the left, through a central angle of
68°13'29", having a radius of 67.00 feet and an arc length of 79.78 feet to the
chiseled cross found for the end of said curve;
      North 24°20'27" West, a distance of 145.68 feet to a chiseled cross found
for the point of curvature of a curve to the left;
      Along the arc of said curve through a central angle of 06°14'28", having
a radius of 424.70 feet and an arc length of 46.26 feet to a chiseled cross
found for the end of said curve;
      North 53°21'43" East, a distance of 93.54 feet to a 1/2- inch iron rod
found for the point of curvature of a non-tangent curve to the left;
      Along the arc of said curve to the left, through a central angle of
06°50'22", having a radius of 1071.00 feet, a chord bearing of North 82°15'38"
West, a chord distance of 127.77 feet and an arc length of 127.85 feet to a
chiseled cross found for the end of said curve, same being the south corner of
a portion of Cesar Chavez Boulevard (formerly Central Expressway) as abandoned
by aforesaid Ordinance No. 23588, recorded in Volume 98187 at Page 061815
D.R.D.C.T.;
      THENCE North 36°50'27" West, along the southwest line of said
abandonment, and along the current northwest right-of-way line of said Cesar
Chavez Boulevard (formerly Central Expressway), a distance of 123.76 feet to
the intersection of the northeast right-of-way line of said Cesar Chavez
Boulevard (formerly Central Expressway) with the curving southeast right-of-way
line of Marilla Street (a variable width right-of-way at this point) as
described in a deed recorded in Volume 98183 at Page 05868 D.R.D.C.T., said
curve being a curve to the right;
      THENCE in a northeasterly direction, along the southeast right-of-way
line of said Marilla Street, the following:
      Along the arc of said curve to the right, through a central angle of
89°59'41", having a radius of 15.00 feet and an arc length of 23.56 feet to the
point of tangency of said curve (Marilla Street being 58-foot-wide at this
point);
      North 53°09'14" East, a distance of 434.59 feet to the intersection of
the southeast right of-way line of said Marilla Street with the southwest
right-of-way line of Farmers Market Way (a 58-foot-wide right-of-way);
      THENCE South 36°50'46" East, along the southwest right-of-way line of
said Farmers Market Way, a distance of 127.50 feet to the intersection of the
southwest right-of-way line of said Farmers Market Way with the southeast
right-of-way line of Taylor Street (a 58-foot-wide right-of-way);
      THENCE North 53°09'14" East, along the southeast right-of-way line of
said Taylor Street, a distance of 491.01 feet to the point of curvature of a
curve to the right;
      THENCE in a easterly direction, continuing along the southeast right-of-
way line of said Taylor Street and along the arc of said curve to the right,
through a central angle of 90°00'00", having a radius of 15.00 feet and an arc
length of 23.56 feet to the point of tangency of said curve, same being on the
northeast line of said Tract "O," said corner also being the intersection of
the southeast right-of-way line of said Taylor Street with the southwest right-
of-way line of aforesaid Good-Latimer Expressway;
      THENCE South 39°14'11" East, along the northeast line of said Tract "O"
and the southwest right-of-way line of said Good-Latimer Expressway, a distance
of 411.92 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING and containing 11.534 acres of land,
more or less.
   (b)   Market Center Sign Subdistrict. The Market Center Sign Subdistrict is
that area of the Farmers Market Sign District within the following described
boundaries:
      BEGINNING at the south corner of a corner clip in the northeast line of
Harwood Street and the southwest line of City Block 131;
      THENCE North 08°36'06" East, along said corner clip, a distance of 40.00
feet to a point for corner in the south line of said Marilla Street, said point
being the north corner of said corner clip;
      THENCE along the south line of Marilla Street the following calls;
      North 74°47'11" East, a distance of 142.30 feet to a point for corner;
      South 45°01'41" East, a distance of 1.11 feet to a point for corner;
      North 78°16'02" East, a distance of 192.25 feet to a point for corner;
      North 77°52'42" East, a distance of 87.67 feet to a point for corner;
      North 74°22'09" East, a distance of 373.33 feet to a point for corner, in
the southwest line of South Cesar Chavez Boulevard (a variable width right-of-
way);
      THENCE South 36°00'00" East, along the southwest line of said Cesar
Chavez Boulevard, a distance of 601.81 feet to a point for corner;
      THENCE South 32°25'25" East, a distance of 80.16 feet to a point for
corner;
      THENCE South 10°11'11" East, a distance of 220.32 feet to a point for
corner in the south line of Gibson Street, abandoned by Ordinance;
      THENCE South 45°34'13" West, along the south line of said abandoned
Gibson Street, a distance of 89.59 feet to a point for corner;
      THENCE South 71°04'56" West, a distance of 431.66 feet to a point for
corner in the northeast line of aforementioned Harwood Street;
      THENCE North 45°02'47" West, along the northeast line of said Harwood
Street, a distance of 733.28 feet to a point for corner;
      THENCE North 45°01'41" West, continuing along the northeast line of said
Harwood Street, a distance of 313.77 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING and
containing 15.03 acres or 654,661 square feet of land, more or less. (Ord. Nos.
24424; 29233; 29557)
SEC. 51A-7.1602.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to promote signage that is compatible with
the architectural character and design guidelines of the Farmers Market Planned
Development District while encouraging artistic, creative, and innovative signs
that are reflective of themes that have grown and developed in Farmers Market
area. (Ord. Nos. 22097; 29233)
SEC. 51A-7.1603.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this division:
      (1)   ARTWORK means any pictorial or image presentation or design.
      (2)   BANNER means a sign attached to or applied on a strip of cloth.
      (3)   CANOPY SIGN means a sign attached to or applied on a canopy or
awning.
      (4)   DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGN means an attached or detached sign
identifying the Farmers Market.
      (5)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting 18 inches or
less from a building and parallel to the building facade.
      (6)   KIOSK means a detached multi-sided structure for the display of
premise and non-premise signs.
      (7)   MARQUEE SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by
a permanent canopy projecting over a pedestrian street entrance of a building,
and consisting primarily of changeable panels or words.
      (8)   MONUMENT SIGN means a detached premise sign applied directly onto a
grade-level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation
between the sign and the ground, or mounted on a fence or masonry wall.
      (9)   PROJECTING ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting 18 or
more inches from a building.
      (10)   ROOF SIGN means a sign that is attached to or supported by the
roof of a building constructed after December 11, 2013.
      (11)   SUPERGRAPHIC SIGN means a large attached premise or non-premise
sign on a mesh or fabric surface, or a projection of light image onto a wall
face without the use of lasers.
      (12)   THIS DISTRICT means the Farmers Market Sign District.
      (13)   VIDEOBOARD SIGN means a flat screen that is capable of displaying
moving images similar to television images, by light-emitting diode or other
similar technology and that is mounted to the exterior of a building.
      (14)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign painted or affixed onto a window.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the definitions in
Sections
51A-2.102 and
51A-7.102 apply to this division. If there is a conflict, this section
controls. (Ord. Nos. 22097; 29233)
SEC. 51A-7.1604.   SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person may alter, place, maintain, expand, or remove a sign in this
district without first obtaining a sign permit from the city. This section does
not apply to government signs described in Section
51A-7.207.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, the procedure for
obtaining a sign permit is outlined in Section
51A-7.505.
   (c)   Section
51A-7.602 does not apply to signs in this district. (Ord. Nos. 22097; 29233)
SEC. 51A-7.1605   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   (a)   Signs may be located within the right-of-way subject to the licensing
requirements of Chapter XIV of the City Charter,
Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, the Dallas Building Code, and all other
applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulation.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (c), the maximum effective
area of all signs combined on a premise is 10 percent of the total area of all
building facades facing public right-of-way that is adjacent to the premise.
   (c)   When more than 50 percent of the total effective area of all signs
combined on a premise is devoted to artwork, the maximum effective area of all
signs combined on a premise is 15 percent of the total area of all building
facades facing public right-of-way that is adjacent to the premise.
   (d)   All signs must be premise signs or convey a noncommercial message.
   (e)   Special purpose signs may be erected on a premise no more than once
each calendar year. The maximum number of consecutive days that a special
purpose sign may be maintained is 15.
   (f)   The use of neon or single incandescent bulbs is permitted.
   (g)   No portions of a sign other than the words themselves may be
illuminated by back-lighting.
   (h)   No portion of a sign may have a luminance greater than 200
footlamberts.
   (i)   The following materials are suggested, but not required, for signs in
this district:
      (1)   Metal.
      (2)   Glass.
      (3)   Wood. (Ord. Nos. 22097; 29233)
SEC. 51A-7.1606.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ATTACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   In general. The regulations relating to the erection of attached signs
in this district are expressly modified as follows:
   (b)   Attached signs in general.
      (1)    No portion of an attached sign may be located:
         (A)   more than 10 feet from the facade to which it is attached; or
         (B)   less than two feet from the back of a street curb.
      (2)   Although not required, the use of three-dimensional projecting
attached signs is encouraged.
   (c)   Banners.
      (1)   Banners are permitted in this district to promote cultural events
or activities.
      (2)   If the cultural event or activity has a sponsor, no more than 10
percent of the effective area of the banner may be used for sponsor
identification.
      (3)   No portion of a banner may be used to advertise a specific product
or service other than the cultural event or activity.
   (d)   Canopy signs. Canopy signs must be flat-attached or painted directly
onto the surface of the canopy.
   (e)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   No premise may have more than one marquee sign.
      (2)   The length of a marquee sign must not exceed two-thirds of the
length of the facade to which it is attached.
      (3)   Marquee signs may incorporate moving patterns or bands of light,
except that the use of illumination to produce apparent motion of a visual
image, such as expanding or contracting shapes, rotation, or similar effects of
animation, is prohibited.
   (f)   Window sign. No window sign may cover more than 25 percent of the
window surface area.
   (g)    Camden Sign Subdistrict.
      (1)   No more than four attached signs are permitted in this subdistrict.
      (2)   No attached sign may exceed 50 square feet in effective area.
      (3)   Each attached sign may contain a maximum of eight words, except
that words consisting of characters less than four inches in height may be used
without limit.
      (4)   No more than two signs may be attached to any one facade.
   (h)   Attached movement control signs in the Camden Sign Subdistrict.
      (1)   No more than four attached movement control signs are permitted in
this subdistrict.
      (2)   No attached movement control sign may exceed four square feet in
effective area.
      (3)   No attached movement control sign may identify the name or logo of
more than one occupant of the premise. (Ord. Nos. 22097; 24424; 29233)
SEC. 51A-7.1607   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DETACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   In general. The regulations relating to the erection of detached signs
in this district are hereby expressly modified as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no premise having an
attached sign of any type, except for banners, may have a detached sign.
      (2)   A premise that has no attached signs other than banners, and that
has frontage along more than one street, may have one detached sign along each
street frontage.
      (3)   No detached sign support may be located in the public right-of-way.
   (b)   Detached signs in the Camden Sign Subdistrict.
      (1)   No more than four detached signs are permitted in this subdistrict.
      (2)   Each detached sign must be:
         (A)   an integral part of the fence or wall; and
         (B)   constructed of masonry, stone, or similar material with metal
letters and symbols.
      (3)   No minimum setback is required for each detached sign, except that
each detached sign must comply with all visibility obstruction regulations.
      (4)   No detached sign may exceed 30 square feet in effective area.
      (5)   No detached sign may be closer than 200 feet from another detached
premise sign on the same premise.
      (6)   A detached sign may be located on a premise that has an attached
sign.
   (c)   Detached movement control signs in the Camden Sign Subdistrict.
      (1)    No more than two detached movement control signs may be erected in
this subdistrict.
      (2)   No detached movement control sign may exceed seven square feet in
effective area.
      (3)    No detached movement control sign may exceed four feet in height.
      (4)   A detached movement control sign must have a minimum setback of
four feet.
      (5)   No detached movement control sign may identify the name or logo of
more than one occupant of the premise.
      (6)   A detached movement control sign may be located within a visibility
triangle, as defined in Section
51A-4.602(d), if the director finds that the sign will not pose a traffic
hazard. (Ord. Nos. 22097; 24424; 25047; 28073; 29233)
SEC. 51A-7.1608.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE MARKET CENTER SIGN SUBDISTRICT.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the regulations in
Sections
51A-7.1601 through
51A-7.1607 apply to the Market Center Sign Subdistrict. If there is a conflict
between this section and Sections
51A-7.1601 through
51A-7.1607, this section controls.
      (2)   Permit applications are reviewed using the director procedure in
Section
51A-7.505.
      (3)   Signs may be located within the right-of-way subject to the
licensing requirements of Chapter XIV of the City Charter,
Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, the Dallas Building Code, and all other
applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulation.
   (b)   Special provisions for attached signs.
      (1)   Except district identification, roof, supergraphic, and videoboard
signs, all attached signs must be premise signs.
      (2)   Attached signs may cover up to 50 percent of a building’s total
facade area.
      (3)   Attached signs may not cover doors or windows.
   (c)   Special provisions for detached signs.
      (1)   Except detached movement control signs, district identification,
and kiosk signs, all detached signs must be monument premise signs.
      (2)   Detached signs may be located on a premise with attached signs.
      (3)   A detached movement control sign is not a monument sign.
   (d)   District identification signs.
      (1)   A maximum of five district identification signs are permitted.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, district
identification signs may only be located over and span across the rights-of-way
at the following locations:
         (A)   Marilla Street and Pearl Street;
         (B)   Taylor Street and Cesar Chavez Boulevard;
         (C)   Taylor Street and Harwood Street; and
         (D)   Cesar Chavez Boulevard and Farmers Way.
      (3)   Minimum clearance for a district identification sign located over
and spanning across a right-of-way must be determined by the director of the
department of transportation and public works before a district identification
sign permit may be issued.
      (4)   A district identification sign that is located over and spanning
across a right-of-way may not resemble or obstruct any traffic control devices.
      (5)   One district identification sign may be located on top of a
building at the southeast corner of Farmers Way and Pearl Street. Maximum
height of the district identification sign on top of a building at the
southeast corner of Farmers Way and Pearl Street is 30 feet.
      (6)   Maximum effective area of a district identification sign is 1,000
square feet.
      (7)   A district identification sign may not be located in or visually
obstruct a visibility triangle as defined in the visual obstructions
regulations in Section
51A-4.602(d).
   (e)   Kiosks.
      (1)   A maximum of 10 kiosks are permitted.
      (2)   Except city kiosks, kiosks may not be located in the rights-of-way.
      (3)   Kiosks must be spaced at least 50 feet from another kiosk.
      (4)   Kiosks may not be illuminated by a detached independent external
light source.
      (5)   Kiosks may not exceed 10 feet in height and 100 square feet in
effective area.
   (f)   Monument signs.
      (1)   A maximum of five monument signs are permitted.
      (2)   Maximum effective area of a monument sign is 50 square feet.
      (3)   Maximum height of a monument sign is 15 feet.
      (4)   No monument sign may be closer than 200 feet from another monument
sign on the same premise.
   (g)   Roof signs.
      (1)    A maximum of two roof signs are permitted.
      (2)   A roof sign may not be located on the same building as another roof
sign.
      (3)   A roof sign may not exceed 1,200 square feet in effective area.
      (4)    At least 15 percent of the effective area of a roof sign must
identify the Farmers Market.
      (5)   A roof sign must comply with the Dallas Fire Code and must be
approved by the fire marshal before a sign permit may be approved by the
director.
   (h)   Supergraphic signs.
      (1)   In general.
         (A)   Two supergraphic signs are permitted in addition to the number
of supergraphic signs permitted in Section
51A-7.930.
         (B)   Supergraphic signs may be located on the facade of any building.
      (2)    Visual display and coverage.
         (A)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, a supergraphic sign
must have one large visual display with a minimum of 80 percent non-textual
graphic content (no more than 20 percent text).
            (i)    Multiple displays giving an appearance of multiple signs are
prohibited.
            (ii)   The effective area of text is the sum of the areas within
minimum imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which
fully contains a word.
         (B)   Supergraphic signs are intended to be creative and artful and
not strictly a representation of an advertised product. It is the intent of
this provision to:
            (i)   encourage the use of illustrative images or other non-
repetitive design elements;
            (ii)    encourage visually interesting, vibrant, and colorful
designs;
            (iii)   discourage use of solid colors or repetitive design
elements; and
            (iv)   discourage an image of a single product or product logo
without other graphic elements.
         (C)   Supergraphic signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
If internally illuminated, a supergraphic sign may consist of translucent
materials, but not transparent materials.
      (3)   Extensions.
         (A)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraph (B), a supergraphic
sign may not extend beyond the edge of the face of the building to which it is
attached.
         (B)   A supergraphic sign may wrap around the edge of a building if:
            (i)   both building facades to which the supergraphic sign is
attached are otherwise eligible facades; and
            (ii)   the supergraphic sign is one continuous image.
      (4)   Message duration. A supergraphic sign location may not display the
same message for more than four consecutive months in any 12-month period.
      (5)   Hardware fasteners. All hardware fasteners for a supergraphic sign
must comply with the Dallas Building Code and all other ordinances, rules, and
regulations of the City of Dallas.
      (6)   HBA signs prohibited. No supergraphic sign may be a Highway
Beautification Act (HBA) sign as defined in Section
51A-7.102.
   (i)   Videoboard signs.
      (1)   In general.
         (A)   A maximum of two videoboard signs are permitted.
         (B)   Videoboard signs must have a vertical orientation with height
exceeding the width at a minimum 16:9 height-to-width ratio.
         (C)   Videoboard signs may project a maximum of 12 feet into the
right-of-way:
            (i)   subject to review by the traffic engineer to ensure that the
sign will not pose a traffic hazard or visibility obstruction; and
            (ii)   provided that no videoboard sign may be project closer than
two feet to a vertical plane extending through the back of a street curb.
         (D)   Videoboard signs must have a minimum clearance of 15 feet above
the sidewalk and a maximum clearance of 35 feet above the sidewalk.
         (E)   Videoboard signs must have videoboard displays on both sides of
the sign.
         (F)    Videoboard signs may have a maximum 150 square feet in
effective area.
      (2)    Display.
         (A)   All videoboard signs must:
            (i)   contain a default mechanism that freezes the image in one
position in case of a malfunction;
            (ii)    automatically adjust the sign brightness based on natural
ambient light conditions in compliance with the following formula:
               (aa)   the ambient light level measured in luxes, divided by 256
and then rounded down to the nearest whole number, equals the dimming level;
then,
               (bb)   the dimming level, multiplied by .0039 equals the
brightness level; then,
               (cc)    the brightness level, multiplied by the maximum
brightness of the specific sign measured in nits, equals the allowed sign
brightness, measured in nits. For example:
                  32768   =    ambient light in luxes
               ÷    256
                   128    =    dimming level
               x    0039
                  . 4992    =    brightness level
               x     9000    =    (maximum brightness of the example sign)
                  4492.8   =    allowed brightness in nits;
               (dd)   be turned off between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday
through Friday and 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday; and
               (ee)   not display light of such intensity or brilliance to
cause glare, impair the vision of an ordinary driver, or constitute a nuisance.
         (B)   Videoboard signs must:
            (i)    have a full color display able to display a minimum of 281
trillion color shades; and
            (ii)    be able to display a high quality image with a minimum
resolution equivalent to the following table:
 
Videoboard Sign Resolution Chart
100 s/f to 125 s/f   16 mm
Greater than 126 s/f 19 mm
 
      (3)   Light intensity. Before the issuance of a videoboard sign permit,
the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer
that the light intensity:
         (A)   has been factory programmed to comply with the maximum
brightness and dimming standards in Provision (j)(2)(A)(ii)(cc); and
         (B)   is protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected
software, or other method satisfactory to the building official.
      (4)   Change of message. Except as provided in this paragraph, changes of
message must comply with the following:
         (A)   Each message must be displayed for a minimum of eight seconds.
         (B)   Changes of message must be accomplished within two seconds.
         (C)   Changes of message must occur simultaneously on the entire sign
face.
         (D)   No flashing, dimming, or brightening of message is permitted
except to accommodate changes of message.
      (5)   Streaming information. If a special events permit has been issued
for subdistrict activities, streaming video and audio is permitted, except that
ticker tape streaming is permitted at all times when the videoboard sign is
operating. Ticker tape streaming must be located within the bottom 10 percent
of the effective area.
      (6)   Malfunction. Videoboard sign operators must respond to a
malfunction or safety issue within one hour after notification.
   (j)   Detached movement control signs in the Market Center Sign Subdistrict.
      (1)   A maximum of five detached movement control signs may be erected in
this subdistrict.
      (2)   No minimum distance is required between a detached movement control
sign and any other sign in this subdistrict.
      (3)   Maximum effective area is 24 square feet on each sign face.
      (4)   Each face of a detached movement control sign may have a maximum of
six panels and a minimum of three panels.
      (5)   Maximum height is eight feet. Maximum width is three and a half
feet.
      (6)   No maximum letter size.
      (7)   Maximum number of words on a panel is five.
      (8)   A detached movement control sign may identify businesses and uses
within this subdistrict and may include district identification.
      (9)   Minimum clearance for pedestrian access on the sidewalk must be
determined by the director before a detached movement control sign permit may
be issued. (Ord. Nos. 29233; 29557; 30802; 32864)
Division
51A-7.1700. Provisions for Victory Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.1701.   DESIGNATION OF VICTORY SIGN DISTRICT.
   (a)   A special provision sign district is hereby created to be known as the
Victory Sign District.
   (b)   Any portion of this district that was formerly part of the Downtown
Special Provision Sign District is no longer considered to be part of that
district. This division completely supersedes Division
51A-7.900 with respect to the property within this district.
   (c)   This district is that area of the city within the boundaries described
in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 30043, passed by the Dallas City Council
on March 23, 2016. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918; 30043)
SEC. 51A-7.1702.   DESIGNATION OF SUBDISTRICTS.
   (a)   This district is hereby divided into four subdistricts: Subdistricts
A, B, C, and D. Subdistrict B has three subareas, B-1, B-2, and B-3.
Subdistrict C has two tracts and one subarea, C-1. Subdistrict D has two
subareas, D-1 and D-2.
   (b)   The subdistrict boundaries are described in Exhibit A attached to
Ordinance No. 31410, passed by the Dallas City Council on December 11, 2019.
(Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918; 30043; 31410)
SEC. 51A-7.1703.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of these sign regulations is to encourage and regulate the
erection and display of signs that will create a unique, lively, and
commercially-active environment that is bright and safe, and that incorporates
diverse, state-of-the-art graphic technologies.
   (b)   These sign regulations have been developed to achieve the following
objectives in this district:
      (1)   To create an atmosphere of vitality appropriate for a place where
thousands of citizens gather for entertainment and celebration.
      (2)   To encourage the use of signs that are innovative, colorful, and
entertaining, and that bring a distinctive character to this district.
      (3)   To identify and promote special events and cultural activities that
will occur in this district.
      (4)   To encourage signs with a style, orientation, and location that
take into consideration the high number of pedestrians expected within this
district.
      (5)   To communicate clear directions to and through this district.
      (6)   To promote the economic success of businesses in this district.
(Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1704.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this division:
      (1)   ADVERTISE means to attract, or to attempt to attract, the attention
of any person to any business, accommodations, goods, services, property, or
commercial activity.
      (2)   ATTACHED SIGN means any sign attached to, applied on, or supported
by, any part of a building (such as a wall, parapet, roof, window, canopy,
awning, arcade, or marquee) that encloses or covers usable space, and any sign
attached to, applied on, or supported by, mounted antennas, water reservoirs on
buildings, chimneys, and visual screens that surround roof-mounted equipment.
For the following signs, the term attached sign also means any sign attached
to, applied on, or supported by the exterior structural framing of a building
or architectural elements of a building, whether or not the exterior structural
framing or architectural elements enclose or cover usable space:
         (A)   Signs on buildings adjacent to an entertainment complex plaza.
         (B)   A hotel spectacular sign as described in Section
51A-7.1727(d).
      (3)   AWNING SIGN means a sign that is attached to or applied or painted
on an awning.
      (4)   BANNER means a sign attached to or applied on a strip of cloth,
vinyl, or similar material and attached to a building or structure. Canopy
signs and flags are not banners.
      (5)   BLOCK means an area bounded by streets on all sides.
      (6)   BLOCKFACE means all of the premises on one side of a block.
      (7)   BUILDING means a structure that has a roof supported by columns,
walls or air for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals or
chattel.
      (8)   CANOPY SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by a
canopy.
      (9)   CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN means a sign displaying static or moving
images (similar to television images) that may display different designs,
messages, or advertisements and that may include LED/LCD elements, slide
lettering, slated rotating surfaces, or other changeable message technology.
      (10)   CHARACTER means any letter of the alphabet or numeral.
      (11)   CITY means the city of Dallas, Texas.
      (12)   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE means a message placed or caused to be placed
before the public by a person or business enterprise directly involved in the
manufacture or sale of the products, property, accommodations, services,
attractions, or activities or possible substitutes for those things which are
the subject of the message and that:
         (A)   refers to the offer for sale or existence for sale of products,
property, accommodations, services, attractions, or activities; or
         (B)   attracts attention to a business or to products, property,
accommodations, services, attractions, or activities that are offered or exist
for sale or for hire.
      (13)   COMMISSION means the city plan commission of the city of Dallas.
      (14)   DETACHED SIGN means any sign connected to the ground that is not
an attached, portable, or vehicular sign.
      (15)   DIRECTOR means the director of planning and development of the
city or that director’s designated representative.
      (16)   DISTRICT ACTIVITIES means: (A) the name, trade name, or logo of
the owner or occupant of any premise within this district; (B) the
identification of any premise within this district; (C) any accommodations,
services, or activities offered or conducted, other than incidentally, on any
premise within this district; (D) products sold, other than incidentally, on
any premise within this district; and (E) the sale, lease, or construction of
any premise within this district.
      (17)   EFFECTIVE AREA means the following:
         (A)   For marquee and other changeable message signs and detached
signs other than monument signs, the area within a minimum imaginary rectangle
of vertical and horizontal lines that fully contains all extremities of the
sign, excluding its supports, mast, and finial that does not include patterns,
characters, logos, or illustrations. The rectangle is calculated from an
orthographic projection of the sign viewed horizontally. The viewpoint for this
projection that produces the largest rectangle must be used. If elements of the
sign are moveable or flexible, such as a flag or a string of lights, the
measurement is taken when the elements are fully extended and parallel to the
plane of view. If an attached sign moves or rotates, the sign's effective area
shall be measured when the sign is stationary and shall not be based on the
entire area within which the sign moves or rotates.
         (B)   For monument signs and attached signs other than marquee and
other changeable message signs, the sum of the areas within minimum imaginary
rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which fully contains a
word, excluding a mast and finial that does not include patterns, characters,
logos, or illustrations. If a design, outline, illustration, or interior
illumination surrounds or attracts attention to a word, then it is included in
the calculation of the effective area. An awning or canopy is not included in
the calculation of the effective area.
      (17.1)   ENHANCED BANNER SIGN means a district identification sign
consisting of a pole displaying banners and elements that display the name or
logo of the district.
      (18)   ENTERTAINMENT COMPLEX means a public, multi-use sports,
entertainment, and convention facility with a seating capacity of at least
15,000, where people view and participate in events and performances,
including, but not limited to, theatrical, musical and dramatic performances,
professional or amateur sporting events, and meetings and assemblages.
      (19)   ENTERTAINMENT COMPLEX PLAZA means any outdoor area (whether
publicly or privately owned) that is accessible to the public, and that is: (A)
at least 10,000 square feet in size; (B) adjacent to an entertainment complex;
or (C) within 300 feet of, and has direct pedestrian access to, an
entertainment complex. Direct pedestrian access includes, but is not limited
to, access across public or private streets.
      (20)   ERECT means to build, attach, hang, place, suspend, fasten, affix,
maintain, paint, draw, or otherwise construct.
      (21)   EXPRESSWAY means Interstate Highway 35E and Woodall Rodgers
Freeway.
      (22)   EXPRESSWAY-FACING FACADE means a facade that is parallel to or
within 45° of the travel lanes of an expressway.
      (23)   FACADE means any separate face of a building, including parapet
walls and omitted wall lines, or any part of a building which encloses or
covers usable space, chimneys, roof-mounted equipment, mounted antennas, or
water towers. Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction or in
directions within 45° of one another, they are to be considered as part of a
single facade. A roof is not a facade or part of a facade. Multiple buildings
on the same lot will each be deemed to have separate facades. For purposes of
these sign regulations, each 250 linear feet, or fraction thereof, of an
expressway-facing facade in Subdistrict C is deemed to be a separate facade.
For signs located on buildings adjacent to an entertainment complex plaza and
the hotel spectacular sign, as described in Section
51A-7.1727(d), the term facade includes the exterior structural framing of a
building or architectural elements of the building, whether or not the exterior
structural framing or architectural element encloses or covers usable space.
      (23.1)   FINIAL means a single stationary ornamental element above a sign
that may include a light.
      (24)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting 18 inches or
less from a building.
      (25)   GOVERNMENT SIGN means a flag, insignia, legal notice,
informational, directional, traffic, or safe school zone sign which is legally
required or necessary to the essential functions of government agencies.
      (26)   HEIGHT, as applied to a sign, means the vertical distance between
the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher,
and a level plane going through the nearest point of the vehicular traffic
surface of the adjacent improved public right-of-way, other than an alley. In
the event a sign is equidistant from more than one improved public right-of-
way, none of which are alleys, the highest point shall be used.
      (27)   HIGHWAY BEAUTIFICATION ACT (HBA) SIGN means a non-premise sign
that is within 660 feet of an expressway right-of-way and whose message is
visible from the main traveled way of that expressway.
      (28)   ILLUMINATED SIGN means any sign that is directly lighted by any
electrical light source, internal or external. This definition does not include
signs that are illuminated by street lights or other light sources owned by any
public agency or light sources that are specifically operated for the purpose
of lighting the area in which the sign is located rather than the sign itself.
      (29)   KIOSK means a multi-sided structure for the display of premise and
non-premise signs. Kiosks may be changeable message signs.
      (30)   LUMINANCE means the brightness of a sign or a portion thereof
expressed in terms of footlamberts. For purposes of this division, luminance is
determined by the use of an exposure meter calibrated to standards established
by the National Bureau of Standards and equipped with a footlambert scale.
      (31)   MARQUEE SIGN means a changeable message sign attached to, applied
on, or supported by a permanent canopy projecting over a pedestrian street
entrance of a building.
      (31.1)   MAST means an upright pole that supports a sign and may extend
above the sign.
      (32)   MONUMENT SIGN means a detached sign applied directly onto a grade-
level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation between
the sign and grade.
      (33)   MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGN means a sign that directs vehicular and
pedestrian movement within this district or to the West End Historic District.
      (34)   NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE means any message that is not a commercial
message. News messages such as stock quotes, scores from sporting events, and
news bulletins are noncommercial messages.
      (35)   NON-PREMISE SIGN means any sign that is not a premise sign.
      (36)   OCCUPANCY means the purpose for which a building is used or
intended to be used. The term also includes the building or room housing such
use.
      (37)   ONE SIGN means any number of detached signs structurally connected
above grade.
      (38)   PARAPET SIGN means a projecting attached sign erected on or
attached to the eaves or edge of the roof or on a parapet. A parapet sign is
not a roof sign.
      (38.1)   PARKING STRUCTURE SCREENING SIGN means an attached sign located
on a parking structure intended to be creative and artful by use of visually
interesting, vibrant, and colorful designs with promotional messages limited to
the name or logo of the district or athletic team names, players, or logos.
      (39)   PERMANENT SIGN means any sign that is not a temporary sign as
defined in this section or a sign permitted pursuant to Sections
51A-7.1716 through
51A-7.1722 of this division.
      (40)   PORTABLE SIGN means any sign that is not securely connected to the
ground in such a way that it cannot easily be moved from one location to
another and that is not an attached sign, vehicular sign, or a sign that refers
solely to the sale or lease of the premises.
      (41)   PREMISE means a lot or unplatted tract that is reflected in the
plat books of the building inspection division of the city. Refer to Section
51A-7.1709 of this division.
      (42)   PREMISE SIGN means any sign the content of which relates to the
premise on which it is located and refers exclusively to:
         (A)   the name, trade name, or logo of the owner or occupant of the
premise or the identification of the premises;
         (B)   accommodations, services, or activities offered or conducted on
the premise;
         (C)   products sold, other than incidentally, on the premise if no
more than 70 percent of the sign is devoted to the advertisement of products by
brand name or symbol; or
         (D)   the sale, lease, or construction of the premise.
      (43)   PROJECTING ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting 18 or
more inches from a building.
      (44)   PROMOTIONAL MESSAGE means a message that identifies, promotes, or
advertises a cultural activity within this district, any event being conducted,
in whole or in part, in an entertainment complex or entertainment complex plaza
within this district, any special event being conducted in this district, or
any other event that will benefit the city. Benefit to the city is established
by:
         (A)   use of city property in accordance with a contract, license, or
permit;
         (B)   the receipt of city monies for the activity or event; or
         (C)   an ordinance or resolution of the city council that recognizes
the activity or event as benefiting the city.
      (45)   PROTECTIVE SIGN means any sign that is commonly associated with
safeguarding the permitted uses of the occupancy, including, but not limited to
“bad dog,” “no trespassing,” and “no solicitors.”
      (46)   PUBLIC AREA means any publicly or privately-owned outdoor area
that is accessible to the public.
      (47)   ROOF SIGN means a sign that is attached to or supported by the
roof of a building.
      (48)   SAFE SCHOOL ZONE SIGN means a government sign:
         (A)   to be placed in the public right-of-way at the direction of a
school district;
         (B)   indicating a safe school hotline number, or an alcohol-free,
gun-free, or drug-free zone for a school; and
         (C)   erected to give notice of these zones in order to aid in the
enforcement of state or federal laws involving violation of certain crimes in
proximity of a school.
      (49)   SETBACK means the distance between a sign and the nearest public
right-of-way line. An alley is not considered to be public right-of-way for the
purpose of calculating a setback. Where a public way crosses a railroad right-
of-way, the setback is measured from the public right-of-way line extended
across the railroad right-of-way.
      (50)   SIGN means any device, flag, light, figure, picture, letter, word,
message, symbol, plaque, poster, display, design, painting, drawing, billboard,
wind device, or other thing visible from outside the premise on which it is
located and that is designed, intended, or used to inform or advertise to
persons not on that premise. This definition does not include:
         (A)   searchlights and landscape features that display no words or
symbols;
         (B)   works of art that are not designed, intended, or used to
advertise; or
         (C)   temporary holiday decorations.
      (51)   SIGN HARDWARE means the structural support system for a sign,
including the fastening devices that secure the sign to a building facade or
pole.
      (52)   SIGN SUPPORT means any pole, post, strut, cable, or other
structural fixture or framework necessary to hold and secure a sign, providing
that the fixture or framework is not imprinted with any picture, symbol, or
word using characters in excess of one inch in height, nor is internally or
decoratively illuminated.
      (53)   SPECIAL EVENT means a temporary event or gathering, including a
special event parade, using either private or public property, in which the
estimated number of participants and spectators exceeds 75 during any day of
the event and that involves one or more of the following activities, except
when the activity is for construction or housemoving purposes only:
         (A)   Closing of a public street.
         (B)   Blocking or restriction of public property.
         (C)   Sale of merchandise, food, or beverages on public or private
property.
         (D)   Erection of a tent on public or private property.
         (E)   Installation of a stage, bandshell, trailer, van, portable
building, grandstand, or bleachers on public or private property.
         (F)   Placement of portable toilets on public or private property.
      (54)   SPECIAL EVENT PARADE means the assembly of three or more persons
whose gathering is for the common design of traveling or marching in procession
from one location to any other location for the purpose of advertising,
promoting, celebrating, or commemorating a thing, person, date, or event that
is not directly related to the expression of feelings and beliefs on current
political, religious, or social issues.
      (55)   SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGN means a sign temporarily supplementing the
permanent signs on a premise.
      (56)   TEMPORARY SIGN means a sign erected for a limited time that
identifies an event or activity of limited duration. Examples include signs
advertising the sale or lease of property, construction activity in progress,
or a concert or other cultural event.
      (57)   THIS DISTRICT means the Victory Sign District.
      (58)   VEHICULAR SIGN means any sign on a vehicle moving along the ground
or on any vehicle parked temporarily, incidental to its principal use for
transportation. This definition does not include signs that are being
transported to a site of permanent erection.
      (60)   WELCOME MESSAGE means a message that identifies and greets heads
of state; foreign dignitaries; groups using city property in accordance with a
contract, license, or permit; or government organizations.
      (60.1)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign painted or affixed to a window.
      (61)   WIND DEVICE means any flag, banner, pennant, streamer, or similar
device that moves freely in the wind.
      (62)   WORD: For purposes of this division, each of the following is
considered to be one word:
         (A)   Any word in any language found in any standard unabridged
dictionary or dictionary of slang.
         (B)   Any proper noun or any initial or series of initials.
         (C)   Any separate character, symbol or abbreviation such as “&”, “$”,
“%”, and “Inc.”.
         (D)   Any telephone number or commonly used combination of numerals
and symbols such as “$5.00" or “50%”.
         (E)   Any internet website, network, or protocol address, domain name,
or universal record locator.
         (F)   Any symbol or logo that is a registered trademark but which
itself contains no word or character.
A street number is not considered to be a word. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25047; 25918;
30043)
SEC. 51A-7.1705.   APPLICABILITY OF HIGHWAY BEAUTIFICATION ACTS.
   For purposes of applying the Federal and Texas Highway Beautification Acts,
this district is considered to be a commercial zoning district. (Ord. Nos.
24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1706.   VICTORY DISTRICT SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this subsection, a person shall not
alter, place, maintain, expand, or remove a sign in this district without first
obtaining a sign permit from the city. A sign permit is not required to:
      (i)   Erect an illuminated projection sign in accordance with Section
51A-7.1727(i).
      (ii)   change the text on a changeable message sign or a kiosk.
      (iii)   Erect or replace a banner using the existing sign hardware. A
sign permit is required to install sign hardware for a banner.
   (b)   Sign permit procedures. Except as provided in Subsection (c) below,
the procedures for obtaining a sign permit in Division
51A-7.600 apply in this district.
   (c)   Roof Signs in Subdistrict B and Subarea D-2.
      (i)   Certificate of appropriateness required. No sign permit may be
issued to authorize a roof sign in Subdistrict B unless the commission has
first issued a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with this
subsection.
      (ii)   Application for a roof sign. When applying for a roof sign in
Subdistrict B or Subarea D-2, the applicant shall submit an application to the
building official. After determining that the proposed roof sign conforms with
all building, electrical, and mechanical codes and all sign regulations in this
ordinance, the building official shall forward a copy of the application to the
director within five working days of its receipt. The applicant shall provide
the building official and the director with specific information in the form of
perspectives, renderings, photographs, models, or other representations
sufficient to show the nature of the proposed sign and its effect on the
building on which it is located as well as its effect on surrounding premises.
Any applicant may request a meeting with the director before submitting an
application and may consult with the director during the review of the permit
application.
      (iii)   Review of application by director. The director shall review the
application and make a recommendation within 10 days of its receipt. In
reviewing an application, he shall first consider whether the applicant has
submitted sufficient information to allow an informed decision. If he finds
that the proposed roof sign is consistent with the special character of this
district, he shall make a recommendation of approval to the commission. The
director shall consider the proposed sign in terms of its appropriateness for
this district without regard to any consideration of the message conveyed by
the sign. After consideration of these factors, the director shall recommend
approval or denial of the application and forward that recommendation to the
commission.
      (iv)   City plan commission review. Upon receipt of a recommendation by
the director, the commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the
application. At least 10 days before the hearing, notice of the date, time, and
place of the hearing, the name of the applicant, and the location of the
proposed roof sign must be published in the official newspaper of the city. In
addition, the building official shall serve, by hand-delivery or mail, a
written notice to the applicant that contains a reference to this subsection,
and the date, time, and location of the hearing. A notice sent by mail is
served by depositing it properly addressed and postage paid in the United
States mail. In making its decision, the commission shall consider the same
factors that were required to be considered by the director in making his
recommendation. If the commission approves the application, it shall forward a
certificate of appropriateness to the building official within 15 days of the
date of its approval. If the commission denies the application, it shall so
inform the building official in writing. The building official shall advise the
applicant of the denial within five working days of the date of receipt of the
written notice from the commission. If the commission does not deny the
application within 60 days of its receipt by the building official, the
building official shall issue a certificate of appropriateness to the
applicant.
      (v)   Authority of building official not affected. Nothing in this
subsection shall affect or modify the authority of the building official to
refuse to grant a sign permit when the proposed roof sign does not conform to
the height, effective area, setback, or similar restrictions established by
this ordinance or the structural requirements of the construction codes of the
city.
      (vi)   Appeal to council. A decision to deny the certificate may be
appealed by the applicant. An appeal is made by filing a written request with
the director for review by the city council. An appeal must be made within 10
days after notice is given to the applicant of the commission’s decision. In
considering the appeal, the sole issue shall be whether or not the commission
erred in making its decision, and in this connection, the city council shall
consider the same standards that were required to be considered by the
commission. Decisions of the city council are final as to available
administrative remedies. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918; 30892; 31410)
SEC. 51A-7.1707.   IMITATION OF TRAFFIC AND EMERGENCY SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall cause to be erected or maintained any sign using any
combination of forms, words, colors, or lights that imitate standard public
traffic regulatory, emergency signs, or signals. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1708.   OTHER CODES NOT IN CONFLICT, APPLICABLE.
   All signs erected or maintained pursuant to the provisions of this division
shall be erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable state laws
and with the building code, electrical code, and other applicable ordinances of
the city. In the event of conflict between this division and other laws, the
most restrictive standard applies. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1709.   CREATION OF SITE.
   Except for signs located wholly within the public right-of-way, the building
official shall not issue a permit for construction, erection, placement, or
maintenance of a sign until a site is established in one of the following ways:
      (1)   A lot is part of a plat which is approved by the city plan
commission and filed in the plat records of Dallas County, Texas.
      (2)   Tracts that are governed by a detached sign unity agreement in
accordance with Section
51A-7.1710. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1710.   DETACHED SIGN UNITY AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   The building official may authorize the dissolution of common boundary
lines between lots for the limited purpose of allowing those lots to be
considered one premise for the erection of detached signs if a written
agreement is executed in accordance with this section on a form provided by the
city.
   (b)   The agreement must:
      (1)   contain legal descriptions of the properties sharing the common
boundary line(s);
      (2)   set forth adequate consideration between the parties;
      (3)   state that all parties agree that the properties sharing the common
boundary line(s) may be collectively treated as one lot for the limited purpose
of erecting detached signs;
      (4)   state that the dissolution of the common boundary line(s) described
in the agreement is only for the limited purpose of allowing the erection of
detached signs, and that actual lines of property ownership are not affected;
      (5)   state that it constitutes a covenant running with the land with
respect to all properties sharing the common boundary line(s);
      (6)   state that all parties agree to defend, indemnify, and hold
harmless the city of Dallas from and against all claims or liabilities arising
out of or in connection with the agreement;
      (7)   state that it shall be governed by the laws of the state of Texas;
      (8)   state that it may only be amended or terminated by a subsequent
written instrument that is:
         (A)   signed by an owner of property sharing the common boundary line
(s) or by a lienholder, other than a taxing entity, that has either an interest
in a property sharing the common boundary line(s) or an improvement on such a
property;
         (B)   approved by the building official;
         (C)   approved as to form by the city attorney; and
         (D)   filed and made a part of the deed records of Dallas County,
Texas;
      (9)   be approved by the building official and be approved as to form by
the city attorney;
      (10)   be signed by all owners of the properties sharing the common
boundary line(s);
      (11)   be signed by all lienholders, other than taxing entities, that
have either an interest in the properties sharing the common boundary line(s)
or an improvement on those properties; and
      (12)   be filed and made a part of the deed records of Dallas County,
Texas.
   (c)   The building official shall approve an agreement if all properties
governed by the agreement fully comply with the regulations in this division.
   (d)   An agreement shall not be considered effective until a true and
correct copy of the approved agreement is filed in the deed records in
accordance with this section and two file-marked copies of the agreement are
filed with the building official.
   (e)   An agreement may only be amended or terminated by a written instrument
that is executed in accordance with this subsection on a form provided by the
city. The instrument must be:
      (1)   signed by an owner of property sharing the common boundary line(s)
or by a lienholder, other than a taxing entity, that has either an interest in
a property sharing the common boundary line(s) or an improvement on such a
property;
      (2)   approved by the building official;
      (3)   approved as to form by the city attorney; and
      (4)   filed and made a part of the deed records of Dallas County, Texas.
The building official shall approve an instrument amending or terminating an
agreement if all properties governed by the agreement fully comply with the
regulations in this division. The amending or terminating instrument shall not
be considered effective until it is filed in the deed records in accordance
with this subsection and two file-marked copies are filed with the building
official.
   (f)   No detached non-premise sign may be erected or maintained on a
property that is described in an agreement executed in accordance with this
section. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1711.   GENERAL MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   In general. Sign and sign supports must be maintained in a state of
good repair and neat appearance at all times.
   (b)   Revocation of permit.
      (1)   The building official shall revoke, in writing, the sign permit for
a sign if it has for a period of one year:
         (A)   displayed obsolete advertising matter;
         (B)   been without advertising matter; or
         (C)   been damaged in excess of 50 percent of the cost of replacement
of the sign.
      (2)   The owner of the sign is liable to the city for a civil penalty in
the amount of $200 a day for each calendar day that the sign is maintained
without a required permit. The building official shall give written notice to
the property owner of the amount owed to the city in civil penalties, and shall
notify the city attorney of any unpaid civil penalty. The city attorney shall
collect unpaid civil penalties in a suit on the city’s behalf.
      (3)   The civil penalty provided for in Paragraph (2) is in addition to
any other enforcement remedy the city may have under city ordinances and state
law. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1712.   GOVERNMENT SIGNS.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (b), nothing in this division shall
be construed to regulate the display of a government sign.
   (b)   Safe school zone signs must satisfy the following requirements.
      (1)   Each sign must be erected within 600 feet of a school.
      (2)   No sign may exceed five square feet in effective area.
      (3)   At least 80 percent of the effective area of each sign must be
devoted to a governmental message.
      (4)   Up to 20 percent of the effective area of each sign may be devoted
to the identification of a sponsor. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1713.   SIGNS OVER THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (a)   Signs may be located in or project over the public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, sidewalks, subject to the licensing and
franchise requirements of Chapter XIV of the city charter,
Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, as amended, and the requirements of this
section.
   (b)   The traffic engineer shall review the location of any sign located in
or overhanging the public right-of-way to ensure that the sign will not pose a
traffic hazard or visibility obstruction. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918; 28424)
SEC. 51A-7.1714.   COMMERCIAL VERSUS NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, any sign that
may display a commercial message may also display a noncommercial message,
either in place of or in addition to the commercial message, so long as the
sign complies with other requirements of this ordinance that do not pertain to
the content of the message displayed.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, any sign that
may display one type of noncommercial message may also display any other type
of noncommercial message, so long as the sign complies with other requirements
of this ordinance that do not pertain to the content of the message displayed.
(Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1715.   PREMISE VERSUS NON-PREMISE ADVERTISEMENT.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, any sign that may
display non-premise advertisement may display premise advertisement in place of
the non-premise advertisement, so long as the sign complies with other
requirements of this ordinance that do not pertain to the content of the
message displayed. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1716.   MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGNS.
   In addition to all other signs permitted in this ordinance, movement control
signs are permitted subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   Movement control signs must direct vehicular or pedestrian movement
within this district or to the West End Historic District and may include the
name or logo of any premise located in this district or the name or logo of the
West End Historic District.
      (2)   Except as provided in this paragraph, no movement control sign may
exceed 30 square feet in effective area.
         (A)   Four movement control signs may have a maximum effective area of
60 square feet.
         (B)   One movement control sign exceeding 30 square feet in effective
area may be located at each of the following intersections:
            (i)   Victory Avenue and Victory Avenue West;
            (ii)   Olive Street and Houston Street;
            (iii)    Continental Avenue and Victory Avenue; and
            (iv)   Houston Street and Victory Avenue West.
      (3)   Movement control signs may be attached or detached signs and may be
erected on any premise without limit as to number.
      (4)   Movement control signs may be changeable message signs when the
messages are limited to directing vehicular movement, including but not limited
to the availability and amount of parking, price of parking, and the name of
the parking business. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918; 30043)
SEC. 51A-7.1717.   SIGNS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   In addition to all other signs permitted in this ordinance, an unlimited
number of signs that only identify the name or logo of this district may be
located on or incorporated into manhole covers, street light poles, sidewalks,
benches, trash receptacles, and other improvements in public areas. No such
sign, however, may exceed one square foot in effective area or contain more
than three words. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918; 30043)
SEC. 51A-7.1718.   PROTECTIVE SIGNS.
   (a)   The occupant of a premise may erect not more than two protective
signs, in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   No sign may exceed 100 square inches in effective area.
      (2)   No detached sign may exceed two feet in height.
      (3)   No letter may exceed four inches in height.
   (b)   The protective signs authorized in the preceding subsection are in
addition to all other signs permitted in this ordinance. (Ord. Nos. 24348;
25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1719.   VEHICULAR SIGNS.
   (a)   In addition to all other signs permitted in this ordinance, vehicular
signs are permitted subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   No sign may contain flashing or moving elements.
      (2)   No sign may have an element with a luminance greater than 200
footlamberts.
      (3)   No sign may project beyond the surface of a vehicle in excess of
eight inches.
      (4)   No sign may be attached to a vehicle so that the driver’s vision is
obstructed from any angle.
      (5)   Signs, lights, and signals used by authorized emergency vehicles
are not restricted.
   (b)   A vehicular sign must comply with all regulations for detached signs
if:
      (1)   it is placed so as to constitute a “sign” as defined in Section
51A-7.1704; and
      (2)   the vehicle upon which the sign is located is parked on other than
a temporary basis.
   (c)   The owner of the vehicle upon which a vehicular sign is placed is
responsible for ensuring that the provisions of this section are adhered to and
commits an offense if any vehicular sign on his vehicle violates this section.
If such a vehicle is found unattended or unoccupied, the registered owner of
the vehicle shall be presumed to be the actual owner. The records of the state
highway department or the county highway license department showing the name of
the registered owner of the vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence of
actual ownership by the named individual. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1720.   STREET CONSTRUCTION ALLEVIATION SIGNS.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
      (1)   CONSTRUCTION means major activity involving on-site excavation,
fabrication, erection, alteration, repair, or demolition that materially alters
or restricts access to a premise.
      (2)   DIRECTOR means the director of transportation and public works of
the city or his or her designated representative.
      (3)   ERECT means erect or maintain.
      (4)   OPERATOR means a person who causes a use or business to function or
puts or keeps a use or business in operation. A person need not have an
ownership interest in a use or business to be an “operator” of the use or
business for purposes of this section.
      (5)   OWNER includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
tenant in partnership, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, or lessee.
      (6)   SIGN means a sign authorized to be erected or maintained under this
section.
      (7)   STREET means a street more than 85 feet in width, including
frontage roads, if applicable. “Frontage Road” means a frontage, access, or
service road for a freeway or tollway.
   (b)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the city in order to lessen the congestion in
the streets; to improve communications efficiency by allowing businesses to
identify themselves and by helping customers to locate these businesses; to
promote the safety of persons and property by reducing the confusion created by
street construction; and to preserve landscape quality by imposing uniform
standards. This section is not intended to apply to temporary minor repairs to
streets.
   (c)   Authority to erect. In addition to any other signs permitted in this
ordinance, up to two detached premise signs may be erected on a premise if:
      (1)   the premise contains at least one main use other than a single
family or duplex use;
      (2)   the premise has frontage along that portion of a street under
construction as defined in Subsection (a); and
      (3)   the director has given written notice in accordance with Subsection
(d).
   (d)   Notice required to be given by the director. Whenever the director
determines that construction of a street, as defined in this section, is
imminent, the director shall serve a written notice for the purpose of
authorizing the erection of signs in accordance with this section. The written
notice may be hand-delivered, sent by mail, or published in the official
newspaper of the city. In order to validly authorize a sign under this section,
the notice must:
      (1)   contain a reference to or copy of this section;
      (2)   describe with specificity the portion of the street that is or will
be under construction;
      (3)   contain estimated commencement and completion dates for the
construction; and
      (4)   contain a statement that no sign may be erected or maintained on a
premise:
         (A)   more than five days before the estimated construction
commencement date stated in the notice; or
         (B)   more than five days after the estimated construction completion
date stated in the notice.
   (e)   Time period when sign authorized. This section only authorizes signs
to be placed on property adjacent to that portion of a street described in the
notice given pursuant to Subsection (d) during the time period beginning five
days before the estimated construction commencement date stated in the notice
and ending five days after the estimated construction completion date stated in
the notice. No sign may be erected or maintained on a premise:
      (1)   more than five days before the estimated construction commencement
date stated in the notice; or
      (2)   more than five days after the estimated construction completion
date stated in the notice.
The director may change the time period for erecting and maintaining signs
under this section at any time by giving a new notice in accordance with
Subsection (d).
   (f)   Physical requirements for sign. All signs must comply with the
following paragraphs:
      (1)   No more than two signs may be erected on a premise. No more than
one sign may be erected at any motor vehicle entrance to a premise.
      (2)   No setback is required for a sign; however, no sign may be located
in a public right-of-way. If a sign is placed in a visibility triangle as
defined in Section
51A-4.602(d), it shall be a defense to prosecution under that section that the
sign does not constitute a traffic hazard.
      (3)   The sign must be visible from and oriented towards the street under
construction and have an arrow that directs motorists to a motor vehicle
entrance to the premise.
      (4)   The sign must be a square, with dimensions of four feet by four
feet. It must have a three-inch border of white reflective sheeting or paint
and a reflective blue background. The text of the sign must consist of
reflective white characters. (Note: It is intended that the requirements of
this paragraph be strictly and precisely complied with.)
      (5)   No sign may exceed eight feet in height.
      (6)   No sign may be a portable sign unless the director determines that
the sign does not constitute a safety hazard.
   (g)   Criminal responsibility. If a sign violates this section and is not
otherwise authorized under the Dallas City Code, a person is criminally
responsible for a sign unlawfully erected or maintained if the person:
      (1)   erects or maintains the sign;
      (2)   is an owner or operator of a use or business to which the sign
refers; or
      (3)   owns part or all of the land on which the sign is located.
   (h)   City may remove signs. The City of Dallas may remove any sign without
liability if the director determines that the sign constitutes a safety hazard,
or if the sign does not comply with this section; however, the city shall not
be liable for failure to remove a sign. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25047; 25918; 30239;
30654; 32864)
SEC. 51A-7.1721.   ATTACHED SIGNS ON MACHINERY OR EQUIPMENT.
   Words may be attached to machinery or equipment which is necessary or
customary to a business, including but not limited to devices such as gasoline
pumps, vending machines, ice machines, etc., provided that the words so
attached refer exclusively to products or services dispensed by the device,
consist of characters no more than four inches in height, and project no more
than one inch from the surface of the device. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1722.   DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   (a)   District identification signs may only identify the name or logo of
this district.
   (b)   No sign may exceed three words or be a changeable message sign.
   (c)   These signs are in addition to all other signs permitted on a premise
and are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   In Subdistrict A, district identification signs are not permitted
in addition to the other signs authorized on a premise. Any sign in Subdistrict
A that identifies the name or logo of this district must meet the regulations
for attached or detached signs in Subdistrict A, and the sign will be included
in the calculation of the number of permitted signs on a premise.
      (2)   In Subdistricts B and D, district identification signs must be flat
attached signs, monument signs, banners attached to pole supports, or enhanced
banner signs.
         (A)   Attached and detached signs.
            (i)   In Subdistrict B, a maximum of three flat attached signs or
monument signs are permitted.
            (ii)   In Subdistrict D, a maximum of two monument signs are
permitted.
            (iii)   The maximum effective area for a flat attached sign is 900
square feet.
            (iv)   The maximum effective area for a monument sign is 150 square
feet and the sign may not exceed 10 feet in height.
         (B)   Banners attached to pole supports. No maximum number of banners
attached to pole supports. The following additional restrictions apply:
            (i)   Banners and hardware must meet the sign construction and
design standards contained in the Dallas Building Code and be constructed of
weather-resistant and rust-proof material.
            (ii)   Maximum height, including masts and finials, is 36 feet.
            (iii)   Banners must be between 12 feet and 30 feet above grade,
excluding masts and finials.
            (iv)   Maximum projection for banners is three feet from the pole
on which it is mounted.
            (v)   Maximum effective area for individual banners is 50 square
feet.
         (C)   Enhanced banner signs.
            (i)   In addition to the banners and elements allowed in
Subparagraph B, enhanced banner signs may have one each of the following
elements located between 12 feet and 30 feet above grade:
               (aa)   A vertically oriented illuminated blade cabinet that
contains the logo or name of the district with a maximum effective area of 40
square feet with a maximum projection of three feet from the pole on which it
is mounted.
               (bb)   A horizontal element that contains the logo or name of
the district with a maximum effective area of 10 square feet and a maximum
projection of six feet from the pole on which it is mounted.
            (ii)   A maximum of one enhanced banner sign is allowed per
blockface. Enhanced banner signs are limited to the following locations:
               (aa)   The southwest corner of Houston Street and Olive Street;
               (bb)   The southwest corner of Victory Park Lane and Olive
Street;
               (cc)   The southwest corner of Houston Street and Museum Way;
               (dd)   The northeast corner of Victory Park Lane and High Market
Street;
               (ee)   The northeast corner of Houston Street and High Market
Street;
               (ff)   The northwest corner of Victory Park Lane and High Market
Street;
               (gg)   The northwest corner of Houston Street and Lamar Street;
               (hh)   The southeast corner of Victory Avenue and Olive Street;
and
               (ii)   The southeast corner of Victory Avenue and High Market
Street.
      (3)   In Subdistrict C, the only district identification signs permitted
are one monument sign and banners attached to pole supports. If the sign is a
monument sign, the sign may not exceed 10 feet in height or have an effective
area greater than 150 square feet. If the sign is a banner, the banner and its
hardware must:
         (A)   meet the sign construction and design standards contained in the
Dallas Building Code;
         (B)   be at least 12 feet but no more than 25 feet above grade;
         (C)   not project more than three feet from the pole on which it is
mounted;
         (D)   not exceed 50 square feet in effective area; and
         (E)   be made out of weather-resistant and rust-proof material. (Ord.
Nos. 24348; 25918; 30043)
SEC. 51A-7.1723.   DETACHED SIGNS IN ACCESS EASEMENTS.
   (a)   No more than 10 permanent, non-premise detached signs may be located
in access easements in this district.
   (b)   No permanent sign in an access easement may exceed five words or be a
changeable message sign.
   (c)   These signs may only identify district activities. (Ord. Nos. 24348;
25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1724.   STREAMERS, PENNANTS, AND INFLATABLE SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   Streamers, pennants, and inflatable signs, including, but not limited to,
balloons, are prohibited in this district. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1725.   GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS. 
   Unless otherwise stated, the following general rules apply to all signs in
this district.
      (1)   All signs must comply with Divisions
51A-7.500,
51A-7.600,
51A-7.800, and
51A-7.1700. No other division of
Article VII applies to a sign in this district.
      (2)   There are no setback requirements for a sign in this district.
      (3)   All signs in this district must be premise signs or convey a
noncommercial message.
      (4)   No sign may be painted onto the roof of a building, and no flat
attached sign is permitted on the roof of a building.
      (5)   No illuminated sign that has an effective area of 400 square feet
or less may have a luminance greater than 300 footlamberts, nor may any such
sign have a luminance greater than 300 footlamberts for any portion of the sign
within a circle two feet in diameter. No illuminated sign which has an
effective area greater than 400 square feet may have a luminance greater than
200 footlamberts, nor may any such sign have a luminance greater than 200
footlamberts for any portion of the sign within a circle of two feet in
diameter. The measurements of luminance are taken from any other premise or
from any public right-of-way other than an alley. This subsection does not
apply to signs authorized by Subsections
51A-7.1727(c), (d) or (i).
      (6)   No illuminated sign, nor any illuminated element of any sign, may
turn on or off, or change its brightness, if:
         (A)   the change of illumination produces an apparent motion of the
visual image, including but not limited to illusion of moving objects, moving
patterns or bands of light, expanding or contracting shapes, rotation or any
similar effect of animation;
         (B)   the change of message or picture occurs more often than once
each three seconds for those portions of a sign which convey time or
temperature, or once each 20 seconds for all other portions of a sign; or
         (C)   a portion of the sign, within a circle of two feet in diameter,
has a luminance greater than 200 footlamberts when all elements of the sign are
fully and steadily illuminated.
This subsection does not apply to signs authorized by Subsections
51A-7.1727(c), (d) or (i).
      (7)   No sign or any part of any sign may move or rotate at a rate more
often than once each 10 seconds, or change its message at a rate more often
than once each 20 seconds, with the exception of wind devices, the motion of
which is not restricted. This subsection does not apply to signs authorized by
Subsections
51A-7.1727(c), (d) or (i) , unless the sign is visible from the main traveled
way of an expressway.
      (8)   No sign may move, rotate, or change its message at any rate if any
of its elements or any illuminated portion within a two-foot circle has a
luminance greater than 200 footlamberts. This subsection does not apply to
signs authorized by Subsections
51A-7.1727(c), (d) or (i).
      (9)   Attached premise signs are allowed a 10 percent increase in
effective area if 51 percent or more of the characters incorporate neon
lighting. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918; 30043)
SEC. 51A-7.1726.   SIGN REGULATIONS FOR SUBDISTRICT A (THE ENTERTAINMENT
COMPLEX SUBDISTRICT).
   (a)   Movement and illumination provisions for all signs.
      (1)   Signs visible from the main traveled way of an expressway. For
signs containing a message that is visible from the main traveled way of an
expressway, the regulations of Section
51A-7.1725 apply.
      (2)   All other signs. For all other signs, the regulations of Section
51A-7.1725 apply except for the provisions of Section
51A-7.1725 (6), (7), and (8).
      (3)   Luminance.
         (A)   For purposes of applying Section
51A-7.1725 (5), (6), and (8), the measurements of luminance are taken from any
premise or public right-of-way, other than an alley, outside this district.
         (B)   Luminance limitations related to measurements taken within a
circle of two feet in diameter under Section
51A-7.1725 (5), (6), and (8) do not apply in this subdistrict.
      (4)   Changeable message sign greater than 1,000 square feet facing an
entertainment complex plaza. The provisions of Section
51A-7.1725 (5), (6), (7), and (8) do not apply to a changeable message sign
greater than 1,000 square feet in effective area located on the facade of a
building facing the entertainment complex plaza.
   (b)   Permanent attached signs. The only permanent attached signs permitted
in this subdistrict are signs provided for in this subsection.
      (1)   Number of permitted signs.
         (A)   There is no limitation on the number of premise and non-premise
attached signs that may be placed on a facade of a building.
         (B)   Except as otherwise provided, there is no limitation on the
number of changeable message signs 1,000 square feet in effective area and
less, including marquee signs, that may be placed on a facade of a building.
The facade of a building that has a changeable message sign greater than 1,000
square feet in effective area may not have additional changeable message signs
greater than 100 square feet in effective area on the same facade.
         (C)   No more than 13 roof signs are permitted in this subdistrict.
      (2)   Number of words or characters.
         (A)   Except for roof signs, there is no limit as to the number of
words or characters that may be placed on an attached sign.
         (B)   The painted roof sign permitted on an entertainment complex may
contain 10 words. For all other roof signs, no more than three characters or
symbols are permitted for each sign.
      (3)   Premise and non-premise signs.
         (A)   All roof signs in this subdistrict must be premise signs.
         (B)   All other signs in this subdistrict may be premise or non-
premise signs.
      (4)   Effective area limitations for certain attached signs.
         (A)   The maximum effective area of a changeable message sign is 1,000
square feet, except:
            (i)   A marquee sign.
            (ii)   One changeable message sign with a maximum effective area of
1,500 square feet on the facade of a building facing the entertainment complex
plaza.
         (B)   The maximum effective area of a marquee sign is 250 square feet.
         (C)   The maximum effective area of an awning or canopy sign is 150
square feet.
         (D)   The maximum effective area of the painted roof sign on an
entertainment complex is 8,500 square feet. For purposes of calculating the
maximum effective area of this painted roof sign, the building official shall
draw a minimum imaginary rectangle of vertical and horizontal lines around all
extremities of the sign. The area within the minimum imaginary rectangle is the
effective area of the roof sign.
         (E)   With the exception of the one painted roof sign permitted on an
entertainment complex, there is no maximum effective area for a roof sign.
         (F)   The maximum effective area for all other projecting attached
signs is 20 square feet.
      (5)   Cumulative effective area limitations for all attached signs. The
cumulative effective area of permanent non-premise attached signs on a building
facade may not exceed 10 percent of the total area of the facade on which the
signs are located. The cumulative effective area of all permanent attached
signs on the facade may not exceed 30 percent of the total area of the facade.
      (6)   Spacing of attached non-premise signs. HBA signs on a facade must
be spaced a minimum of 50 feet from all HBA signs on another facade. There are
no spacing requirements for HBA signs on the same facade.
      (7)   Signs overhanging or projecting into the public right-of-way.
         (A)   Attached signs overhanging the public right-of-way are permitted
as long as each sign is a minimum of 10 feet above the sidewalk grade.
         (B)   No portion of a marquee sign may:
            (i)   project more than eight feet into the public right-of-way; or
            (ii)   be located less than two feet from the back of a street
curb.
         (C)   For all other projecting attached signs, no portion of the signs
may:
            (i)   project more than four feet into the public right-of-way; or
            (ii)   be located less than two feet from the back of the street
curb.
      (8)   Roof signs.
         (A)   No roof sign may project above the surface to which it is
attached by more than 25 feet.
         (B)   One flat attached roof sign is permitted on an entertainment
complex if it is: (1) painted directly on the roof of the entertainment
complex, and (2) not visible within 400 feet of the boundary of Subdistrict A.
The sign is deemed visible if any portion of that sign can be seen at a point
five feet above grade.
         (C)   All other roof signs in this subdistrict must be mounted
parallel to the building facade.
         (D)   No roof sign may be a changeable message sign.
      (9)   Parapet signs. Parapet signs are prohibited in this subdistrict.
      (10)   No limitation on projecting attached signs. Projecting attached
signs are permitted on premises with detached signs.
      (11)   District activities and non-premise signs. A minimum of 30 percent
of the effective area of an attached non-premise sign must identify district
activities.
      (12)   Signs projecting over the roof line. Except for a roof sign, no
attached sign may project over a building.
      (13)   Location limitation on projecting attached signs. Except for a
roof sign, no portion of a projecting attached sign may be located at a point
on the facade above 66 feet in height.
   (c)   Permanent detached signs.
      (1)   The only permanent detached signs permitted in this subdistrict are
movement control and vent stack signs.
      (2)   A detached sign may only be located on a vent stack if:
         (A)   the sign face does not exceed 15 feet in height; and
         (B)   the sign does not exceed 100 square feet in effective area.
      (3)   Only one sign may be located on a vent stack, and no more than 16
vent stack signs are permitted in this subdistrict.
      (4)   Signs located on vent stacks may be non-premise signs. Twelve of
the 16 permitted signs may only identify district activities.
   (d)   Temporary signs. The only temporary signs permitted in this
subdistrict are special purpose signs, temporary protective signs, temporary
signs on construction fencing, and “for sale,” “for lease,” “remodeling,” and
“under construction” signs. These temporary signs are in addition to all other
signs permitted in this ordinance.
   (e)   Special purpose signs.
      (1)   Illumination. Special purpose signs may be externally illuminated,
and, except for banners, may be internally illuminated or “back-lighted.”
      (2)   Premise special purpose signs.
         (A)   Attached premise special purpose signs.
            (i)   Entertainment complex. On an entertainment complex, there is
no limit on the number or size of attached premise special purpose signs. No
sign may be maintained for more than 45 days in any given twelve-month period.
            (ii)   All other uses. An occupancy may have one attached premise
special purpose sign up to four times within any twelve-month period as long as
the sign:
               (aa)   is displayed for no more than 45 days each time during
the twelve-month period; and
               (bb)   has no more than 10 words that contain any character
equal to or exceeding four inches in height.
         (B)   Detached premise special purpose signs. No detached premise
special purpose sign is permitted in this subdistrict.
      (3)   Non-premise special purpose signs.
         (A)   In general. Non-premise special purpose signs are permitted
subject to the following regulations:
            (i)   Except as provided in Subparagraph (A)(ii) below, non-premise
special purpose signs may only display promotional and welcome messages.
            (ii)   Up to 10 percent of the effective area of a non-premise
special purpose sign may contain commercial advertisement. The name of the
event or activity identified in a promotional message is not considered
commercial advertisement even if the event or activity is named after the
sponsor.
            (iii)   A non-premise special purpose sign may not be erected more
than 30 days before the beginning of the advertised activity or event, and must
be removed no later than 10 days after the activity or event has ended.
            (iv)   The sign hardware for a banner may be left in place between
displays of a banner.
         (B)   Attached non-premise special purpose signs.
            (i)   Entertainment complex. The only attached non-premise special
purpose signs permitted on an entertainment complex are banners. Banners may be
displayed anywhere on the entertainment complex without limit on their number
or size.
            (ii)   All other uses. For all other uses, attached non-premise
special purpose signs are prohibited.
         (C)   Detached non-premise special purpose signs. No detached non-
premise special purpose sign is permitted in this subdistrict.
   (f)   Other temporary signs.
      (1)   Temporary protective signs. In addition to the other protective
signs permitted under Section
51A-7.1718, temporary protective signs may be erected anywhere on a
construction site at anytime during construction. There is no limit on the
number of these signs, but no sign may exceed 20 square feet in effective area
or eight feet in height. Temporary protective signs may be illuminated, but no
lighting source may project more than three inches from the vertical surface
of, or six inches above the top of, the sign. All temporary protective signs
must be removed upon completion of the construction.
      (2)   Temporary signs on construction fencing. Temporary signs may be
erected on construction fencing subject to the following provisions:
         (A)   The signs must be spaced at least 50 feet apart.
         (B)   No sign may exceed 128 square feet in effective area or eight
feet in height.
         (C)   No sign may project more than three inches from the vertical
surface of, or six inches above the top of, the fence.
         (D)   The signs may be illuminated.
         (E)   The signs may only identify the project under construction and
its owners, developers, future tenants, lenders, architects, engineers, project
consultants, and contractors.
         (F)   The signs must be removed upon completion of the construction.
      (3)   “For Sale,” “For Lease,” “Remodeling,” and “Under Construction”
signs. Signs that relate exclusively to the sale, lease, construction, or
remodeling of the premises on which they are located are permitted. There is no
limit to the number of attached signs permitted. Detached signs are limited to
one for each 100 feet of frontage on a public street or private access
easement. If attached to a window, the maximum effective area of the sign is 16
square feet; if attached to other portions of a facade, the maximum effective
area is 32 square feet. No detached sign may exceed 128 square feet in
effective area or 16 feet in height. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918; 26552)
SEC. 51A-7.1727.   SIGN REGULATIONS FOR SUBDISTRICT B (RETAIL AND ENTERTAINMENT
SUBDISTRICT).
   (a)   Movement and illumination provisions for all signs.
      (1)   Signs visible from the main traveled way of an expressway. For
signs containing a message that is visible from the main traveled way of an
expressway, the regulations of Section
51A-7.1725 apply.
      (2)   All other signs. For all other signs, the regulations of Section
51A-7.1725 apply except for the provisions of Section
51A-7.1725 (6), (7), and (8). The provisions of Subsections
51A-7.1725(5), (6), (7), and (8) do not apply to the signs authorized by
Subsections
51A-7.1727(c), (d), and (i).
      (3)   Luminance.
         (A)   For purposes of applying Section
51A-7.1725(5), (6), and (8), the measurements of luminance are taken from any
premise or public right-of-way, other than an alley, outside this district. The
measurement of luminance taken within a circle of two feet in diameter under
Section
51A-7.1725(5), (6), and (8) does not apply in this subdistrict.
         (B)   The luminance limitations Section
51A-7.1725(5), (6), and (8) do not apply to signs authorized by Subsections
51A-7.1727(c), (d) or (i).
   (b)   Permanent attached signs. The only permanent attached signs permitted
in this subdistrict are signs provided for in this subsection and Subsections
(c) and (d). The restrictions on signs in this subsection do not apply to the
signs authorized in Subsections (c) and (d) below.
      (1)   Number of permitted signs.
         (A)   Each premise or non-residential occupancy is allowed:
            (i)   one projecting attached sign per facade;
            (ii)   one marquee sign, canopy sign, or an awning sign per facade;
and
            (iii)   one additional attached sign per facade. The one additional
attached sign may not be a changeable message sign.
         (B)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, in addition to the
three signs permitted in Subparagraph (A), each premise is entitled to two
changeable message signs, other than marquee signs. A theater may have a
maximum of one changeable message premise sign for each theater screen other
than marquee signs.
         (C)   Four flat attached non-premise signs are permitted in this
subdistrict. These signs are not in addition to the number of signs permitted
on a premise. Only one non-premise sign is permitted on a facade. A maximum of
two of the four attached non-premise signs may be changeable message signs.
         (D)   No more than two roof signs are permitted in this subdistrict.
Only one roof sign is permitted per building.
         (E)   In no event may the total number of signs on a premise or
nonresidential occupancy exceed the number of signs permitted under
Subparagraphs (A) and (B).
         (F)   Window signs are limited to premise signs and do not count
against the maximum number of permanent attached signs. Window signs are
limited to the first and second floor of a building and may not cover more than
25 percent of any window.
      (2)   Number of words or characters.
         (A)   Except for marquee and changeable message signs, no person may
erect a sign that contains more than 10 words consisting of any characters of a
height equal to or exceeding four inches on any building facade. Words
consisting of characters less than four inches in height may be used without
limit.
         (B)   There is no limit as to the number of words containing
characters of a height equal to or exceeding four inches on a marquee or other
changeable message sign.
      (3)   Premise and non-premise signs. Except for the four attached non-
premise signs permitted in Subsection (b)(1), all attached permanent signs in
this subdistrict must be premise signs or convey a noncommercial message.
      (4)   Effective area limitations for certain attached signs.
         (A)   With the exception of a marquee sign, the maximum effective area
of a changeable message sign is 1,000 square feet.
         (B)   The maximum effective area of a marquee sign is 250 square feet.
         (C)   The maximum effective area of an awning or canopy sign is 150
square feet.
         (D)   There is no maximum effective area for a parapet sign.
         (E)   The maximum effective area for a roof sign is 800 square feet.
         (F)   The maximum effective area for all other projecting attached
signs is 250 square feet.
      (5)   Effective area limitation for non-premise attached signs. Except as
further restricted in Subsection (b)(4)(A), the effective area of a permanent
non-premise attached sign on a building facade may not exceed 50 percent of the
area of the portion of the facade below 66 feet in height.
      (6)   Cumulative effective area limitations for all attached signs. The
cumulative effective area of all permanent attached signs on a building facade
may not exceed 50 percent of the total area of the facade.
      (7)   Spacing of attached non-premise signs. HBA signs must be spaced at
least 250 feet apart.
      (8)   Signs overhanging or projecting into the public right-of-way.
         (A)   Attached signs overhanging the public right-of-way are permitted
as long as each sign is a minimum of 10 feet above the sidewalk grade.
         (B)   No portion of a marquee sign may be located less than 2.5 feet
from the back of a street curb.
         (C)   For all other projecting attached signs, no portion of the signs
may:
            (i)   project more than eight feet into the public right-of way; or
            (ii)   be located less than two feet from the back of the street
curb.
      (9)   Parapet signs. Parapet signs are permitted as follows:
         (A)   Except as provided in Subparagraph (B), no parapet sign may
project more than four feet above the edge of the roof, regardless of whether
the sign is erected on a parapet wall or the roofs edge.
         (B)   Six parapet signs in this district may project up to 10 feet
above the edge of the roof if no parts of the signs are located at a height
above 100 feet, measured from the grade of the buildings on which the signs are
attached.
      (10)   Roof signs. Roof signs are permitted as follows:
         (A)   No part of a roof sign may be located at a height above 100
feet, measured from the grade of the building on which the sign is attached.
         (B)   The sign support for a roof sign must consist of open, exposed
metal framing. The metal must be painted or coated, or be composed of a
material that will not rust or corrode.
         (C)   A roof sign must be erected on the main roof of the building.
         (D)   No roof sign may project above the roof more than one-third of
the building height.
         (E)   A roof sign must be mounted parallel to the nearest facade of
the building.
         (F)   No roof sign may be a changeable message sign.
      (11)   No limitation on projecting attached signs. Projecting attached
signs are permitted on premises with detached signs.
      (12)   Location limitation on non-premise signs. No portion of a non-
premise sign may be located at a point on the facade above 66 feet in height.
      (13)   District activities and non-premise signs. A minimum of 30 percent
of the effective area of an attached non-premise sign must identify district
activities.
      (14)   Signs projecting over the roof line. A projecting, attached sign,
other than a roof or parapet sign, may project up to a maximum of 10 feet above
a building. No changeable message or attached non-premise sign may project
above a building.
      (15)   Location limitation on projecting attached signs. Except for a
roof or parapet sign, no portion of a projecting attached sign may be located
at a point on the facade above 66 feet in height.
      (16)   Location limitation on changeable message signs. No portion of a
changeable message sign may be located at a point on the facade above 66 feet
in height.
   (c)   Additional signs in Subarea B-1.
      (1)   In general. The non-premise signs described in this subsection are
permitted in Subarea B- 1 subject to the following restrictions.
         (A)   The signs may not be HBA signs.
         (B)   The signs are permitted on premises with detached signs.
         (C)   The signs are in addition to all other signs permitted on a
premise.
      (2)   Icon Tower Signs. A maximum of three projecting attached changeable
message signs are permitted on an architectural element (such as a tower) that
is part of a building adjacent to the western edge of an entertainment complex
plaza, subject to the following restrictions:
         (A)   The signs may not be HBA signs.
         (B)   Each sign may not exceed 1,200 square feet in effective area.
         (C)   The signs may not be located more than 150 feet above the base
of the building to which the architectural element is attached.
         (D)   The signs may not project above the architectural element to
which they are attached.
         (E)   The signs may project outward from the architectural element to
which they are attached.
         (F)   All of the signs must be located on the same architectural
element.
      (3)   Icon tower static signs. A maximum of five projecting attached
signs are permitted on an architectural element (such as a tower) that is part
of a building adjacent to the western edge of an entertainment complex plaza,
subject to the following restrictions:
         (A)   The signs may not be HBA signs.
         (B)   Each sign may not exceed 144 square feet in effective area.
         (C)   The signs may not be located more than 170 feet above the base
of the building to which the architectural element is attached.
         (D)   The signs may project above the architectural element to which
they are attached.
         (E)   The signs may project outward from the architectural element to
which they are attached.
         (F)   All of the signs must be located on the same architectural
element.
         (G)   The signs are subject to the limitations on the number of words
or characters in Subsection (b)(2) above.
      (4)   Media Wall Signs. A maximum of eight projecting attached changeable
message signs are permitted on a facade facing an entertainment complex plaza,
subject to the following restrictions:
         (A)   The signs may not be HBA signs.
         (B)   Each sign may not exceed 967 square feet in effective area.
         (C)   The signs may move along the structural framing to which they
are attached and converge to form one or more screens that exceed 967 square
feet in effective area.
         (D)   The signs may not be located more than 85 feet above the base of
the building to which the signs are attached.
         (E)   The signs may project outward from the structural framing or
building to which they are attached.
         (F)   The signs may not project above the building to which they are
attached.
         (G)   No facade may have more than five media wall signs.
         (H)   The signs may be attached to the exterior structural framing of
the building or the building itself.
      (5)   Portal Sign. One projecting attached changeable message sign is
permitted on a building adjacent to the eastern edge of an entertainment
complex plaza, subject to the following restrictions:
         (A)   The sign may not be an HBA sign.
         (B)   The sign may not exceed 2,135 square feet in effective area.
         (C)   The sign may not be located more than 85 feet above the base of
the building to which the sign is attached.
         (D)   The sign must be oriented to the south, southeast, or east.
         (E)   The sign may be attached to one or more facades, so that it
wraps around the building.
         (F)   The sign may be attached to the exterior structural framing of
the building or the building itself.
         (G)   The sign may project outward from the structural framing or
building to which it is attached.
         (H)   The sign may not project above the building to which it is
attached.
      (6)   Ticker sign. Two projecting attached changeable message signs are
permitted on an architectural element that is part of a building adjacent to
the eastern or western edge of an entertainment complex plaza, subject to the
following restrictions:
         (A)   The sign may not be an HBA sign.
         (B)   The sign may not exceed 1,000 square feet in effective area.
         (C)   The sign may not be located more than 40 feet above the base of
the building to which the architectural element is attached.
         (D)   Except as provided in Subparagraph (E), the sign may be attached
to a maximum of two facades, so that it wraps around the building.
         (E)   The sign must be primarily oriented towards either the
entertainment complex plaza or Olive Street.
         (F)   The sign may not project above the building to which the
architectural element is attached.
         (G)   The sign may project outward from the architectural element to
which it is attached.
      (7)   Entertainment complex plaza accent lighting. Facades facing the
entertainment complex plaza may have building accent lighting consisting of LED
or similar technology that changes colors or brightness. All messages are
limited to images, symbols, logos, or words that are associated with district
activities.
   (d)   Additional signs in Subareas B-2 and B-3:
      (1)   Hotel spectacular sign. One non-premise flat attached changeable
message sign is permitted on an architectural element that is part of a
building in Subarea B-2, subject to the following restrictions:
         (A)   The sign may not be an HBA sign.
         (B)   The sign is permitted on a premise with detached signs.
         (C)   The sign is in addition to all other signs permitted on a
premise.
         (D)   The sign may not exceed 1,680 square feet in effective area.
         (E)   The sign may not be located more than 170 feet above the base of
the building to which the architectural element is attached.
         (F)   The sign may not project above the building to which it is
attached.
         (G)   The sign may project outward from the building or architectural
element to which it is attached.
         (H)   The sign must be oriented to the north, northwest, or west.
         (I)   The sign may be attached to one or more facades, so that it
wraps around the building.
         (J)   If a portion of the sign is static, the static portion is
subject to the restrictions on the number of words or characters in Subsection
(b)(2) above.
      (2)   Parking structure screening signs. Attached signs are permitted on
parking structures in Subarea B-3, subject to the following restrictions:
         (A)   Visual display and coverage.
            (i)   The maximum effective area of text may not exceed 20 percent.
The effective area of text is the sum of the areas within minimum imaginary
rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which fully contains a
word.
            (ii)   Multiple displays giving an appearance of multiple signs are
prohibited.
             (iii)   A parking structure screening sign must be at least 10
feet above adjacent average grade.
            (iv)   A parking structure screening sign may be internally or
externally illuminated. If internally illuminated, a parking structure
screening sign may consist of translucent materials, but not transparent
materials. Illumination must be turned off between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Monday through Friday and 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.
            (v)   Minimum permitted effective area of a parking structure
screening sign is 750 square feet.
         (B)   Location and construction.
             (i)   The sign may not be an HBA sign.
            (ii)   A parking structure screening sign may only be located on a
blank wall face or on the facade of a parking structure facing north, west, or
south.
            (iii)   The parking structure must comply with the Dallas Building
Code parking structure ventilation requirements.
            (iv)   No parking structure screening sign may cover any window or
architectural or design feature of the building to which it is attached.
            (v)   A parking structure screening sign may wrap around the edge
of a building if both building facades to which the parking structure screening
sign is attached are eligible facades and the parking structure screening sign
is one continuous image.
   (e)   Permanent detached signs. The only permanent detached signs permitted
in this subdistrict are signs provided for in this subsection.
      (1)   Kiosks. Kiosks are permitted subject to the following regulations:
         (A)   No more than 20 kiosks are permitted in this district.
         (B)   Kiosks within the same block face and within 20 feet of the
right-of-way line of a public street must be spaced at least 50 feet apart.
         (C)   No kiosk may be illuminated by a detached independent external
light source.
         (D)   Kiosks may not be located on sidewalks unless a minimum
unobstructed sidewalk width of 10 feet is maintained. If, however, a greater
unobstructed sidewalk is required in the ordinance establishing Planned
Development District No. 582, then that greater unobstructed sidewalk width
requirement must be maintained.
         (E)   Kiosks must be securely anchored to the ground.
         (F)   No kiosk may exceed ten feet in height, measured from the ground
at the base of the kiosk, or 100 square feet in effective area.
         (G)   Kiosks may display premise or non-premise signs. If the sign
displayed is a non-premise non-changeable message sign or a non-premise non-
digital changeable message sign, 30 percent of the effective area of the sign
must identify a district activity. If the sign displayed is a non-premise
digital changeable message sign, the sign must identify a district activity 30
percent of the time measured on a 24- hour basis.
      (2)   Monument signs. Each premise fronting on a public street or private
access easement may have one monument sign. Premises that have more than 250
feet of frontage along a public street or private access easement, other than
an alley, may have not more than one additional monument sign for each
additional 250 feet of frontage or fraction thereof. No monument sign may
exceed 250 square feet in effective area or 10 feet in height.
      (3)   Water tower sign. One non-premise sign is permitted on a water
tower in this subdistrict subject to the following regulations:
         (A)   The sign is limited to two words.
         (B)   The sign may only identify the name or logo of this district.
         (C)   The sign may not exceed 110 feet in height.
         (D)   The sign must be painted on the water tower.
      (4)   All other detached signs. The following additional detached signs
are permitted:
         (A)   Non-premise detached signs may be located in private access
easements. No such sign may exceed 30 feet in height or have a sign face that
exceeds six feet in height. Each such sign must have a minimum clearance of 14
feet above the ground. Signs permitted under this subparagraph must be spaced
at least 250 feet apart.
         (B)   The owner or operator of a surface parking lot may erect one
non-premise detached sign for each vehicular entrance to the parking lot, and
one additional non-premise detached sign for each 40,000 square feet of parking
surface. Signs permitted under this subparagraph:
            (i)   may not exceed 30 square feet in effective area or 20 feet in
height;
            (ii)   must be spaced at least 100 feet apart; and
            (iii)   must be located at least five feet from the lot line or
public right-of-way line, whichever creates the greater setback.
A minimum of 30 percent of the effective area of each sign must identify a
district activity.
         (C)   Two additional non-premise detached signs are permitted in this
subdistrict subject to the following provisions:
            (i)   No sign may exceed 66 feet in height, measured from the
ground at the base of the sign.
            (ii)   No sign may exceed 1,500 square feet in effective area.
            (iii)   The signs must be spaced 400 feet from each other and if
the sign is an HBA sign, it must be spaced 100 feet from any detached HBA sign.
            (iv)   No sign may be nearer than five feet to the lot line or
public right-of-way line, whichever creates the greater setback.
            (v)   No sign may exceed one foot in width for every three feet in
height, measured from the ground at the base of the sign.
            (vi)   The signs must consist of individual panels. Messages may
only be displayed on the individual panels. Each panel must be separated from
the others by at least one foot of air space, and, except as otherwise
provided, no single panel may have an effective area that exceeds 250 square
feet. One panel of a sign may have an effective area of up to 500 square feet
if: (aa) the panel is an electronic changeable message panel, and (bb) the
message displayed on the panel only identifies district activities.
            (vii)   A minimum of 50 percent of the cumulative effective area of
each sign must identify district activities.
         (D)   One additional non-premise detached sign is permitted in this
subdistrict subject to the following provisions:
            (i)   The sign may not exceed 30 feet in height, measured from the
ground at the base of the sign.
            (ii)   The sign may not exceed 600 square feet in effective area.
            (iii)   If the sign is an HBA sign, the sign must be spaced at
least 200 feet from any other detached HBA sign.
            (iv)   The sign may not be nearer than five feet to the lot line or
public right-of-way line, whichever creates the greater setback.
            (v)   The sign must be located on the same premise as an
entertainment complex use.
            (vi)   A minimum of 70 percent of the sign’s effective area must
identify district activities.
      (5)   Vent stack signs prohibited. Except as provided in this paragraph,
no sign may be located on a vent stack. In Subarea B-2, a vent stack may be
used as a monument sign or monument district identification sign.
   (f)   Temporary signs. The only temporary signs permitted in this
subdistrict are special purpose signs, temporary protective signs, temporary
signs on construction fencing, and “for sale,” “for lease,” “remodeling,” and
“under construction” signs. These temporary signs are in addition to all other
signs permitted in this ordinance.
   (g)   Special purpose signs.
      (1)   Illumination. Special purpose signs may be externally illuminated,
and, except for banners, may be internally illuminated or “back-lighted.”
      (2)   Premise special purpose signs.
         (A)   Attached premise special purpose signs.
            (i)   In general.   An occupancy may have one attached premise
special purpose sign up to four times within any twelve-month period as long as
the sign:
               (aa)   is displayed for no more than 45 days each time during
the twelve-month period; and
               (bb)   has no more than 10 words that contain any character
equal to or exceeding four inches in height.
            (ii)   Entertainment complex plaza.    There is no limit on the
number of attached premise special purpose signs that may be erected on the
facade of a building facing and adjacent to an entertainment complex plaza. No
attached premise special purpose sign may be maintained for more than 45 days
in any given twelve-month period.
         (B)   Detached premise special purpose signs.
            (i)   An occupancy may have a detached premise special purpose sign
no more than three times each calendar year for no more than 38 consecutive
days each time. No detached premise special purpose sign may be erected at an
occupancy during the 30-day period immediately following the removal of a
detached premise special purpose sign from that occupancy.
            (ii)   Detached premise special purpose signs must:
               (aa)   be located at least 100 feet apart;
               (bb)   not exceed eight feet in height; and
               (cc)   not exceed 50 square feet in effective area.
            (iii)   No more than one detached premise special purpose sign may
be erected on each street or private access easement that the premise fronts
on.
      (4)   Non-premise special purpose signs.
         (A)   In general. Non-premise special purpose signs are permitted
subject to the following regulations:
            (i)   Except as provided in Subparagraph (A)(ii) below, non-premise
special purpose signs may only display promotional and welcome messages.
            (ii)   Up to 10 percent of the effective area of a non-premise
special purpose sign may contain commercial advertisement. The name of the
event or activity identified in a promotional message is not considered
commercial advertisement even if the event or activity is named after the
sponsor.
            (iii)   A non-premise special purpose sign may not be erected more
than 30 days before the beginning of the advertised activity or event, and must
be removed no later than 10 days after the activity or event has ended.
            (iv)   The sign hardware for a banner may be left in place between
displays of a banner.
         (B)   Attached non-premise special purpose signs.
            (i)   The only attached non-premise special purpose signs permitted
in this subdistrict are banners.
            (ii)   Banners may be displayed on the facade of a building that is
adjacent to an entertainment complex plaza, except that no portion of a banner
may be located on the facade at a point above 66 feet in height. There is no
limit on the number or size of these banners.
            (iii)   Banners may also be displayed on the facades of buildings
that are not adjacent to an entertainment complex plaza, except that no portion
of a banner may be located on the facade at a point above 36 feet in height. No
banner may exceed 200 square feet in effective area, and all banners must be
spaced at least 100 feet apart.
         (C)   Detached non-premise special purpose signs. The only detached
non-premise special purpose signs permitted in this subdistrict are as follows:
            (i)   Banners on street light poles. Banners are permitted on
street light poles as long as the banners and their hardware:
               (aa)   Meet the sign construction and design standards contained
in the Dallas Building Code;
               (bb)   are at least 12 feet above grade, unless they overhang a
roadway, in which case they must be at least 15 feet above grade;
               (cc)   do not project more than three feet from the pole on
which they are mounted;
               (dd)   do not exceed 50 square feet in effective area; and
               (ee)   are made out of weather-resistant and rustproof material.
            (ii)   Other banners crossing the public way. Banners may be
displayed over and across the public way. No portion of a banner may be located
more than 35 feet above grade, or less than 14 feet above any street, sidewalk,
or other pedestrian area. The height of a sign face may not exceed six feet.
All banners must be spaced at least 100 feet apart.
            (iii)   Other signs located in the right-of-way. Signs may be
displayed on any public sidewalk or other public pedestrian area if an
unobstructed 10-foot sidewalk or pedestrian walkway area is maintained. No sign
may exceed an effective area of 50 square feet, or a height of 10 feet. No more
than one sign is permitted per blockface.
   (h)   Other temporary signs.
      (1)   Temporary protective signs. In addition to the other protective
signs permitted under Section
51A-7.1718, temporary protective signs may be erected anywhere on a
construction site at anytime during construction. There is no limit on the
number of these signs, but no sign may exceed 20 square feet in effective area
or eight feet in height. Temporary protective signs may be illuminated, but no
lighting source may project more than three inches from the vertical surface
of, or six inches above the top of, the sign. All temporary protective signs
must be removed upon completion of the construction.
      (2)   Temporary signs on construction fencing. Temporary signs may be
erected on construction fencing subject to the following provisions:
         (A)   The signs must be spaced at least 50 feet apart.
         (B)   No sign may exceed 128 square feet in effective area or eight
feet in height.
         (C)   No sign may project more than three inches from the vertical
surface of, or six inches above the top of, the fence.
         (D)   The signs may be illuminated.
         (E)   The signs may only identify the project under construction and
its owners, developers, future tenants, lenders, architects, engineers, project
consultants, and contractors.
         (F)   The signs must be removed upon completion of the construction.
      (3)   “For Sale,” “For Lease,” “Remodeling,” and “Under Construction”
signs. Signs that relate exclusively to the sale, lease, construction, or
remodeling of the premises on which they are located are permitted. There is no
limit to the number of attached signs permitted. Detached signs are limited to
one for each 100 feet of frontage on a public street or private access
easement. If attached to a window, the maximum effective area of the sign is 16
square feet; if attached to other portions of a facade, the maximum effective
area is 32 square feet. No detached sign may exceed 128 square feet in
effective area or 16 feet in height.
   (i)   Illuminated Projection Signs. A maximum of five non-premise signs
created by the projection of light onto an entertainment complex plaza adjacent
to an entertainment complex are permitted. The projection of light may
originate from a premise other than the premise upon which the light is cast.
These illuminated projection signs are in additional to all other signs
permitted on a premise. The signs may not be HBA signs. (Ord. Nos. 24348;
25918; 30043)
SEC. 51A-7.1728.   SIGN REGULATIONS FOR SUBDISTRICT C (EXPRESSWAY ADJACENCY
SUBDISTRICT).
   (a)   Permanent attached signs. The only permanent attached signs permitted
in this subdistrict are signs provided for in this subsection.
      (1)   Number of permitted signs.
         (A)   Each premise or non-residential occupancy is entitled to one
attached sign per facade.
         (B)   In addition to the signs permitted in Subparagraph (A), the
following flat attached non-premise signs are permitted on expressway-facing
facades in this subdistrict:
            (i)   On three expressway-facing facades, two non-premise signs
with a maximum number of 10 words each, regardless of the size of any character
in the word, are permitted. No sign may exceed 672 square feet in effective
area or be a changeable message sign. One of the two signs on each facade is
limited to advertising district activities.
            (ii)   In lieu of one of the three facades permitted attached non-
premise signs in Subparagraph (i) above and one 1,500-square-foot detached non-
premise sign permitted in Subsection (b) of this section, one expressway-facing
facade may have an unlimited number of non-premise signs. The cumulative
effective area of all non-premise signs on that facade, however, may not exceed
22 percent of the area of the building facade below 66 feet in height. There is
no limit on the number of words permitted on a sign. Only one marquee sign and
one other changeable message sign, not to exceed 500 square feet in effective
area, are permitted on that facade. These signs are limited to advertising
district activities.
            (iii)   For purposes of calculating the maximum effective area of a
non-premise attached sign in this subdistrict, the building official shall draw
a minimum imaginary rectangle of vertical and horizontal lines around all
extremities of the attached non-premise sign. The area within the minimum
imaginary rectangle is the effective area of the sign.
         (C)   In addition to the signs permitted in Subparagraphs (A) and (B),
a non-residential occupancy wholly located within Subarea C-1 is entitled to
one additional attached sign per facade, up to a maximum of two signs per
facade. For a facade located partially within Subarea C-1 and partially outside
of Subarea C-1, the maximum number of attached premise signs per non-
residential occupancy located on that part of the facade located within Subarea
C-1 is two, limited to four attached premise signs total for the entire facade.
      (2)   Number of words or characters generally.
         (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph or in Paragraph
(1), no person may erect a sign which contains more than 10 words consisting of
any characters of a height equal to or exceeding four inches on any building
facade. Words consisting of characters less than four inches in height may be
used without limit.
         (B)   There is no limit as to the number of words containing
characters of a height equal to or exceeding four inches on a marquee or other
changeable message sign.
      (3)   Premise and non-premise signs. Except for the attached non-premise
signs permitted in Paragraph (1), all attached permanent signs in this
subdistrict must be premise signs or convey a noncommercial message.
      (4)   Effective area limitations for certain attached signs.
         (A)   Except as provided in Subsection (a)(1)(B)(ii) of this section
or as further restricted below, the maximum effective area of a changeable
message sign is 1,000 square feet.
         (B)   The maximum effective area of a marquee sign is 250 square feet.
         (C)   The maximum effective area of an awning or canopy sign is 150
square feet.
         (D)   There is no maximum effective area for a parapet sign.
         (E)   The maximum effective area for all other projecting attached
signs is 20 square feet.
      (5)   Cumulative effective area limitations for all attached signs.
         (A)   Except as provided in Subparagraph (B), the cumulative effective
area of all permanent attached signs on an expressway-facing facade may not
exceed 22 percent of the total area of the facade.
         (B)   The cumulative effective area of all permanent attached signs on
the expressway-facing facade that is permitted to have an unlimited number of
non-premise attached signs pursuant to Subsection (a)(1)(B)(ii) may not exceed
32 percent of the total area of the facade.
         (C)   The cumulative effective area of all permanent attached signs on
a facade that does not face an expressway may not exceed 20 percent of the
total area of the facade.
      (6)   Spacing of attached non-premise signs. HBA signs on a facade must
be spaced a minimum of 1000 feet from all HBA signs on another facade. There
are no spacing requirements for HBA signs on the same facade.
      (7)   Signs overhanging or projecting into the public right-of-way.
         (A)   Attached signs overhanging the public right-of-way are permitted
as long as each sign is a minimum of 10 feet above the sidewalk grade.
         (B)   No portion of a marquee sign may:
            (i)   project more than eight feet into the public right-of-way; or
            (ii)   be located less than two feet from the back of a street
curb.
         (C)   For all other projecting attached signs, no portion of the signs
may:
            (i)   project more than four feet into the public right-of-way; or
            (ii)   be located less than two feet from the back of the street
curb.
      (8)   Parapet signs. Parapet signs are permitted in this subdistrict. No
parapet sign may project more than four feet above the edge of the roof,
regardless of whether the sign is attached to a parapet wall or the roof’s
edge.
      (9)   Roof signs. Roof signs are prohibited in this subdistrict.
      (10)   No limitation on projecting attached signs. Projecting attached
signs are permitted on premises with detached signs.
      (11)   Limitations on changeable message signs.
         (A)   A premise is entitled to only one marquee sign per facade,
except that one additional marquee sign is permitted on that facade if the
width of the facade is more than 300 feet.
         (B)   A premise is entitled to two additional changeable message signs
per facade as long as the signs are not marquee signs.
         (C)   No portion of a changeable message sign may be located at a
point on the facade above 66 feet in height.
      (12)   Location limitation on projecting attached signs. Except for a
parapet sign, no portion of a projecting attached sign may be located at a
point on the facade above 66 feet in height.
      (13)   Location limitation on non-premise signs. No portion of a non-
premise sign may be located at a point on the facade above 66 feet in height.
      (14)   Signs projecting over the roof line. Except for a parapet sign, no
attached sign may project over a building.
   (b)   Permanent detached signs. The only permanent detached signs permitted
in this subdistrict are signs provided for in this subsection.
      (1)   Kiosks. Kiosks are permitted subject to the following regulations:
         (A)   No more than 20 kiosks are permitted in this district.
         (B)   Kiosks within the same block face and within 20 feet of the
right-of-way line of a public street must be spaced at least 50 feet apart.
         (C)   No kiosk may be illuminated by a detached, independent external
light source.
         (D)   Kiosks may not be located on sidewalks unless a minimum
unobstructed sidewalk width of 10 feet is maintained. If, however, a greater
unobstructed sidewalk is required in the ordinance establishing Planned
Development District No. 582, then that greater unobstructed sidewalk width
requirement must be maintained.
         (E)   Kiosks must be securely anchored to the ground.
         (F)   No kiosk may exceed ten feet in height, measured from the ground
at the base of the kiosk, or 100 square feet in effective area.
         (G)   Kiosks may display premise or non-premise signs. If the sign
displayed is a non-premise non-changeable message sign or a non-premise non-
digital changeable message sign, 30 percent of the effective area of the sign
must identify a district activity. If the sign displayed is a non-premise
digital changeable message sign, the sign must identify a district activity 30
percent of the time measured on a 24- hour basis.
      (2)   Monument signs. Each premise fronting on a public street or private
access easement may have one monument sign. Premises which have more than 250
feet of frontage along a public street or private access easement, other than
an alley, may have not more than one additional monument sign for each
additional 250 feet of frontage or fraction thereof. No monument sign may
exceed 250 square feet in effective area or 10 feet in height.
      (3)   All other detached signs. The following additional detached signs
are permitted:
         (A)   Non-premise detached signs may be located in private access
easements. No such sign may exceed 30 feet in height or have a sign face that
exceeds six feet in height. Each such sign must have a minimum clearance of 14
feet above the ground. Signs permitted under this subparagraph must be spaced
at least 250 feet apart.
         (B)   The owner or operator of a surface parking lot may erect one
non-premise detached sign for each vehicular entrance to the parking lot, and
one additional premise or non-premise detached sign for each 40,000 square feet
of parking surface. Signs permitted under this subparagraph:
            (i)   may not exceed 20 square feet in effective area or 20 feet in
height;
            (ii)   must be spaced at least 100 feet apart; and
            (iii)   must be located at least five feet from the lot line or
public right-of-way line, whichever creates the greater setback.
A minimum of 30 percent of the effective area of each sign must identify a
district activity.
         (C)   Two additional non-premise detached signs are permitted in this
subdistrict subject to the following provisions:
            (i)   No sign may exceed 66 feet in height, measured from the
ground at the base of the sign.
            (ii)   No sign may exceed 1,500 square feet in effective area.
            (iii)   The signs must be spaced at least 1,500 feet from each
other and at least 100 feet from any detached HBA sign.
            (iv)   No sign may be nearer than five feet to the lot line or
public right-of-way line, whichever creates the greater setback.
            (v)   No sign may exceed one foot in width for every three feet in
height, measured from the ground at the base of the sign.
            (vi)   The signs must consist of individual panels. Messages may
only be displayed on the individual panels. Each panel must be separated from
the others by at least one foot of air space, and except as otherwise provided,
no single panel may have an effective area that exceeds 250 square feet. One
panel of a sign may have an effective area of up to 500 square feet if: (aa)
the panel is an electronic changeable message panel, and (bb) the message
displayed on the panel only identifies district activities.
            (vii) A minimum of 50 percent of the cumulative effective area of
each sign must identify district activities.
      (4)   Vent stack signs prohibited. No sign may be located on a vent stack
in this subdistrict.
   (c)   Temporary signs. The only temporary signs permitted in this
subdistrict are special purpose signs, temporary protective signs, temporary
signs on construction fencing, and “for sale,” “for lease,” “remodeling,” and
“under construction” signs. These temporary signs are in addition to all other
signs permitted in this ordinance.
   (d)   Special purpose signs.
      (1)   Illumination. Special purpose signs may be externally illuminated,
and, except for banners, may be internally illuminated or “back-lighted.”
      (2)   Premise special purpose signs.
         (A)   Attached premise special purpose signs. An occupancy may have
one attached premise special purpose sign up to four times within any twelve-
month period as long as the sign:
            (i)   is displayed for no more than 45 days each time during the
twelve-month period; and
            (ii)   has no more than 10 words that contain any character equal
to or exceeding four inches in height.
         (B)   Detached premise special purpose signs.
            (i)   An occupancy may have a detached premise special purpose sign
no more than three times each calendar year for no more than 38 consecutive
days each time. No detached premise special purpose sign may be erected at an
occupancy during the 30-day period immediately following the removal of a
detached premise special purpose sign from that occupancy.
            (ii)   Detached premise special purpose signs must:
               (aa)   be located at least 100 feet apart;
               (bb)   not exceed eight feet in height; and
               (cc)   not exceed 50 square feet in effective area.
            (iii)   No more than one detached premise special purpose sign may
be erected on each street or private access easement that the premise fronts
on.
      (4)   Non-premise special purpose signs.
         (A)   In general. Non-premise special purpose signs are permitted
subject to the following regulations:
            (i)   Except as provided below, non-premise special purpose signs
may only display promotional and welcome messages.
            (ii)   Up to 10 percent of the effective area of a non-premise
special purpose sign may contain commercial advertisement. The name of the
event or activity identified in a promotional message is not considered
commercial advertisement even if the event or activity is named after the
sponsor.
            (iii)   A non-premise special purpose sign may not be erected more
than 30 days before the beginning of the advertised activity or event, and must
be removed no later than 10 days after the activity or event has ended.
            (iv)   The sign hardware for a banner may be left in place between
displays of a banner.
         (B)   Attached non-premise special purpose signs. Attached non-premise
special purpose signs are prohibited in this subdistrict.
         (C)   Detached non-premise special purpose signs. The only detached
non-premise special purpose signs permitted in this subdistrict are as follows:
            (i)   Banners on street light poles. Banners are permitted on
street light poles as long as the banners and their hardware:
               (aa)   meet the sign construction and design standards contained
in the Dallas Building Code;
               (bb)   are at least 12 feet above grade, unless they overhang a
roadway, in which case they must be at least 15 feet above grade;
               (cc)   do not project more than three feet from the pole on
which they are mounted;
               (dd)   do not exceed 50 square feet in effective area; and
               (ee)   are made out of weather-resistant and rustproof material.
            (ii)   Other banners crossing the public way. Banners may be
displayed over and across the public way. No portion of a banner may be located
more than 35 feet above grade, or less than 14 feet above any street, sidewalk,
or other pedestrian area. The height of a sign face may not exceed six feet.
All banners must be spaced at least 100 feet apart.
   (e)   Other temporary signs.
      (1)   Temporary protective signs. In addition to the other protective
signs permitted under Section
51A-7.1718, temporary protective signs may be erected anywhere on a
construction site at anytime during construction. There is no limit on the
number of these signs, but no sign may exceed 20 square feet in effective area
or eight feet in height. Temporary protective signs may be illuminated, but no
lighting source may project more than three inches from the vertical surface
of, or six inches above the top of, the sign. All temporary protective signs
must be removed upon completion of the construction.
      (2)   Temporary signs on construction fencing. Temporary signs may be
erected on construction fencing subject to the following provisions:
         (A)   The signs must be spaced at least 50 feet apart.
         (B)   No sign may exceed 128 square feet in effective area or eight
feet in height.
         (C)   No sign may project more than three inches from the vertical
surface of, or six inches above the top of, the fence.
         (D)   The signs may be illuminated.
         (E)   The signs may only identify the project under construction and
its owners, developers, future tenants, lenders, architects, engineers, project
consultants, and contractors.
         (F)   The signs must be removed upon completion of the construction.
      (3)   “For Sale,” “For Lease,” “Remodeling,” and “Under Construction”
signs. Signs that relate exclusively to the sale, lease, construction, or
remodeling of the premises on which they are located are permitted. There is no
limit to the number of attached signs permitted. Detached signs are limited to
one for each 100 feet of frontage on a public street or private access
easement. If attached to a window, the maximum effective area of the sign is 16
square feet; if attached to other portions of a facade, the maximum effective
area is 32 square feet. No detached sign may exceed 128 square feet in
effective area or 16 feet in height. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918; 31410)
SEC. 51A-7.1729.   SIGN REGULATIONS FOR SUBDISTRICT D (OFFICE AND RESIDENTIAL
SUBDISTRICT).
   (a)   Permanent attached signs. The only permanent attached signs permitted
in this subdistrict are signs provided for in this subsection.
      (1)   Number of permitted signs.
         (A)   Except as provided in this paragraph, each premise or non-
residential occupancy is entitled to one attached sign per facade.
         (B)   In addition to the signs allowed in Subparagraph (A), each non-
residential occupancy located wholly within Subarea D-2 is allowed:
            (i)   one projecting attached sign per facade;
            (ii)   one marquee sign, canopy sign, or awning sign per facade;
and
            (iii)   one additional attached sign per facade.
         (C)   For a facade located partially within Subarea D-2 and partially
outside of Subarea D-2:
            (i)   The maximum number of attached premise signs per non-
residential occupancy located on that part of the facade located within Subarea
D-2 is four, limited to four attached premise signs total for the entire
facade.
            (ii)   The maximum total number of attached premise signs per non-
residential occupancy on a facade wholly or partially located in Subarea D-2 is
four.
      (2)   Number of words or characters.
          (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, no person may
erect a sign which contains more than 10 words consisting of any characters of
a height equal to or exceeding four inches on any building facade. Words
consisting of characters less than four inches in height may be used without
limit.
          (B)   There is no limit as to the number of words containing
characters of a height equal to or exceeding four inches on a marquee or other
changeable message sign.
       (3)   Premise and non-premise signs. All attached permanent signs in
this subdistrict must be premise signs or convey a noncommercial message.
      (4)   Effective area limitations for certain attached signs.
         (A)   With the exception of a marquee sign, the maximum effective area
of a changeable message sign is 1,000 square feet.
         (B)   The maximum effective area of a marquee sign is 250 square feet.
         (C)   The maximum effective area of an awning or canopy sign is 150
square feet.
         (D)   There is no maximum effective area for a parapet sign.
         (E)   The maximum effective area for a roof sign is 800 square feet.
         (F)   The maximum effective area for all other projecting attached
signs is 250 square feet.
      (5)   Cumulative effective area limitations for all attached signs. The
cumulative effective area of all permanent attached signs on a building facade
may not exceed 20 percent of the total area of the building facade on which the
signs are located.
      (6)   Signs overhanging or projecting into the public right-of-way.
         (A)   Attached signs overhanging the public right-of-way are permitted
as long as each sign is a minimum of 10 feet above the sidewalk grade.
         (B)   No portion of a marquee sign may:
            (i)   project more than eight feet into the public right-of-way; or
            (ii)   be located less than two feet from the back of a street
curb.
         (C)   For all other projecting attached signs, no portion of the signs
may:
            (i)   project more than four feet into the public right-of-way; or
            (ii)   be located less than two feet from the back of the street
curb.
      (7)   Parapet signs. Parapet signs are permitted in this subdistrict. No
parapet sign may project more than four feet above the edge of the roof,
regardless of whether the sign is attached to a parapet wall or the roof's
edge.
      (8)   Roof signs. A maximum of two roof signs are permitted in Subarea D-
2 only.
         (A)   A roof sign may only be erected on the roof of a main building.
         (B)   One roof sign per building is permitted.
         (C)   Roof signs may not exceed a height of 30 feet above the building
or one-third of the building height, whichever is less, measured from the
highest point of the roofline of the building upon which the sign is attached.
         (D)   The support for a roof sign must be constructed of open, exposed
metal framing. The metal must be painted or coated, or be composed of a
material that will not rust or corrode.
         (E)   A roof sign may not be a changeable message sign.
      (9)   No limitation on projecting attached signs. Projecting attached
signs are permitted on premises with detached signs.
      (10)   Limitation on changeable message signs.
         (A)   A premise is entitled to only one marquee sign per facade,
except that one additional marquee sign is permitted on that facade if the
width of the facade is more than 300 feet.
         (B)   A premise is entitled to two additional changeable message signs
per facade as long as the signs are not marquee signs.
         (C)   No portion of a changeable message sign is permitted at a point
on the facade above 66 feet in height.
          (11)   Signs projecting over the roof line. A projecting attached
sign, other than a roof sign in Subarea D-2, may project up to a maximum of
five feet above a building. No changeable message sign may project above a
building.
   (b)   Permanent detached signs. The only permanent detached signs permitted
in this subdistrict are signs provided for in this subsection.
      (1)   Kiosks. Kiosks are permitted subject to the following regulations:
         (A)   No more than 20 kiosks are permitted in this district.
         (B)   Kiosks within the same block face and within 20 feet of the
right- of-way line of a public street must be spaced at least 50 feet apart.
         (C)   No kiosk may be illuminated by a detached independent external
light source.
         (D)   Kiosks may not be located on sidewalks unless a minimum
unobstructed sidewalk width of 10 feet is maintained. If, however, a greater
unobstructed sidewalk is required in the ordinance establishing Planned
Development District No. 582, then that greater unobstructed sidewalk width
requirement must be maintained.
         (E)   Kiosks must be securely anchored to the ground.
         (F)   No kiosk may exceed ten feet in height, measured from the ground
at the base of the kiosk, or 100 square feet in effective area.
         (G)   Kiosks may display premise or non-premise signs. If the sign
displayed is a non-premise non-changeable message sign or a non-premise non-
digital changeable message sign, 30 percent of the effective area of the sign
must identify a district activity. If the sign displayed is a non-premise
digital changeable message sign, the sign must identify a district activity 30
percent of the time measured on a 24-hour basis.
      (2)   Monument signs. Each premise fronting on a public street or private
access easement may have one monument sign. Premises which have more than 250
feet of frontage along a public street or private access easement, other than
an alley, may have not more than one additional monument sign for each
additional 250 feet of frontage or fraction thereof. No monument sign may
exceed 250 square feet in effective area or 10 feet in height.
      (3)   All other detached signs. The following additional detached signs
are permitted:
         (A)   Non-premise detached signs may be located in private access
easements. No such sign may exceed 30 feet in height or have a sign face that
exceeds six feet in height. Each such sign must have a minimum clearance of 14
feet above the ground. Signs permitted under this subparagraph must be spaced
at least 250 feet apart.
         (B)   The owner or operator of a parking lot or parking garage
(regardless of whether the parking garage stands alone or is part of a building
that houses another use) may erect one non-premise detached sign in Subarea D-
2 only, which may be a changeable message sign for each vehicular entrance to
the parking lot or parking garage, and one additional non-premise detached sign
for each 40,000 square feet of parking surface. Signs permitted under this
subparagraph:
            (i)   may not exceed 30 square feet in effective area or 20 feet in
height;
            (ii)   must be spaced at least 100 feet apart; and
            (iii)   must be located at least five feet from the lot line or
public right-of-way line, whichever creates the greater setback.
A minimum of 30 percent of the effective area of each sign must identify a
district activity.
      (4)   Vent stack signs prohibited. No sign may be located on a vent stack
in this subdistrict.
   (c)   Temporary signs. The only temporary signs permitted in this
subdistrict are special purpose signs, temporary protective signs, temporary
signs on construction fencing, and “for sale,” “for lease,” “remodeling,” and
“under construction” signs. These temporary signs are in addition to all other
signs permitted in this ordinance.
   (d)   Special purpose signs.
      (1)   Illumination. Special purpose signs may be externally illuminated,
and, except for banners, may be internally illuminated or “back-lighted.”
      (2)   Premise special purpose signs.
         (A)   Attached premise special purpose signs. An occupancy may have
one attached premise special purpose sign up to four times within any twelve-
month period as long as the sign:
            (i)   is displayed for no more than 45 days each time during the
twelve-month period; and
            (ii)   has no more than 10 words that contain any character equal
to or exceeding four inches in height.
         (B)   Detached premise special purpose signs.
            (i)   An occupancy may have a detached premise special purpose sign
no more than three times each calendar year for no more than 38 consecutive
days each time. No detached premise special purpose sign may be erected at an
occupancy during the 30-day period immediately following the removal of a
detached premise special purpose sign from that occupancy.
            (ii)   Detached premise special purpose signs must:
               (aa)   be located at least 100 feet apart;
               (bb)   not exceed eight feet in height; and
               (cc)   not exceed 50 square feet in effective area.
            (iii)   No more than one detached premise special purpose sign may
be erected on each street or private access easement that the premise fronts
on.
      (4)   Non-premise special purpose signs.
         (A)   In general. Non- premise special purpose signs are permitted
subject to the following regulations:
            (i)   Except as provided below, non-premise special purpose signs
may only display promotional and welcome messages.
            (ii)   Up to 10 percent of the effective area of a non-premise
special purpose sign may contain commercial advertisement. The name of the
event or activity identified in a promotional message is not considered
commercial advertisement even if the event or activity is named after the
sponsor.
            (iii)   A non- premise special purpose sign may not be erected more
than 30 days before the beginning of the advertised activity or event, and must
be removed no later than 10 days after the activity or event has ended.
            (iv)   The sign hardware for a banner may be left in place between
displays of a banner.
         (B)   Attached non- premise special purpose signs. Attached non-
premise special purpose signs are prohibited in this subdistrict.
         (C)   Detached non- premise special purpose signs. The only detached
non-premise special purpose signs permitted in this subdistrict are as follows:
            (i)   Banners on street light poles. Banners are permitted on
street light poles as long as the banners and their hardware:
               (aa)    meet the sign construction and design standards
contained in the Dallas Building Code;
               (bb)   are at least 12 feet above grade, unless they overhang a
roadway, in which case they must be at least 15 feet above grade;
               (cc)   do not project more than three feet from the pole on
which they are mounted;
               (dd)   do not exceed 50 square feet in effective area; and
               (ee)   are made out of weather-resistant and rustproof material.
            (ii)   Other banners crossing the public way. Banners may be
displayed over and across the public way. No portion of a banner may be located
more than 35 feet above grade, or less than 14 feet above any street, sidewalk,
or other pedestrian area. The height of a sign face may not exceed six feet.
All banners must be spaced at least 100 feet apart.
   (e)   Other temporary signs.
      (1)   Temporary protective signs. In addition to the other protective
signs permitted under Section 51A-7.1718, temporary protective signs may be
erected anywhere on a construction site at anytime during construction. There
is no limit on the number of these signs, but no sign may exceed 20 square feet
in effective area or eight feet in height. Temporary protective signs may be
illuminated, but no lighting source may project more than three inches from the
vertical surface of, or six inches above the top of, the sign. All temporary
protective signs must be removed upon completion of the construction.
      (2)   Temporary signs on construction fencing. Temporary signs may be
erected on construction fencing subject to the following provisions:
         (A)   The signs must be spaced at least 50 feet apart.
         (B)   No sign may exceed 128 square feet in effective area or eight
feet in height.
         (C)   No sign may project more than three inches from the vertical
surface of, or six inches above the top of, the fence.
         (D)   The signs may be illuminated.
         (E)   The signs may only identify the project under construction and
its owners, developers, future tenants, lenders, architects, engineers, project
consultants, and contractors.
         (F)   The signs must be removed upon completion of the construction.
      (3)   “For Sale,” “For Lease,” “Remodeling,” and “Under Construction”
signs. Signs that relate exclusively to the sale, lease, construction, or
remodeling of the premises on which they are located are permitted. There is no
limit to the number of attached signs permitted. Detached signs are limited to
one for each 100 feet of frontage on a public street or private access
easement. If attached to a window, the maximum effective area of the sign is 16
square feet; if attached to other portions of a facade, the maximum effective
area is 32 square feet. No detached sign may exceed 128 square feet in
effective area or 16 feet in height.
   (f)   Additional signs in Subarea D-1: Parking structure screening signs.
      (1)   Visual display and coverage.
         (A)   The maximum effective area of text may not exceed 20 percent.
The effective area of text is the sum of the areas within minimum imaginary
rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which fully contains a
word.
         (B)   Multiple displays giving an appearance of multiple signs are
prohibited.
         (C)   A parking structure screening sign must be at least 10 feet
above adjacent average grade.
         (D)   A parking structure screening sign may be internally or
externally illuminated. If internally illuminated, a parking structure
screening sign may consist of translucent materials, but not transparent
materials. Illumination must be turned off between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Monday through Friday and 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.
         (E)   Minimum permitted effective area of a parking structure
screening sign is 750 square feet.
      (2)   Location and construction.
         (A)   The sign may not be an HBA sign.
         (B)   A parking structure screening sign may only be located on a
blank wall face or on the facade of a parking structure facing north, east, or
south.
         (C)   The parking structure must comply with the Dallas Building Code
parking structure ventilation requirements.
         (D)   No parking structure screening sign may cover any window or
architectural or design feature of the building to which it is attached.
         (E)   A parking structure screening sign may wrap around the edge of a
building if both building facades to which the parking structure screening sign
is attached are otherwise eligible facades and the parking structure screening
sign is one continuous image. (Ord. Nos. 24348; 25918; 30043; 31410)
SEC. 51A-7.1730.   NON-CONFORMANCE AND BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AUTHORITY.
   (a)   Purpose of section. It is the declared purpose of this division that,
in time, all privately owned signs shall either conform to the provisions of
this division or be removed. By the passage of this ordinance and its
amendments, no presently illegal sign shall be deemed to have been legalized
unless such sign complies with all current standards under the terms of this
ordinance and all other ordinances of the city of Dallas. Any sign which does
not conform to all provisions of this ordinance shall be a nonconforming sign
if it legally existed as a conforming or nonconforming sign under prior
ordinances; or an illegal sign if it did not exist as a conforming or
nonconforming sign, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared
purpose of this ordinance that this division, and not the provisions of
Article IV, shall exclusively govern how non-conforming signs in this district
are treated. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this ordinance
that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either
civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time this ordinance was adopted shall
be discharged or affected by such passage, but prosecutions and suits for such
offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted, and causes
presently pending may proceed.
   (b)   Removal and maintenance of certain non-conforming signs.
      (1)   A sign erected without a permit, either prior to or after the
adoption of this division, is an illegal sign if a permit was required for its
erection according to the law in effect at the time the sign was erected. It
shall be unlawful to maintain any illegal sign. It is a defense to prosecution
under this subsection if the sign has been made to comply with the provisions
of this division so that a permit may be issued.
      (2)   No person may repair a nonconforming sign if the cost of repair is
more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the
same location, unless that sign is brought into conformity with this chapter.
No person may alter or repair a nonconforming sign where the effect of such
repair shall be to enlarge or increase the structure of the nonconforming sign.
For purposes of this section, mono-pole, metal, and wood are each an example of
a “type” of sign and the term “repair” does not include maintenance or changes
of words or other content on the face of a sign.
   (c)   Board of Adjustment authority.
      (1)   The board of adjustment may, in specific cases, take the following
actions and authorize the following special exceptions with respect to the
provisions of this division.
      (2)   The board of adjustment may waive any filing fee for an appeal
under this division when the board finds that payment of the fee would result
in substantial financial hardship to the applicant. The applicant may either
pay the fee and request reimbursement as part of his appeal or request that the
matter be placed on the board’s miscellaneous docket for predetermination. If
the matter is placed on the miscellaneous docket, the applicant may not file
his appeal until the merits of the request for waiver have been determined by
the board.
      (3)   The board of adjustment may hear and decide appeals that allege
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
building inspection division in the enforcement of this division.
      (4)   The board of adjustment may require a nonconforming sign to be
brought into immediate conformity with all current standards of all ordinances
of the city, or to be removed when, from the evidence presented, the board
finds the sign to be hazardous to the public or to have been abandoned by its
owners.
      (5)   Where a permit was required for a sign’s erection according to the
law in effect at the time the sign was erected and where the building
inspection division finds no record of a permit being issued, the board of
adjustment may authorize the issuance of a replacement permit when, from the
evidence presented, the board finds either that a permit was issued or that
arrangements were made with a sign company to obtain the permit.
   (d)   Determination of non-commercial message.
      (1)   Findings. The city council finds that it may be necessary in the
enforcement of this division to determine whether the message displayed upon a
sign is a commercial message or a noncommercial message.
      (2)   Hearing. If a person receives a notice of violation or is cited for
maintaining an illegal sign, and the person notifies the city attorney in
writing within 10 days of receiving the notice or citation that he believes the
sign displays a noncommercial message and is, therefore, not in violation of
this division, the city attorney shall postpone prosecution of the case and
shall have the matter placed on the agenda of the board of adjustment for
appeal under Section
51A-7.1730(c)(3) of this section. The board shall give the person maintaining
the sign 10 days written notice of a public hearing on the matter. After
hearing the evidence, the board shall decide whether the message displayed on
the sign is commercial or noncommercial. No fee may be charged for this appeal.
      (3)   Judicial Review. If the board decides that the message is
commercial and that the sign is illegal, the person maintaining the sign may
within 10 days of the board’s decision file a notice of nonacceptance of the
decision with the city attorney. Within three days after receiving notice of
nonacceptance, the city attorney shall initiate suit in the district court for
determination that the sign is commercial and for an injunction to prohibit
display of the sign in violation of this article. The city shall bear the
burden of showing that the sign is commercial. In computing the three-day time
period, Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays are excluded. (Ord. Nos. 24348;
25918)
SEC. 51A-7.1731.   RELOCATION OF NON- PREMISE SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   Non-premise signs located outside of this district and located on or
overhanging a parcel of land owned or acquired by a governmental entity may not
be relocated within this district. (Ord. 25918)
Division 51A-7.1800. Provisions for Southside Entertainment Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.1801.   DESIGNATION OF SOUTHSIDE ENTERTAINMENT SIGN DISTRICT.
   (a)   A special provision sign district is hereby created to be known as the
Southside Entertainment Sign District. For purposes of this article, the
boundaries of the Southside Entertainment Sign District are that portion of
Planned Development District No. 317 (the Cedars Special Purpose District),
that is enclosed between the centerlines of Interstate Highway 30, the Dallas
Area Rapid Transit right-of-way, Belleview Road, and the MK&T railroad right-
of-way.
   (b)   This division incorporates by reference the provisions of Divisions
51A-7.100 through
51A-7.800 of
CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF THE DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE,” as that division exists
today and as it may be amended in the future. In the event of a conflict
between the provisions of this division and Divisions
51A-7.100 through
51A-7.800, this division controls.
   (c)   Any portion of the property described in Subsection (a) that was
formerly part of the Downtown Special Provision Sign District is no longer
considered to be part of that district. This division completely supersedes
Division
51A-7.900 with respect to the property described in Subsection (a). (Ord.
24760)
SEC. 51A-7.1802.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of these sign regulations is to regulate the construction
of new signs and the alteration of existing signs to promote economic growth in
this district as an entertainment district.
   (b)   These sign regulations have been developed to achieve the following
objectives in this district:
      (1)   To create a vibrant entertainment environment while ensuring that
signage does not obscure architecturally significant features of the buildings
in this district.
      (2)   To help create an aesthetically pleasing environment that promotes
economic growth in this district. (Ord. 24760)
SEC. 51A-7.1803.   DEFINITIONS.
      (1)   ARCADE SIGN means a sign that is mounted under a canopy or awning
and is perpendicular to the building to which the canopy or awning is attached.
This sign is intended to be read from the pedestrian walkway that the canopy or
awning covers.
      (2)   AREA INFORMATION SIGN means a sign providing information about any
of the following:
         (A)   The name, trade name, or logo of the owner or occupant of any
premise within this district.
         (B)   The identification of any premise within this district.
         (C)   Any accommodations, services or activities offered, or
conducted, other than incidentally, on any premise within this district.
         (D)   The sale, lease, or construction of any premise within this
district.
      (3)   ATTACHED SIGN means a sign that is attached to, applied on, or
supported by: any part of a building (such as a wall, parapet, roof, window,
canopy, awning, arcade, or marquee) that encloses or covers usable space;
mounted antennas; water reservoirs on buildings; chimneys; or visual screens
that surround roof-mounted equipment.
      (4)   AWNING means a fabric or vinyl surface supported by a metal (or
other similarly strong material) structure, which is applied to the face of a
building.
      (5)   AWNING SIGN means a sign attached to, painted on, or otherwise
applied to an awning.
      (6)   BANNER means a sign applied on a strip of cloth, vinyl, or similar
material and attached to a building or structure. Awning, canopy signs, and
flags are not banners.
      (7)   CANOPY means a permanent, non-fabric architectural element
projecting from the face of a building.
      (8)   CANOPY SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by a
canopy, with no changeable message area.
      (9)   CHANGEABLE MESSAGE means the portion of a sign composed of Light
Emitting Diode (LED)/Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) elements, “Diamond Vision”
technology, slide lettering, slated rotating surfaces, or other changeable
message technology that displays different designs or advertisements.
      (10)   DISTRICT or THIS DISTRICT means the Southside Entertainment Sign
District.
      (11)   EFFECTIVE AREA means:
         (A)   for a detached sign, or a marquee sign, the area within a
minimum imaginary rectangle of vertical and horizontal lines that fully
contains all extremities of the sign excluding its supports. The rectangle is
calculated from an orthographic projection of the sign viewed horizontally. The
viewpoint for this projection that produces the largest rectangle must be used.
If elements of the sign are moveable or flexible, such as a flag or a string of
lights, the measurement is taken when the elements are fully extended and
parallel to the plane of view;
         (B)   for a sign placed on an awning, canopy, fence, construction
barricade, non-enclosing wall, planter, or other similar structure that is
designed to serve a separate purpose other than to support the sign, the entire
area of such structure may not be computed, and the effective area must be
measured by the rule for effective area for an attached sign; and
         (C)   for an attached sign other than a marquee sign, the sum of the
areas within minimum imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines,
each of which fully contains a word. If a design, outline, illustration, or
interior illumination surrounds or attracts attention to a word, then it is
included in the calculation of the effective area.
      (12)   EVENT SIGN means a temporary sign advertising any event at a
sports, musical, or arts venue in this district, including, but not limited to,
indoor motion picture theaters, theaters for live musical or dramatic
performances, indoor and outdoor concert halls, galleries, and exhibition
halls.
      (13)   FACADE means a separate face of a building, such as: a parapet
wall; an omitted wall line; any part of a building which encloses or covers
usable space; a chimney; roof-mounted equipment; a mounted antenna; or a water
tower. Where separate facades on a building are oriented in the same direction
or in directions within 45 degrees of one another, they are to be considered as
part of a single facade. A roof is not a facade or part of a facade. Multiple
buildings on the same lot have separate facades from each other.
      (14)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign that projects 18 inches
or less from a building, and has a face parallel to the building facade.
      (15)   GENERIC GRAPHICS means a pattern of shapes, colors, or symbols
that does not commercially advertise.
      (16)   LANDSCAPE SIGN means a sign that is a part of a single landscape
design that creates a base for the sign in conjunction with a retaining wall or
an open space created with the use of water or planting material.
      (17)   MARQUEE SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by
a permanent canopy projecting over a pedestrian street entrance of a building,
and consisting primarily of changeable panels, words, or characters.
      (18)   MESSAGE AREA means the area within the effective area of a sign
that provides a specific commercial or noncommercial message and that excludes
all extremity and intra-areas associated with the sign fixture.
      (19)   MONUMENT SIGN means a detached sign applied directly onto a grade-
level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation between
the sign and grade.
      (20)   MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGN means a sign that directs vehicular and
pedestrian movement within this district.
      (21)   OCCUPANT means a person, group of people collectively,
association, partnership, corporation, or other entity to whom a single
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official.
      (22)   PROJECTING ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting more
than 12 inches from a building at an angle other than parallel to the facade.
      (23)   ROOF SIGN means a sign that is attached to or supported by the
roof of a building.
      (24)   SIGN HARDWARE means the structural support system for a sign,
including the fastening devices that secure a sign to a building facade or
pole.
      (25)   SPECIAL SIGN DISTRICT ADVISORY COMMITTEE means that committee
created by Section
51A-7.504 of the Dallas Development Code, as amended.
      (26)   TEMPORARY SIGN means a sign erected for a limited time that
identifies an event or activity of limited duration. Examples include signs
advertising the sale or lease of property, construction activity in progress,
or a concert or other cultural event.
      (27)   WELCOME MESSAGE means a message that identifies and greets heads
of state, foreign dignitaries, groups using city property in accordance with a
contract, license, or permit, or government organizations.
      (28)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign painted or affixed to a window.
      (29)   WORD: For purposes of this division, each of the following is
considered to be one word:
         (A)   Any word in any language found in any standard unabridged
dictionary or dictionary of slang.
         (B)   Any proper noun or any initial or series of initials.
         (C)   Any separate character, symbol, or abbreviation such as “&”,
“$”, “%”, and “Inc.”
         (D)   Any telephone number, street number, or commonly used
combination of numerals and symbols such as “$5.00" or “50%.”
         (E)   Any Internet website, network, or protocol address, domain name,
or universal record locator.
         (F)   Any symbol or logo that is a registered trademark but which
itself contains no word or character.
         (G)   A street address is not considered to be a word.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the definitions in the
Dallas Development Code apply to this division. In the event of a conflict,
this section controls. (Ord. 24760)
SEC. 51A-7.1804.   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, all applications for
certificates of appropriateness for signs in this district must be reviewed by
the special sign district advisory committee using the permit procedures set
forth in Section
51A-7.505.
   (b)   The only signs permitted in this district are those specified in this
division, and those required by state or federal law.
   (c)   In Historic Overlay District No. 56, the Landmark Commission has the
sole authority:
      (1)   to determine every aspect of a sign other than the construction and
maintenance standards, such as the location, size, height, effective area,
number, and type of signs; and
      (2)   to issue a certificate of appropriateness for a sign.
   (d)   All wind devices except for flags and banners are prohibited in this
district unless allowed under a special events permit issued under Chapter 42A
of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
   (e)   Roof signs and pole signs, except for area information signs and
temporary detached signs, are prohibited.
   (f)   A sign with a changeable message area may not change its message at a
rate more often than once each 20 seconds. No sign permit is required for
changes to the changeable message portion of a sign.
   (g)   All signs must be premise signs, except area information signs, banner
signs on streetlight poles, movement control signs, vehicular signs, government
signs, event signs, and window display signs.
   (h)   Signs over the right-of-way.
      (1)   Signs may be located within the public right-of-way subject to the
franchise requirements of Chapter XIV of the City Charter,
Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, as amended,
Chapter 36 of the Dallas Building Code, and the requirements of all other
applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
      (2)   The traffic engineer shall review the location of any sign located
in or overhanging the public right-of-way to ensure that the sign will not pose
a traffic hazard or visibility obstruction.
      (3)   Signs overhanging the public right-of-way are permitted, except
that no sign may project closer than two feet to the vertical plane extending
through the back of a street curb. No portion of a sign may be located less
than two feet from the back of a street curb. (Ord. Nos. 24760; 28424)
SEC. 51A-7.1805.   ATTACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   Attached signs in general.
      (1)   The total effective area for all attached signs on a facade may not
exceed 30 percent of the area of the facade. Projecting signs, marquee signs,
and event signs are not included in the total effective area calculations of a
facade.
      (2)   Except for changeable message portions of a sign, event signs, or
as otherwise provided in this division, on any building facade, there may be a
maximum of eight words per premise and/or per occupant which contain any
character of a height equal to or exceeding four inches. Words consisting of
characters less than four inches high may be used without limit.
      (3)   Attached signs must be securely attached.
      (4)   Attached signs may not project more than four feet above the
surface to which they are attached, unless otherwise specified in this
division.
   (b)   Arcade signs.
      (1)   An arcade sign must be located at least six feet from any other
arcade sign.
      (2)   No arcade sign may exceed six square feet in effective area.
      (3)   No arcade sign may be lower than 10 feet above grade.
   (c)   Awning signs.
      (1)   No awning sign may project beyond the surface of the awning or be
lower than 10 feet above grade or higher than 20 feet above grade.
      (2)   The total effective area for any one awning sign may not exceed six
square feet.
      (3)   An awning sign must be located over a window or a door.
   (d)   Canopy signs.
      (1)   No canopy sign may:
         (A)   exceed 50 percent of the length of the canopy facade to which it
is attached;
         (B)   project vertically beyond the canopy more than 15 percent of the
length of the sign;
         (C)   project horizontally more than 12 inches from the surface of the
canopy; or
         (D)    be lower than 10 feet above grade.
      (2)   A canopy sign may only be located over a pedestrian entrance to a
premise.
   (e)   Flat attached signs.
      (1)   The maximum effective area for a flat attached sign is 15 percent
of the total facade area.
      (2)   The minimum distance between flat attached signs is four feet.
      (3)   Parapet signs are permitted as flat attached signs.
   (f)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   No marquee sign may exceed 50 percent of the area of the facade.
      (2)   No marquee sign may be longer than two-thirds of the length of the
frontage of the building to which the marquee is attached.
      (3)   Marquee signs may not project more than five feet above the roof
line of the facade to which it is attached.
      (4)   No premise may have more than one marquee sign per street frontage.
   (g)   Projecting attached signs.
      (1)   A projecting attached sign may not exceed the following size
limits:
         (A)   Seventy-five square feet in effective area if the building to
which it is attached is at least 36 feet high.
         (B)   Thirty square feet in effective area if the building to which it
is attached is less than 36 feet high.
      (2)   No projecting attached sign may be lower than 12 feet above grade.
      (3)   No projecting attached sign may project more than five feet from
the facade, or more than five feet over the roof line, of the building to which
it is attached.
   (h)   Temporary attached signs.
      (1)   Temporary attached signs permitted in this district are temporary
protective signs, or signs that relate exclusively to the sale, lease,
construction, or remodeling of the premises on which they are located.
      (2)   No more than one temporary attached sign per occupant is permitted
on the facade of the building.
      (3)   Temporary protective signs may be erected anywhere on a
construction site during construction, subject to the following provisions:
         (A)   No sign may exceed 20 square feet in effective area or ten feet
in height.
         (B)   The signs may be illuminated.
         (C)   The signs must be removed upon completion of the construction.
      (4)   Signs that relate exclusively to the sale, lease, construction, or
remodeling of the premises on which they are located are permitted, but if the
sign is attached to a window, the maximum effective area of the sign is 15
square feet. (Ord. 24760)
SEC. 51A-7.1806.   EVENT SIGNS.
   (a)   Event signs may be non-premise signs.
   (b)   Event signs are not counted in the calculations for total percentage
of facade area covered by signs.
   (c)   A maximum of 15 percent of the effective area of the sign may contain
words or logos that identify the sponsor of the activity or event.
   (d)   Only one event sign per facade is permitted at one time.
   (e)   Each facade may display an event sign for up to 15 consecutive days
(the display period), a maximum of 12 times per calendar year per premise or
occupant. No event sign may be displayed on the same facade in two or more
consecutive display periods.
   (f)   The effective area of an event sign may not exceed 30 percent of the
area of the facade to which it is attached.
   (g)   An event sign may contain an unlimited number of words.
   (h)   An event sign may not be painted on any part of the building or be
below 10 feet above grade. (Ord. 24760)
SEC. 51A-7.1807.   WINDOW DISPLAY SIGNS.
   (a)   Window display signs are permitted only on the ground floor of a
vacant building.
   (b)   A window display sign may contain only the following messages: welcome
messages for visitors; advertising of occupants or events at a sports, musical,
or arts venue in this district, including, but not limited to, indoor motion
picture theaters, theaters for live musical or dramatic performances, indoor
and outdoor concert halls, galleries, and exhibition halls; generic graphics
(including three-dimensional artifacts); a message identifying the sponsor of
the display; or a message referring to the sale or lease of the premises.
   (c)   Window display signs may not:
      (1)   cover more than 25 percent of the surface area of a window;
      (2)   contain a logo or word that has any character that exceeds five
inches in height; or
      (3)   contain more than 15 percent sponsorship identification.
   (d)   No sign permit or certificate of appropriateness is required to erect
or remove a window display sign. (Ord. 24760)
SEC. 51A-7.1808.   DETACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   Detached signs in general.
      (1)   The only detached signs permitted are area information signs,
banner signs on streetlight poles, landscape signs, monument signs, temporary
detached signs, construction barricade signs, movement control signs, vehicular
signs, government signs, and protective signs.
      (2)   A detached premise sign may contain only the name, logo, and
address of a premise in this district and its occupants.
      (3)   No more than one detached sign per premise per street frontage is
permitted, except that a premise having more than 450 feet of street frontage
may have one additional sign per 100 feet (or fraction thereof) of street
frontage above 450 feet.
      (4)   Banner signs on streetlight poles and movement control signs may
contain only the name, logo, and address of any building in this district and
its occupants, or a sponsorship or welcome message, unless otherwise specified
in this section.
   (b)   Area information signs.
      (1)   A maximum of one area information sign is permitted in this
district, and it may be located only in the following area, generally described
as being near the intersection of Terminal Street and Lamar Street: Being a
portion of Lot 3 of Mosher’s Subdivision of Block 419 of the City of Dallas,
Texas, as recorded in Volume 4, Page 201, of the Map Records of Dallas County,
Texas, and more particularly described as an area within the perimeter of Lot
3, in the shape of a rectangle which is 20 feet wide and 96 feet long, and
which is bounded on the northwest by an imaginary line which is parallel to and
11.5 feet to the southeast of the northwest lot line of said Lot 3 (said
northwest line being the dividing or common line between Lot 3 and Lot 4 of
said Mosher’s Subdivision of Block 419), bounded on the northeast by an
imaginary line which is parallel to and 15 feet to the southwest of the
northeast lot line of said Lot 3 (said northeast lot line being adjacent to
Lamar Street), bounded on the southeast by an imaginary line which is parallel
to and 9.9 feet to the northwest of the southeast lot line of Lot 3 (said
southeast line being the dividing or common line between Lot 3 and Lot 2 of
said Mosher’s Subdivision of Block 419), and bounded on the southwest by an
imaginary line parallel to and 15 feet to the northeast of the southwest line
of said Lot 3 (said southwest lot line being adjacent to Terminal Street).
      (2)   An area information sign:
         (A)   may not exceed 60 feet in height or 600 square feet in effective
area;
         (B)   must have a changeable message component to the sign;
         (C)   must display messages regarding at least three occupants of
premises in this district or events in this district per cycle of the
changeable message board, and may not display an occupant or event message in
two successive messages per cycle; and
         (D)   may display sponsorship identification on a maximum of 20
percent of the effective area of the sign.
      (3)   The text in the changeable message portion of the sign is limited
to welcome messages for visitors, and to advertising of occupants or events at
a sports, musical, or arts venue in this district, including, but not limited
to, indoor motion picture theaters, theaters for live musical or dramatic
performances, indoor and outdoor concert halls, galleries, and exhibition
halls.
      (4)   The changeable message portion of the sign must be available for
messages from all premises and occupants within this district.
   (c)   Banner signs on streetlight poles.
      (1)   A banner sign is permitted only if it:
         (A)   advertises an occupant or premise in this district or events at
a sports, musical, or arts venue in this district, including, but not limited
to, indoor motion picture theaters, theaters for live musical or dramatic
performances, indoor and outdoor concert halls, galleries, and exhibition
halls; or
         (B)   displays a sponsorship identification, a welcome message, or
generic graphics.
      (2)   Text on a banner sign may not exceed 10 percent of the total
effective area of the banner.
      (3)   A banner and its sign hardware must:
         (A)   be mounted on a streetlight pole;
         (B)   meet the sign construction and design standards in the Dallas
Building Code;
         (C)   be at least 12 feet above grade, unless it overhangs a roadway,
in which case it must be at least 15 feet above grade;
         (D)   be made out of weather-resistant and rust-proof material;
         (E)   not project more than three feet from the pole onto which it is
mounted; and
         (F)   not exceed 20 square feet in effective area.
      (4)   No sign permit or certificate of appropriateness is required to
erect or remove a banner sign.
   (d)   Landscape signs.
      (1)   A landscape sign must be a premise sign.
      (2)   A landscape sign may have a maximum effective area of 50 square
feet, and a maximum height of 15 feet.
      (3)   There is no minimum setback required for landscape signs.
      (4)   Section
51A-7.304(c) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended, does not apply to
landscape signs in this district.
   (e)   Monument signs.
      (1)   A monument sign must be a premise sign.
      (2)   A monument sign may have a maximum effective area of 50 square
feet, and a maximum height of 15 feet.
      (3)   There is no minimum setback required for monument signs.
      (4)   Section
51A-7.304(c) of the Dallas Development Code, as amended, does not apply to
monument signs in this district.
   (f)   Temporary detached signs.
      (1)   Temporary detached signs permitted in this district are temporary
protective signs, or signs that relate exclusively to the sale, lease,
construction, or remodeling of the premises on which they are located.
      (2)   There is no limit on the number of temporary protective signs
permitted.
      (3)   Temporary protective signs may be erected anywhere on a
construction site during construction, subject to the following provisions:
         (A)   No temporary protective sign may exceed 20 square feet in
effective area or 10 feet in height.
         (B)   The signs may be illuminated.
         (C)   The signs must be removed upon completion of the construction.
      (4)   Signs that relate exclusively to the sale, lease, construction, or
remodeling of the premises on which they are located are permitted, subject to
the following restrictions:
         (A)   The maximum height of the sign is 10 feet, and the maximum
effective area of the sign is 128 square feet.
         (B)   No more than one of this type of sign is permitted per each 100
feet of frontage of the premises. (Ord. 24760)
SEC. 51A-7.1809.   CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGNS.
   (a)   A construction barricade sign may cover up to 100 percent of the
surface area of the construction barricade to which it is attached.
   (b)   A construction barricade sign may contain any number of words and may
have a maximum message area of 50 square feet.
   (c)   A construction barricade sign may neither be lighted nor contain any
moving parts.
   (d)   A construction barricade sign must be removed from the area when the
construction barricade is removed, i.e. the sign may not be detached from the
barricade and left at the site.
   (e)   The information on a construction barricade sign is limited to
information regarding what is being constructed on the site and who is
conducting the construction, including the owners, developers, future tenants,
lenders, architects, engineers, project consultants, and contractors. The sign
may not advertise a product.
   (f)   A construction barricade may not project more than four feet above the
top or sides of the construction barricade.
   (g)   A sign that is affixed to a construction barricade may not project
more than two inches from the surface of the construction barricade. (Ord.
24760)
SEC. 51A-7.1810.    MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGNS.
   (a)   Movement control signs must direct vehicular or pedestrian movement
within this district or to adjacent districts and may include the name or logo
of any premise located in this district or in any sign district within a one-
mile radius of the Central Business District.
   (b)   Movement control signs that include the name or logo of two or more
premises may:
      (1)    not exceed 30 square feet in effective area;
      (2)   be located in a public right-of-way; or
      (3)   be erected anywhere within the district without limit as to number.
   (c)   Movement control signs that include the name or logo of only one
premise may:
      (1)   not exceed two square feet in effective area;
      (2)   not be located in the public right-of-way; and
      (3)   be erected on the premise without limit as to number. (Ord. 24760)
SEC. 51A-7.1811.   PROTECTIVE SIGNS.
   (a)   The owner of, and each occupant of, a premise may erect no more than
two detached protective signs in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   No sign may exceed 700 square inches in effective area.
      (2)   No detached sign may exceed two feet in height.
   (b)   The owner of, and each occupant of, a premise may erect attached
protective signs at each entrance to a premise in accordance with the following
provisions:
      (1)    No sign may exceed 700 square inches in effective area.
      (2)   The cumulative messages may not exceed 1,300 square inches per
entrance.
      (3)   No word may exceed four inches in height, unless otherwise required
by law. (Ord. 24760)
SEC. 51A-7.1812.   APPLICABILITY OF HIGHWAY BEAUTIFICATION ACTS.
   For purposes of applying the Federal and Texas Highway Beautification Acts,
this district is considered to be a commercial zoning district. (Ord. 24760)
Division 51A-7.1900. Provisions for West Village Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.1901.   DESIGNATION OF WEST VILLAGE SIGN DISTRICT.
   A special provision sign district is hereby created to be known as the West
Village Sign District. For purposes of this article, the boundaries of the West
Village Sign District are that portion of the West Mixed Use Subzone of the
Planned Development District No. 305 (commonly known as the Cityplace PD) that
is enclosed within the following boundaries set forth in Exhibit 7.1900A, which
is attached to and made a part of this ordinance, and generally described as
the property bounded by the centerlines of Cole Avenue, Blackburn Street,
McKinney Avenue, and Lemmon Avenue, and including a 1.1028 acre tract fronting
approximately 357 feet on Blackburn Street, fronting approximately 118 feet on
McKinney Avenue, and fronting approximately 118 feet on Cole Avenue. (Ord.
24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1902.   DESIGNATION OF SUBDISTRICTS.
   (a)   This district is hereby divided into two subdistricts: Subdistricts A
and B.
   (b)   Subdistrict A is that area of this district within the following
described boundaries: all building faces that front on Cole Avenue, Blackburn
Street, McKinney Avenue, and Lemmon Avenue.
   (c)   Subdistrict B is that area of this district that is not in Subdistrict
A. (Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1903.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this division is to regulate both the construction of
new signs and the alterations of existing signs to create a unique, lively and
commercially-active environment that is bright and safe, and that incorporates
diverse, state-of-the-art graphic technologies to promote an urban mixed use
environment in this district.
   (b)   These sign regulations have been developed to achieve the following
objectives in this district:
      (1)   To create an aesthetically pleasing environment that promotes an
atmosphere of vitality appropriate for a place where thousands of citizens
gather for entertainment and celebration.
      (2)   To encourage the use of signs that are innovative, colorful, and
entertaining, and that bring a distinctive character to this district.
      (3)   To identify and promote special events and cultural activities that
will occur in this district.
      (4)   To encourage signs with a style, orientation, and location that
take into consideration the high number of pedestrians expected within this
district.
      (5)   To communicate clear directions to and through this district.
      (6)   To promote the economic success of businesses in this district.
(Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1904.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   ARCADE SIGN means any sign mounted to the underside of a canopy or
awning intended to be read from the pedestrian walkway that the canopy covers.
      (2)   ATTACHED SIGN means any sign attached to, applied on, or supported
by, any part of a building (such as a wall, parapet, roof, window, canopy,
awning, arcade, or marquee) that encloses or covers usable space.
      (3)   AWNING means a fabric or vinyl surface supported by a tubular metal
structure, which is applied to the face of a building.
      (4)   AWNING SIGN means a sign that is attached or applied to or painted
on an awning.
      (5)   BANNER means a sign attached to or applied on a strip of cloth,
vinyl, or similar material and attached to a building or structure. Awning
signs and flags are not banners.
      (6)   CANOPY means a permanent, non-fabric architectural element
projecting from the face of a building.
      (7)   CANOPY SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by a
canopy, with no changeable message area.
      (8)   CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN means an electronic sign whose contents can
change periodically and that can show animated messages.
      (9)   DISTRICT means the West Village Special Provision Sign District.
      (10)   EFFECTIVE AREA means:
         (A)   For a detached sign, other than outlined in (B) below, the area
within a minimum imaginary rectangle of vertical and horizontal lines that
fully contains all extremities of the sign, excluding its supports. This
rectangle is calculated from an orthographic projection of the sign viewed
horizontally. The viewpoint for this projection that produces the largest
rectangle must be used. If elements of the sign are moveable or flexible, such
as a flag or a string of lights, the measurement is taken when the elements are
fully extended and parallel to the plane of view.
         (B)   For signs placed on a fence, non-enclosing wall, planter or
other similar structure that is designed to serve a separate purpose other than
to support the sign, the entire area of such structure shall not be computed.
In such cases, the sign area shall be computed as the entire area within a
single continuous rectilinear perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight
lines enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblems, or
figures together with all material, color or lighting forming an integral part
of the display or used to differentiate the sign background against which it is
placed.
         (C)   For an attached sign, the sum of the areas within minimum
imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which fully
contains a word. If a design, outline, illustration, or interior illumination
surrounds or attracts attention to a word, then it is included in the
calculation of effective area.
         (D)   An awning or canopy is not included in the calculation of the
effective area.
      (11)   ENTERTAINMENT COMPLEX means an entertainment facility with a
seating capacity of at least 100 persons for showing motion pictures or staging
theatrical performances to an audience or where the audience views and
participates in events and performances including, but not limited to,
theatrical, musical and dramatic performances, and meetings and assemblages.
      (12)   FACADE means any separate face of a building, including parapet
walls and omitted wall lines, or any part of a building which encloses or
covers usable space, chimneys, roof-mounted equipment, mounted antennas, or
water towers. Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction or in
directions within 45 degrees of one another, they are to be considered as part
of a single facade. A roof is not a facade or part of a facade. Multiple
buildings on the same lot will each be deemed to have separate facades.
      (13)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting 18 inches or
less from a building, the face of which is parallel to the building facade.
      (14)   FREEWAY LOOP means the area of the city inside the District,
within 100 feet of an Expressway right-of-way.
      (15)   GENERIC GRAPHICS means any pattern of shapes, colors, or symbols
that does not commercially advertise.
      (16)   KIOSK means a multi-sided structure or cylindrical structure for
the display of premise signs. It does not mean vending and sales carts.
      (17)   MARQUEE SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by
a permanent canopy projecting over a pedestrian street entrance of a building
and consisting primarily of changeable panels, words, or characters. LED, LCD
or other electronic message technology may be used.
      (18)   MONUMENT SIGN means a detached sign applied directly onto a grade-
level support structure.
      (19)   MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGN means a sign that directs vehicular and
pedestrian movement within this district.
      (20)   NEWSSTAND means an enclosed kiosk that displays premise signs and
is manned by a vendor that sells newspapers, magazines, other periodicals and
other small retail items such as candy, tobacco etc.
      (21)   ONE SIGN means any number of detached sign parts structurally
connected at, or above grade.
      (22)   PARAPET SIGN means a permanent projecting attached sign erected on
or attached to the eaves or edge of the roof or on a parapet. A parapet sign is
not a roof sign.
      (23)   PREMISE means the property in this District.
      (24)   PREMISE SIGN means any sign the content of which relates to the
premise on which it is located and refers exclusively to:
         (A)   the name, trade name, or logo of the owner or occupant of the
premise or the identification of the premises;
         (B)   accommodations, services, or activities offered or conducted on
the premise; or
         (C)   the sale, lease, or construction of the premise.
      (25)   PROJECTING ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting more
than 18 inches from a building at an angle, other than parallel, to the facade.
      (26)   PROMOTIONAL MESSAGE means a message that identifies, promotes, or
advertises a cultural activity taking place in this district, any special event
being conducted in this district, any event being conducted, in whole or in
part, in an entertainment complex in this district, or any other event that
will benefit the city that will take place in this district. Benefit to the
city is established by:
         (A)   Use of city property in accordance with a contract, license, or
permit;
         (B)   The receipt of city monies for the activity or event; or
         (C)   An ordinance or resolution of the city council that recognizes
the activity or event as benefiting the city.
      (27)   PUBLIC AREA means any publicly or privately owned outdoor area
that is accessible to the public.
      (28)   ROOF SIGN means a sign that is attached to or supported by the
roof of a building.
      (29)   SPECIAL SIGN DISTRICT ADVISORY COMMITTEE means that committee
composed and established in Section
51A-7.504 of the Dallas Development Code.
      (30)   STOREFRONT means an identifiable portion of the premise for which
a separate certificate of occupancy has been issued.
      (31)   TEMPORARY SIGN means a sign erected for a limited time that
identifies an event or activity of limited duration. Examples include signs
advertising the sale or lease of property, construction activity in progress,
or a concert or other cultural event.
      (32)   WELCOME MESSAGE means a message that identifies and greets people
who are expected to visit this district, such as heads of state; foreign
dignitaries; groups using city property in accordance with a contract, license,
or permit; or government organizations.
      (33)   WINDOW ART DISPLAY means an exhibit or arrangement placed within a
storefront window of a building and designed to be viewed from a street or
public area.
      (34)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign painted or affixed to a window.
      (35)   WORD: For purposes of this division, each of the following is
considered to be one word:
         (A)   Any word in any language found in any standard unabridged
dictionary or dictionary of slang.
         (B)   Any proper noun or any initial or series of initials.
         (C)   Any separate character, symbol or abbreviation such as “&”, “$”,
“%”, and “Inc.”.
         (D)   Any telephone number or commonly used combination of numerals
and symbols such as “$5.00" or “50%”.
         (E)   Any internet website, network, or protocol address, domain name,
or universal record locator.
         (F)   Any symbol or logo that is a registered trademark but which
itself contains no word or character.
A street number is not considered to be a word. (Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1905.   GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS. 
   (a)   Premise signs. All signs in this district must be premise signs or
convey a noncommercial message.
   (b)   Applicable divisions of
Article VII. Except as otherwise provided in this division, all signs in this
district must comply with
Article VII. Divisions
51A-7.300 and
51A-7.400 do not apply in this district. In the event of a conflict between
this division and other requirements set forth in
Article VII that are not mandated by state or federal law, the requirements set
forth in this division apply.
   (c)   Permit and certificate of appropriateness requirements.
      (1)   Sign permit required. A person shall not alter, place, maintain,
expand, or remove a sign in this district without first obtaining a sign permit
from the city. It is a defense to prosecution that the person was replacing a
banner overhanging the public right-of-way using the existing sign hardware. A
sign permit is required to install sign hardware for a banner.
         (A)   Sign permit procedures.   Except as provided below, the
procedures for obtaining a sign permit in Sec.
51A-7.505 apply in this district.
         (B)   Determination of procedure.    Upon receipt of an application,
the director shall determine whether it is to be reviewed under the director
procedure or committee procedure. The proposed sign must be reviewed under the
director procedure if the sign is:
            (i)   an attached premise sign of less than 50 square feet
effective area and is not located within a historic overlay district; or
            (ii)   a detached premise sign with less than 50 square feet
effective area, less than 25 feet in height, and not located within a historic
overlay district; or
            (iii)   streetlight pole banners or facade mounted banners.
If the proposed sign does not meet the requirements for the director procedure,
it must be reviewed under committee procedure.
      (2)   Certificate of appropriateness. All signs in this district are
required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness, except for:
         (A)   any non-illuminated temporary banners of 20 square feet or less;
or
         (B)   any non-illuminated attached premise sign of less than 20 square
feet; or
         (C)   streetlight pole banners or facade mounted banners.
   (d)   Signs over the right-of-way. Signs may be located in or project over
the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, subject to
the licensing and franchise requirements of Chapter XIV of the City Charter,
Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, as amended,
Chapter 45 of the Dallas Building Code, and the requirements of all other
applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The traffic
engineer shall review the location of any sign located in or overhanging the
public right-of-way to ensure that the sign will not pose a traffic hazard or
visibility obstruction.
   (e)   Other codes not in conflict. All signs erected or maintained pursuant
to the provisions of this division shall be erected and maintained in
compliance with all applicable state laws and with the building code,
electrical code, and other applicable ordinances of the city. Except as
indicated in Subsection (b), in the event of conflict between this division and
other laws, the most restrictive standard applies.
   (f)   Noncommercial messages.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, any sign
that may display a commercial message may also display a noncommercial message,
either in place of or in addition to the commercial message, so long as the
sign complies with other requirements of this ordinance that do not pertain to
the content of the message displayed.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, any sign
that may display one type of noncommercial message may also display any other
type of noncommercial message, so long as the sign complies with other
requirements of this ordinance that do not pertain to the content of the
message displayed.
   (g)   Highway Beautification Acts. For purposes of applying the Federal and
Texas Highway Beautification Acts, this district is considered to be a
commercial zoning district.
   (h)   Streamers, pennants, and inflatable signs. Streamers, pennants, and
inflatable signs, including, but not limited to, balloons are prohibited in
this district.
   (i)   Setback. Except as provided in the spacing requirements for kiosks and
newsstands, there are no setback requirements for a sign in this district.
   (j)   Illuminated signs.
      (1)   Except for changeable message signs, no illuminated sign that has
an effective area of 150 square feet or less may have a luminance greater than
300 footlamberts, nor may any such sign have a luminance greater than 300
footlamberts for any portion of the sign within a circle two feet in diameter.
No illuminated sign which has an effective area greater than 150 square feet
may have a luminance greater than 200 footlamberts, nor may any such sign have
a luminance greater than 200 footlamberts for any portion of the sign within a
circle of two feet in diameter. The measurements of luminance are taken from
any other premise or from any public right-of-way other than an alley.
      (2)   Except for changeable message signs, no illuminated sign nor any
illuminated element of any sign, may turn on or off, or change its brightness,
if:
         (A)   the change of illumination produces an apparent motion of the
visual image, including but not limited to illusion of moving objects, moving
patterns or bands of light, expanding or contracting shapes, rotation or any
similar effect of animation;
         (B)   the change of message or picture occurs more often than once
each three seconds for those portions of a sign which convey time or
temperature, or once each 20 seconds for all other portions of a sign; or
         (C)   a portion of the sign, within a circle of two feet in diameter,
has a luminance greater than 200 footlamberts when all elements of the sign are
fully and steadily illuminated.
   (k)   Sign movement. Except for changeable message signs, no sign or any
part of any sign may move or rotate at a rate more often than once each 10
seconds, or change its message at a rate more often than once each 20 seconds.
Except for changeable message signs, no sign may move, rotate or change its
message at any rate if any of its elements or any illuminated portion within a
two-foot circle has a luminance greater than 200 footlamberts. (Ord. Nos.
24974; 28424)
SEC. 51A-7.1906.   DETACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   Detached signs in general.
      (1)   A premise may have one or more detached signs.
      (2)   Detached signs may not exceed 20 feet in effective area.
      (3)   Detached signs may not exceed 5 feet in height if an attached sign
is located on any storefront on the lot where the detached sign is located;
otherwise, detached signs may not exceed 15 feet in height.
      (4)   Detached signs may only be:
         (A)   monument signs;
         (B)   an architectural, water or landscape composition that identifies
the premise; or
         (C)   signs on public improvements;
         (D)   banners on streetlight poles;
         (E)   special purpose signs; or
         (F)   district identification signs.
   (b)   Signs on public improvements. An unlimited number of signs that only
identify the name or logo of this district may be located on or incorporated
into manhole covers, street light poles, sidewalks, benches, trash receptacles
and other improvements in public areas. No such sign, however, may exceed one
square foot in effective area.
   (c)   Banners on streetlight poles.
      (1)   Banners must display a promotional message, a welcome message, or
generic graphics.
      (2)   No more than 10 percent of the effective area of a banner may
contain a welcome message that identifies and greets a group using city
property in the district in accordance with a contract, license, or permit.
      (3)   No more than 10 percent of the effective area of a banner may
contain the word(s) or logo(s) that identify a sponsor of a cultural event or
activity taking place in the district.
      (4)   A banner having either a promotional message or a welcome message
may not be erected more than 90 days prior to the beginning of the advertised
activity or event, and must be removed no later than 15 days after that
activity or event has ended. The sign hardware for a banner may be left in
place between displays of a banner.
      (5)   A banner and its hardware must:
         (A)    be mounted on a streetlight pole;
         (B)   meet the sign construction and design standards in the Dallas
Building Code;
         (C)   be at least 12 feet above grade, unless it overhangs a roadway,
in which case it must be at least 15 feet above grade;
         (D)   be made out of weather-resistant and rust-proof material;
         (E)    not project more than three feet from the pole onto which it is
mounted; and
         (F)   not exceed 20 square feet in effective area. (Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1907.   ATTACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Attached signs must be securely attached.
      (2)   Attached signs overhanging the public way are permitted, except
that no sign may project closer than two feet to the vertical plane extending
through the back of a street curb.
      (3)   The maximum combined effective area of all signs attached to a
facade may not exceed 30 percent of the total area of the facade.
      (4)   Except as provided in paragragh (5), attached signs may have a
maximum of eight words, which contain any character of a height equal to or
exceeding four inches and pertain to any premise or occupancy. Words consisting
of characters less than four inches high may be used without limit.
      (5)   A storefront that is used as an entertainment complex may have
attached signs with up to 10 words per facade of 4 inches or greater, which may
be located at any height on the storefront.
      (6)   No sign may be painted onto the roof of a building, and no flat
attached sign is permitted on the roof of a building.
      (7)   No sign may project more than four feet above the edge of the wall
to which it is attached; if the wall to which the sign is attached has a
parapet wall, no sign may project above the parapet wall.
   (b)   Awning signs.
      (1)   No awning sign may:
         (A)   project horizontally more than two inches from the surface of
the awning;
         (B)   be lower than 10 feet above grade; or
         (C)   project vertically more than two inches above the surface of the
awning.
      (2)   The maximum size of each awning sign is six square feet.
      (3)   The maximum combined effective area permitted for all awning signs
on a facade is 150 square feet.
      (4)   There is no limit to the number of awning signs permitted on a
premise.
   (c)   Arcade signs.
      (1)   No arcade sign may exceed six square feet in effective area.
      (2)   The minimum linear distance between any two arcade signs in this
district is 10 feet.
      (3)   There is no limit to the number of arcade signs permitted on a
premise.
      (4)   No arcade sign may be lower than 10 feet above grade.
   (d)   Canopy signs.
      (1)   No canopy sign may:
         (A)   exceed 100 square feet in effective area;
         (B)   project horizontally more than two inches from the surface of
the canopy; or
         (C)   be lower than 10 feet above grade.
      (2)   Canopy signs may project vertically above the surface of the
canopy. The maximum height of the projection may not exceed 15 percent of the
overall length of the sign.
      (3)   Canopy signs erected pursuant to this section are permitted on
canopies that overhang the public right-of-way, except that no canopy sign may
project closer than two feet from the back of the curb.
   (e)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   Marquee signs are allowed only on a storefront that is used as an
entertainment complex.
      (2)   The maximum effective area of a marquee sign is 150 square feet.
      (3)   Marquee signs must be parallel to the surface to which they are
attached, and may not project less than two feet from back of curb.
      (4)   No building may have more than one marquee sign per street
frontage.
      (5)   Marquee signs may use LED, LCD or similar electronic technology.
   (f)   Projecting attached signs.
      (1)   No projecting attached sign on a premise may be closer than five
feet from another projecting attached sign.
      (2)   No projecting attached sign may exceed 100 square feet in effective
area, or project more than 3 feet into the public right-of-way.
      (3)   No projecting attached sign may be lower than 12 feet above grade.
      (4)   No projecting attached sign may project vertically more than four
feet above the edge of the wall to which it is attached; if the sign is
attached to a wall with a parapet wall, it may not project vertically above the
parapet wall.
      (5)   No projecting attached sign shall have its lower end more than 25
feet above grade.
   (g)   Window signs.
      (1)   A window sign may only be a premise sign or contain a promotional
message.
      (2)   Window signs are allowed only in ground level windows.
      (3)   Up to 10 percent of the effective area of a window sign may contain
the word(s) or logo(s) that identify a sponsor of a cultural event or activity
taking place in the district.
   (h)   Changeable message signs.
      (1)   Changeable message signs may only be attached signs.
      (2)   The maximum number of changeable message signs within this district
is two.
      (3)   Changeable message signs may not exceed 150 square feet in
effective area.
      (4)   Changeable message signs are not permitted in Subdistrict A. (Ord.
24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1908.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGNS.
   (a)   Special purpose signs may be externally illuminated, and, except for
banners, may be internally illuminated or “back-lighted.”
   (b)   Attached special purpose signs.
      (1)   Each storefront may have one attached special purpose sign per
facade. An attached special purpose sign may be displayed for a maximum of 45
consecutive days, up to 4 times per year, and it must not exceed 200 square
feet in effective area.
      (2)   A storefront for an entertainment complex use may have up to four
attached special purpose signs at a time. An attached special purpose sign may
be displayed for up to 45 days in any given twelve-month period, and it must
not exceed 400 square feet in effective area.
   (c)   Detached special purpose signs.
      (1)   Each storefront may have a detached special purpose sign no more
than three times each calendar year for no more than 38 consecutive days each
time. No detached special purpose sign may be erected at a location during the
30-day period after the removal of a detached special purpose sign from that
location.
      (2)   A detached special purpose sign must:
         (A)   be located at least 100 feet apart;
         (B)   not exceed eight feet in height; and
         (C)   not exceed 50 square feet in effective area.
      (3)   No more than one detached special purpose sign may be erected on
each street or private access easement on which the storefront has frontage.
(Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1909.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR FACADE-MOUNTED BANNER SIGNS.
   (a)   A banner must primarily display generic graphics.
   (b)   A banner may be a district sign or contain a promotional or a welcome
message.
   (c)   A banner having either a promotional message or a welcome message may
not be erected more than 90 days prior to the beginning of the advertised
activity or event, and must be removed no later than 15 days after that
activity or event has ended. The sign hardware for a banner may be left in
place between displays of a banner.
   (d)   A banner and its hardware:
      (1)   may be mounted parallel on a premise facade or projecting from a
premise facade at an angle of up to 90 degrees;
      (2)   must meet the sign construction and design standards in the Dallas
Building Code;
      (3)   must be at least 12 feet above grade, unless it overhangs a
roadway, in which case it must be at least 15 feet above grade;
      (4)   must be made out of weather-resistant and rust-proof material;
      (5)   must not project more than three feet from the facade; and
      (6)   must not exceed 100 square feet in effective area. (Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1910.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR KIOSK SIGNS.
   (a)   No more than six kiosks are permitted in this district.
   (b)   No kiosk may be illuminated by a detached, independent external light
source.
   (c)   Kiosks must be spaced at least 50 feet apart.
   (d)   Kiosks may be located on sidewalks if unobstructed sidewalk widths of
eight feet are maintained.
   (e)   Kiosks must be securely anchored to the ground.
   (f)   Kiosks may not exceed ten feet in height and 100 square feet in
effective area. The display area for each sign on a kiosk may not exceed 20
square feet. (Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1911.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR NEWSSTAND SIGNS.
   (a)   No more than two newsstands are permitted in this district
   (b)   No newsstand may be illuminated by a detached, independent, external
light source.
   (c)   Newsstands must be spaced at least 50 feet apart.
   (d)   Newsstands may be located on sidewalks if unobstructed sidewalk widths
of eight feet are maintained.
   (e)   Newsstands may not exceed 10 feet in height and 10 feet in diameter.
The display area for each sign on a newsstand may not exceed 30 square feet.
(Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1912.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SIGNS ATTACHED TO MACHINERY OR
EQUIPMENT.
   Words may be attached to machinery or equipment that is necessary or
customary to a business, including but not limited to devices such as gasoline
pumps, vending machines, ATM shelters, ice machines, etc., provided that the
words so attached refer exclusively to products or services dispensed by the
device, consist of characters no more than four inches in height, and project
no more than one inch from the surface of the device.
SEC. 51A-7.1913.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGNS.
   (a)   Movement control signs must direct vehicular or pedestrian movement
within this district or to an adjacent and congruent district and may include
the name or logo of any premise or activity center located in this district.
   (b)   Movement control signs:
      (1)   must not exceed three square feet in effective area;
      (2)   may be located in a public right-of-way; and
      (3)   may be erected anywhere within the district without limit as to
number.
   (c)   Movement control signs may be attached or detached and may be erected
on any premise without limit as to number. (Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1914.    SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGNS.
   (a)   The director of planning and development shall review all signs to be
placed on a construction barricade and upon approval of the signs by the
director, a sign permit for the signs may be issued. This review is a condition
on any permit issued for a construction barricade.
   (b)   A sign that is affixed to a construction barricade must not project
horizontally more than two inches from the construction barricade.
   (c)   A sign that is affixed to a construction barricade must neither be
lighted nor contain any moving parts.
   (d)   A sign that is affixed to a construction barricade must be removed
when the construction barricade is removed.
   (e)   The information contained on a sign placed on a construction barricade
may only convey information regarding what is being constructed on the site and
who is conducting the construction, including the owners, developers, future
tenants, lenders, architects, engineers, project consultants and contractors.
The sign may not advertise a product and the total effective area of the words
on a construction barricade sign may not exceed 50 square feet.
   (f)   A construction barricade may be fully decorated with a graphic except
that:
      (1)   no decoration or part of the graphic may project more than two
inches horizontally from the barricade facade, or
      (2)   no decoration or graphic may project more than four feet vertically
above the top of the barricade. (Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1915.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR OTHER TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (a)   In addition to the other protective signs permitted under Section
51A-7.918, Temporary Protective Signs may be erected anywhere on a construction
site at anytime during construction. There is no limit on the number of these
signs, but no sign may exceed 20 square feet in effective area or eight feet in
height. Temporary protective signs may be illuminated, but no lighting source
may project more than three inches from the vertical surface of, or six inches
above the top of, the sign. All temporary protective signs must be removed upon
completion of the construction.
   (b)   Temporary signs may be erected on construction fencing subject to
Section 51A-7.925(b)(4).
   (c)   “For Sale,” “For Lease,” “Remodeling,” and “Under Construction” signs.
Signs that relate exclusively to the sale, lease, construction, or remodeling
of the premises on which they are located are permitted. There is no limit to
the number of attached signs permitted. Detached signs are limited to one for
each 100 feet of frontage on a public street or private access easement. If
attached to a window, the maximum effective area of the sign is 16 square feet.
If attached to other portions of a facade, the maximum effective area of the
sign is 32 square feet. No detached sign may exceed 128 square feet in
effective area or 16 feet in height. (Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1916.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DISTRICT SIGNS.
   (a)   District signs may only be a facade mounted banner sign, kiosk sign,
newsstand sign, or a changeable message sign.
   (b)   A district sign may display:
      (1)   The name, trade name, or logo of the owner or occupant of the
premise or the identification of the premises located in this district.
      (2)   Accommodations, services, or activities offered or conducted on any
premise within this district;
      (3)   The advertisement of products by brand name or symbol for any
products sold on a premise within this district if at least 10 percent of the
sign is devoted to identification of the district;
      (4)   The sale, lease, or construction of any premise within the West
Village Special Provision Sign District. (Ord. 24974)
SEC. 51A-7.1917.   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   (a)   No more than two district identification signs are permitted in this
district.
   (b)   A district identification sign may only display the name of the
premise as a whole, i.e. “West Village,” and a logo identifying the district.
   (c)   No district identification sign may have a height greater than six
feet, or an effective area greater than 150 square feet. (Ord. 24974)
Division 51A-7.2000. Provisions for the West Commerce Street/Fort Worth Avenue
Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.2001.   DESIGNATION OF THE WEST COMMERCE STREET/FORT WORTH AVENUE
SIGN DISTRICT.
   A sign district is hereby created to be known as the West Commerce Street/
Fort Worth Avenue Sign District. The boundaries of the West Commerce Street/
Fort Worth Avenue Sign District are the same as Planned Development District
No. 714, the West Commerce Street/Fort Worth Avenue Special Purpose District,
and generally described as the property located approximately one-eighth to
one-fourth of a mile to the north and south of West Commerce Street and Fort
Worth Avenue, from North Beckley Avenue to Westmoreland Road. (Ord. 25899)
SEC. 51A-7.2002.   DESIGNATION OF SUBDISTRICTS.
   This district is hereby divided into Subdistricts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. The
boundaries of Subdistricts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 are the same as the boundaries of
Subdistricts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 in Planned Development District No. 714, the
West Commerce Street/Fort Worth Avenue Special Purpose District. (Ord. 25899)
SEC. 51A-7.2003.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this division is to regulate both the construction of
new signs and alterations of existing signs with a view towards enhancing,
preserving, and developing the unique character of the West Commerce Street/
Fort Worth Avenue corridor while addressing the diversity of businesses and
promoting the economy of the West Commerce Street/Fort Worth Avenue corridor.
   (b)   The objectives of this division include those listed in Section
51A-7.101 as well as the objectives of ensuring that signs are appropriate to
the architecture within the district; do not obscure significant architectural
features; lend themselves to developing mixed office, retail, and residential
projects; and preserve the pedestrian character of the area.
   (c)   These sign regulations have been developed to achieve the following
objectives:
      (1)   To protect the historical and architectural character of this
district from inappropriate signs in terms of number (clutter), style, color,
and materials.
      (2)   To ensure that significant architectural features are not obscured.
      (3)   To encourage signs that are complementary to the architectural
styles and historical nature of the buildings.
      (4)   To attract the public to the goods and services available by
enhancing the aesthetic quality of signs.
      (5)   To encourage artistic, creative, and innovative signs that reflect
the themes of the area.
      (6)   To promote safety, communications efficiency, and landscape
quality. (Ord. 25899)
SEC. 51A-7.2004.   DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise stated, the definitions in
Article VII, “ Sign Regulations,” apply to this section. In this section:
      (1)   ARCADE means any walkway that is attached to a building, not fully
enclosed on all sides, and covered with a canopy or roof structure having the
primary function of weather protection.
      (2)   ARCADE SIGN means an attached sign suspended below the roof of an
arcade.
      (3)   AWNING means a projecting fabric or vinyl surface supported by a
metal (or other similarly strong material) structure, which is applied to the
face of a building.
      (4)   AWNING SIGN means an attached sign applied to an awning.
      (5)   BANNER means a sign applied to a strip of cloth or similar
material.
      (6)   CANOPY means a permanent, non-fabric architectural element
projecting from the face of a building.
      (7)   CHANGEABLE MESSAGE means LED/LCD elements, slide lettering, slated
rotating surfaces, or other changeable message technology that displays
different designs or messages.
      (8)   DISTRICT means the West Commerce Street/Fort Worth Avenue Sign
District.
      (9)   DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGN means a detached sign that contains
the logo or name of the West Commerce Street/Fort Worth Avenue corridor or
welcomes people to the West Commerce Street/Fort Worth Avenue corridor.
      (10)   DISTRICT PROMOTIONAL MESSAGE means a message that identifies,
promotes, or advertises a cultural activity, special event, event in an
entertainment facility, or event that will benefit the city, and that will take
place in this district. Benefit to the city is established by: use of city
property in accordance with a contract, license, or permit; the receipt of city
monies for the activity or event; or an ordinance or resolution of the city
council that recognizes the activity or event as benefiting the city.
      (11)   EFFECTIVE AREA means:
         (A)   For a detached sign, other than outlined in Subparagraph (B)
below, the area within a minimum imaginary rectangle of vertical and horizontal
lines that fully contains all extremities of the sign, excluding its supports.
This rectangle is calculated from an orthographic projection of the sign viewed
horizontally. The viewpoint for this projection that produces the largest
rectangle must be used. If elements of the sign are moveable or flexible, such
as a flag or a string of lights, the measurement is taken when the elements are
fully extended and parallel to the plane of view.
         (B)   For signs placed on a fence, non-enclosing wall, planter, or
other similar structure that is designed to serve a separate purpose other than
to support the sign, the entire area of such structure shall not be computed.
In such cases, the sign area shall be computed as the entire area within a
single continuous rectilinear perimeter of not more than eight straight lines
enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblems, or figures
together with all material, color, or lighting forming an integral part of the
display or used to differentiate the sign background against which it is
placed.
         (C)   For an attached sign, the sum of the areas within minimum
imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which fully
contains a word. If a design, outline, illustration, or interior illumination
surrounds or attracts attention to a word, then it is included in the
calculation of effective area.
         (D)   An awning or canopy is not included in the calculation of the
effective area.
      (12)   ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY means a structure or building used for
sports events or the performing arts, including indoor motion picture theaters,
theaters for live musical or dramatic performances, indoor or outdoor concert
halls, and exhibition halls.
      (13)   EXPRESSWAY SIGN means a detached sign that is wholly within 100
feet of an expressway or new expressway right-of-way and whose message is
visible from the main traveled way.
      (14)   FACADE means any separate face of a building, including parapet
walls and omitted wall lines, or any part of a building which encloses or
covers usable space, chimneys, roof-mounted equipment, mounted antennas, or
water towers. Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction or in
directions within 45 degrees of one another, they are to be considered as part
of a single facade. A roof is not a facade or part of a facade. Multiple
buildings on the same lot will each be deemed to have separate facades.
      (15)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign that is parallel to the
building facade.
      (16)   GENERIC GRAPHICS means any pattern of shapes, colors, or symbols
that does not commercially advertise.
      (17)   HIGHWAY BEAUTIFICATION ACT (HBA) SIGN means a non-premise sign
that is within 660 feet of an expressway or new expressway right-of-way and
whose message is visible from the main traveled way.
      (18)   MARQUEE means a permanent canopy projecting over the main
pedestrian entrance of a building. A marquee is considered to be part of the
building.
      (19)   MARQUEE SIGN means an attached sign applied to a marquee, and
consisting primarily of changeable panels, words, or characters.
      (20)   MONUMENT SIGN means a detached sign applied directly onto a grade-
level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation between
the sign and grade.
      (21)   PREMISE means a lot or unplatted tract that is reflected in the
plat books of the building inspection division of the city. See Section
51A-7.208.
      (22)   PREMISE SIGN means any sign the content of which relates to the
premise on which it is located and refers exclusively to:
         (A)   the name, trade name, or logo of the owner or occupant of the
premise or the identification of the premises;
         (B)   accommodations, services, or activities offered or conducted on
the premise; or
         (C)   the construction, lease, remodeling, or sale of the premise.
      (23)   PROJECTING SIGN means an attached sign projecting from a building.
      (24)   SIGN HARDWARE means the structural support system for a sign,
including the fastening devices that secure the sign to a building facade or
pole.
      (25)   SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGN means an attached or detached sign
temporarily supplementing the permanent signs on a premise.
      (26)   WINDOW SIGN means a sign applied to the internal or external
surface of a window.
      (27)   WORD means any of the following:
         (A)   Any word in any language found in any standard unabridged
dictionary or dictionary of slang.
         (B)   Any proper noun or any initial or series of initials.
         (C)   Any separate character, symbol, or abbreviation such as “&”,
“$”, “%”, and “Inc.”.
         (D)   Any telephone number or commonly used combination of numerals
and symbols such as “$5.00" or “50%”.
         (E)   Any internet website, network, protocol address, domain name, or
universal record locator.
         (F)   Any symbol or logo that is a registered trademark but which
itself contains no word or character.
         (G)   A street number is not considered to be a word. (Ord. 25899)
SEC. 51A-7.2005.   SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person may alter, expand, maintain, or place a sign in this
district without first obtaining a sign permit from the city. No sign permit
may be issued for a sign in this district unless the application has first been
reviewed by the director and a certificate of appropriateness has been issued
in accordance with the procedure outlined in this section.
   (b)   This section does not apply to government signs described in Section
51A-7.207.
   (c)   Section
51A-7.504, which establishes the special sign district advisory committee for
special provision sign districts, does not apply to this district.
   (d)   Section
51A-7.505, which outlines the procedure for obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness, does not apply in this district.
   (e)   Section
51A-7.602, which lists certain signs that require sign permits, does not apply
to signs in this district. All signs within this district require sign permits.
   (f)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit to authorize a sign in
this district, the building official shall refer the application to the
director for review. The director shall issue a decision within 30 calendar
days after the a complete application is submitted to the building official.
The director shall solicit the recommendation of appropriate staff before
approving or disapproving a certificate of appropriateness.
   (g)   The director shall approve a certificate of appropriateness if the
application complies with the requirements of this district and the director
finds that the proposed sign is consistent with the character of this district.
The director shall consider the proposed sign in terms of its appropriateness
to this district with particular attention to the effect of the proposed sign
upon the economic structure of this district and the effect of the proposed
sign upon adjacent and surrounding premises without regard to the consideration
of the message conveyed by the sign. The director shall give written notice of
the director’s decision to the applicant. Notice is given when mailed to the
applicant.
   (h)   A decision to grant a certificate of appropriateness may not be
appealed. A decision to deny a certificate of appropriateness may be appealed
to the city plan commission only by the applicant. An appeal is made by filing
a written request with the director within 10 calendar days after notice of the
director’s decision is given. In considering the appeal, the sole issue shall
be whether the director erred, and in this connection, the city plan commission
shall consider the same standard that was required to be considered by the
director. Decisions of the city plan commission are final as to administrative
remedies. If the city plan commission fails to make a decision on an appeal
within 30 calendar days after the appeal is filed with the director, the
application shall be considered approved, provided the sign otherwise complies
with all applicable city codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord.
25899)
SEC. 51A-7.2006.   PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SIGNS.
   (a)   Balloons and wind devices. All balloons, banners, flags, inflatable
objects, pennants, streamers, and wind devices are considered to be signs and
may not be used except as specifically allowed in this section.
   (b)   Changeable messages.
      (1)   A changeable message may not change more than every eight seconds.
      (2)   Only one sign with a changeable message is allowed per premise.
      (3)   The changeable message portion of any sign is limited to an
effective area of 50 square feet.
   (c)   Fences. Except for special purpose signs, signs may not be attached to
fences.
   (d)   Historic overlay districts. Within a historic overlay district, the
landmark commission has the sole authority to determine every aspect of a sign,
other than construction and maintenance standards, including effective area,
height, location, number, size, and type, and to issue a certificate of
appropriateness for that sign.
   (e)   Lighting.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, signs may be
illuminated by internal (back) lighting or indirect lighting.
      (2)   The use of neon or single incandescent bulbs is allowed.
      (3)   A light source external to a sign may illuminate a sign if the
light does not cross into a public right-of-way, a residential zoning district
line, or the property line of a residential use.
      (4)   Light used to illuminate a sign may not turn on or off, or change
its brightness, more than twice a day.
   (f)   Message limitation. All signs must be district identification signs,
district promotional message signs, premise signs, or convey a noncommercial
message.
   (g)   Other applicable law.
      (1)   All signs erected or maintained pursuant to the provisions of this
division must be erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable
federal and state laws and with the building code, electrical code, and other
applicable ordinances of the city. In the event of conflict between this
division and other laws, the most restrictive standard applies.
      (2)   For purposes of applying the Federal and Texas Highway
Beautification Acts, this district is considered to be a commercial zoning
district. Signs within this district may not be HBA signs.
      (3)   The provisions of Division
51A-7.200, “Provisions for All Zoning Districts,” applies in this district. If
the event of a conflict, this division controls.
   (h)   Portable signs. Portable signs are prohibited.
   (i)   Signs over the right-of-way.
      (1)   Signs may be located in or project over the public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, sidewalks, subject to the licensing and
franchise requirements of Chapter XIV of the City Charter,
Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, as amended, the Dallas Building Code, and
the requirements of all other applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations.
      (2)   The traffic engineer shall review the location of any sign located
in or overhanging the public right-of-way to ensure that the sign will not pose
a traffic hazard or visibility obstruction.
      (3)   No portion of a sign may be located less than two feet from a
vertical plane extending upward from the back of a street curb. (Ord. Nos.
25899; 28424)
SEC. 51A-7.2007.   ATTACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   Provisions applicable to all attached signs.
      (1)   Attached signs must be securely attached.
      (2)   The maximum combined effective area of all attached signs on a
facade may not exceed 20 percent of the total area of the facade.
      (3)   Attached signs may have a maximum of eight words, which contain any
character of a height equal to or exceeding four inches. Words consisting of
characters less than four inches high may be used without limit.
      (4)   Attached signs may not be painted onto the roof of a building.
      (5)   Attached signs are not permitted on the roof of a building.
      (6)   Banners used as attached signs may only be special purpose signs.
   (b)   Arcade signs.
      (1)   There is no limit to the number of arcade signs permitted on a
premise.
      (2)   Arcade signs may not exceed eight square feet in effective area.
      (3)   The minimum linear distance between any two arcade signs is 15
feet.
      (4)   Arcade signs may not be lower than 10 feet above the sidewalk.
      (5)   Arcade signs may not project above the arcade to which they are
attached.
      (6)   Arcade signs may only identify the premise or occupant and provide
an address.
   (c)   Awning signs.
      (1)   There is no limit on the number of awning signs on a premise.
      (2)   A sign on the face of the awning may only have an effective area
equal to 20 percent of the face of the awning. As used in this provision,
“face” means the sloping or curved portion of an awning that provides shade
over the sidewalk.
      (3)   Awning signs may not be lower than eight feet above the sidewalk.
      (4)   Awning signs may not project more than two inches from the surface
of the awning.
      (5)   Awning signs may not be backlit.
      (6)   The valance of an awning may only have an address, occupant
identification, or premise identification. As used in this provision, “valance”
means that portion of an awning parallel to the street and perpendicular to the
sidewalk.
   (d)   Flat attached signs.
      (1)   The maximum number of flat attached signs on any premise is one per
public pedestrian entrance or one per first-floor tenant, whichever is greater.
      (2)   The total effective area of all flat attached signs per facade may
not exceed 20 percent of the facade or 400 square feet, whichever is less.
      (3)   Flat attached signs may not project above the roofline.
      (4)   A flat attached sign may not project more than 12 inches from the
facade to which it is attached.
   (e)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   The maximum number of marquee signs on any premise is one per
street frontage.
      (2)   The horizontal dimension (length) of a marquee sign may not exceed
two-thirds of the length of the facade to which it is attached. The vertical
dimension (width) of a marquee sign may not exceed six feet.
      (3)   Marquee signs are allowed only on an entertainment facility.
      (4)   Marquee signs may have a changeable message.
      (5)   Marquee signs may incorporate moving patterns or bands of light,
except that the use of illumination to produce apparent motion of a visual
image, such as animation or similar effects, is prohibited.
   (f)   Projecting signs.
      (1)   The maximum number of projecting signs on any premise is one per
facade.
      (2)   Projecting signs may not exceed 40 square feet in effective area.
      (3)   Projecting signs may not be lower than 10 feet above the sidewalk.
      (4)   No portion of a projecting sign may be located more than five feet
from the facade to which it is attached.
      (5)   A projecting sign may not project higher than four feet above the
edge of the wall to which it is attached.
      (6)   Projecting signs must be a minimum of five feet from another
projecting sign.
      (7)   Projecting signs may have a message on both sides of the sign
structure.
   (g)   Special purpose signs.
      (1)   Non-window special purpose signs.
         (A)   The maximum number of non-window special purpose signs on a
facade at any time is two.
         (B)   Non-window special purpose signs may not exceed 50 square feet
in effective area.
         (C)   Non-window special purpose signs may be displayed on a premise a
maximum of four times each calendar year for a maximum of 30 consecutive days
each time. Each new non-window special purpose sign must have a new message.
         (D)   Banners used as attached signs may only be non-window special
purpose signs.
         (E)   Non-window special purpose signs that relate exclusively to the
construction, lease, remodeling, or sale of the premise are permitted without
limit as to the number or length of time displayed.
      (2)   Window special purpose signs.
         (A)   There is no limit on the number of window special purpose signs.
         (B)   No more than 25 percent of a window surface may be covered by
either window signs or window special purpose signs, alone or in combination.
         (C)   Window special purpose signs may not contain words with
characters more than eight inches in height.
         (D)   Window special purpose signs may be displayed on a premise a
maximum of four times each calendar year for a maximum of 30 consecutive days
each time. Each new window special purpose sign must have a new message.
         (E)   Window special purpose signs may contain a district promotional
message.
         (F)   Window special purpose signs that relate exclusively to the
construction, lease, remodeling, or sale of the premises on which they are
located are permitted without limit as to the number or length of time
displayed.
   (h)   Window signs.
      (1)   There is no limit on the number of window signs.
      (2)   No more than 25 percent of a window surface may be covered by
either window signs or window special purpose signs, alone or in combination.
      (3)   Window signs that use internal neon bulbs may not cover more than
15 percent of the window surface.
      (4)   Window signs may not contain words with characters more than eight
inches in height.
      (5)   Window signs may not be taped to the window. Window signs must be
professionally hand-painted, silk screened, or made of self-adhesive vinyl.
(Ord. 25899)
SEC. 51A-7.2008   DETACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   Provisions applicable to all detached signs.
      (1)   Number. Only one detached sign may be erected on any premise,
except that a premise that has more than 450 feet of frontage along a public
right-of-way other than an alley may have no more than one additional detached
sign for each additional 450 feet of frontage or fraction thereof.
      (2)   Height and effective area dependent upon setback.
         (A)   Detached signs must be set back a minimum of 10 feet.
         (B)   A detached sign set back more than 10 feet but less than or
equal to 20 feet may not exceed 20 feet in height or exceed 50 square feet in
effective area.
         (C)   A detached sign set back more than 20 feet but less than or
equal to 30 feet may not exceed 30 feet in height or exceed 150 square feet in
effective area.
         (D)   In Subdistricts 1, 2, and 4, a detached sign set back more than
30 feet may not exceed 30 feet in height or exceed 150 square feet in effective
area.
         (E)   In Subdistricts 3 and 5, a detached sign set back more than 30
feet may not exceed 40 feet in height or exceed 400 square feet in effective
area.
      (3)   Other requirements.
         (A)   Except for special purpose signs, detached signs may not be
placed on fences.
         (B)   A pole-mounted detached sign must have either a pole cover that
covers the entire pole and is made of masonry, metal, plastic, stucco, or wood
or have a minimum three-foot-high masonry base.
         (C)   Banners used as detached signs may only be street light banners.
   (b)   District identification signs.
      (1)   There is no limit on the number of district identification signs in
the district.
      (2)   The maximum effective area of a district identification sign is 12
square feet.
      (3)   The maximum height of a district identification sign is 20 feet.
      (4)   District identification signs may not have a changeable message.
   (c)   Expressway signs.
      (1)   The maximum number of expressway signs is one per premise.
      (2)   Expressway signs may not exceed 400 square feet in effective area.
      (3)   Expressway signs may not exceed 40 feet in height.
      (4)   Expressway signs must be set back from the expressway and Fort
Worth Avenue a minimum of 50 feet.
   (d)   Monument signs.
      (1)   The maximum number of monument signs is one per premise.
      (2)   Monument signs may not exceed 150 square feet in effective area.
      (3)   Monument signs may not exceed 10 feet in height.
      (4)   In Subdistrict 2, monument signs must be set back a minimum of 15
feet.
      (5)   In Subdistricts 1, 3, 4, and 5, monument signs must be set back a
minimum of 10 feet.
   (e)   Special purpose signs.
      (1)   The maximum number of special purpose signs on a premise at any
time is one per street frontage.
      (2)   Special purpose signs may not exceed 50 square feet in effective
area.
      (3)   Special purpose signs may not exceed eight feet in height.
      (4)   A special purpose sign must be located at least 100 feet from any
other detached special purpose sign on the same premise.
      (5)   Special purpose signs may be displayed on a premise a maximum of
four times each calendar year for a maximum of 30 consecutive days each time.
Each new special purpose sign must have a new message.
      (6)   Special purpose signs may be placed on fences.
      (7)   Special purpose signs may not be mounted on rotating wheels.
      (8)   Special purpose signs may not be mounted on a trailer.
      (9)   Special purpose signs may not be changeable message signs or have
changeable copy.
      (10)   Special purpose signs may not be illuminated.
      (11)   Special purpose signs may not contain flashing or blinking lights.
      (12)   Special purpose signs that relate exclusively to the construction,
lease, remodeling, or sale of the premises on which they are located are
permitted without limit as to the length of time displayed.
   (f)   Street light banners.
      (1)   The maximum number of street light banners is two per pole, with
each banner on opposite sides of the pole.
      (2)   Streetlight banners may not exceed 12 square feet in effective
area.
      (3)   Streetlight banners may not project more than three feet from the
pole onto which they are mounted.
      (4)   Streetlight banners must be at least 12 feet above the sidewalk. A
streetlight banner that overhangs a roadway must be at least 15 feet above the
roadway.
      (5)   Streetlight banners and sign hardware must be made out of weather-
resistant and rust-proof material.
      (6)   If a streetlight banner overhangs the public right-of-way, a
license must be obtained in accordance with the requirements of the City
Charter and the Dallas City Code.
      (7)   A streetlight banner must be a district identification sign, or
display a district promotional message or generic graphics.
      (8)   A street light banner having a district promotional message may not
be erected more than 60 days prior to the beginning of the advertised activity
or event, and must be removed no later than 30 days after that activity or
event has ended.
      (9)   The hardware for a streetlight banner may be left in place between
displays of a banner. A streetlight banner and the sign hardware must be
mounted on a streetlight pole and meet the sign construction and design
standards in the Dallas Building Code.
      (10)   A sign permit is not required to erect or remove a streetlight
banner. (Ord. 25899)
Division 51A-7.2100. Reserved.
   (Repealed by Ord. No. 33252)
Division 51A-7.2200. Parkland Hospital Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.2201.   DESIGNATION OF PARKLAND HOSPITAL SIGN DISTRICT.
   (a)   A sign district is hereby created to be known as the Parkland Hospital
Sign District.
   (b)   This district is that area of the city within the boundaries described
in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 28950, passed by the Dallas City Council
on March 27, 2013. (Ord. 28950)
SEC 51A-7.2202.   DESIGNATION OF CORRIDORS.
   (a)   This district is hereby divided into three corridors: the Perimeter
Corridor, the Parkland Corridor, and the Service Corridor.
   (b)   The Perimeter Corridor is that area of the city generally bordering on
Harry Hines Boulevard, Medical District Drive, and Maple Avenue within the
boundaries described in Exhibit B attached to Ordinance No. 28950, passed by
the Dallas City Council on March 27, 2013.
   (c)   The Parkland Corridor is that area of the city generally encompassing
the internal campus drive from Harry Hines Boulevard to Maple Avenue and from
Tex-Oak Avenue to Bengal Street within the boundaries described in Exhibit C
attached to Ordinance No. 28950, passed by the Dallas City Council on March 27,
2013.
   (d)   The Service Corridor is that area of the city generally bordering the
Parkland campus on the west, Tex-Oak Avenue, Butler Street, portions of
Redfield Street, and Amelia Court within the boundaries described in Exhibit D
attached to Ordinance No. 28950, passed by the Dallas City Council on March 27,
2013. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2203.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this division is to regulate both the construction of
new signs and alterations of existing signs with a view towards enhancing,
preserving, and developing the unique character of the Parkland Hospital area
while addressing the public’s need to find and navigate to the multiple
entrances efficiently.
   (b)   The objectives of this division include those listed in Section
51A-7.101 as well the objectives of ensuring that signs are appropriate to the
architecture of the district, do not obscure significant architectural
features, and lend themselves to the various user types (vehicular to
pedestrian) of the area.
   (c)   The district regulations reflect the vehicular speeds along Harry
Hines Boulevard and Medical District Drive, the high level of pedestrian
activity along Parkland Boulevard, and the need to maximize effective
orientation to multiple buildings on the campus. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2204.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   ARCADE SIGN means any sign that is mounted under a canopy or awning
and is perpendicular to the building to which the canopy or awning is attached.
This sign is intended to be read from the pedestrian walkway that the canopy or
awning covers.
      (2)   AWNING means a fabric or vinyl surface supported by a metal
structure, which is applied to the face of a building.
      (3)   AWNING SIGN means a sign attached to, painted on, or otherwise
applied to an awning.
      (4)   BANNER means a sign attached to or applied on a strip of cloth,
vinyl, or similar material and attached to a building, pole, or structure.
Awning signs, canopy signs, and flags are not banners.
      (5)   BRANDING SIGN means a sign that only displays the brand, logo, or
name of the district.
      (6)   CANOPY means a permanent, non-fabric architectural element
projecting from the face of a building.
      (7)   CANOPY SIGN means a sign attached to, applied on, or supported by a
canopy.
      (8)   CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN means a sign displaying static images that
may display different designs, messages, or advertisements and that may include
LED/LCD elements, slide lettering, slated rotating surfaces, or other
changeable message technology.
      (9)   CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGN means a sign that is affixed to a
construction barricade.
      (10)   DONOR RECOGNITION SIGN means a sign made of words, logos, or
emblems that displays the name of an individual, institution, or other entity
that donates money, time, services, or other goods to Parkland Hospital or the
Parkland Foundation for the benefit of the hospital.
      (11)   DISTRICT means the Parkland Hospital Sign District.
      (12)   EFFECTIVE AREA means the following:
         (A)   For a detached sign, the area within a minimum imaginary
rectangle of vertical and horizontal lines that fully contains all extremities
of the sign, excluding its supports. This rectangle is calculated from an
orthographic projection of the sign viewed horizontally. The viewpoint for this
projection that produces the largest rectangle must be used. If elements of the
sign are movable or flexible, such as a flag or a string of lights, the
measurement is taken when the elements are fully extended and parallel to the
plane of view.
         (B)   For an attached sign, the sum of the areas within minimum
imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which fully
contains a word. If a design, outline, illustration, or interior illumination
surrounds or attracts attention to a word, then it is included in the
calculation of effective area.
         (C)   For signs placed on a fence, non-enclosing wall, planter, or
other similar structure that is designed to serve a separate purpose other than
to support the sign, the entire area of such structure is not computed, and the
effective area is to be measured by the rule for effective area for attached
signs.
      (13)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting 24 inches or
less from a building, and with a face parallel to the building facade.
      (14)   GENERIC GRAPHICS means a pattern of shapes, colors, or symbols
that does not commercially advertise.
      (15)   KIOSK means a multi-sided structure for the display of premise
signs, information messages, and wayfinding information and maps.
      (16)   LANDSCAPE SIGN means a sign that is a part of a single landscape
design which creates a base for the sign in conjunction with a retaining wall
or an open space created with the use of water or planting material.
      (17)   LOWER LEVEL SIGN AREA means the portion of a facade equal to or
less than 85 linear feet measured vertically from the ground.
      (18)   MONUMENT SIGN means a detached sign applied directly onto a grade-
level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation between
the sign and grade.
      (19)   MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGN means a sign that must direct vehicular or
pedestrian movement onto or within this district and may include the name or
logo of any premise located in this district.
      (20)   PARKING LOT IDENTIFICATION SIGN means a sign that may display the
number, name, and primary users, in any combination, of a parking lot within
the district.
      (21)   PARKING ZONE IDENTIFICATION SIGN means a sign identifying a
particular zone or area within a parking lot either by letter, number, name, or
a combination of the three, typically located on light poles within the parking
lot.
      (22)   PEDESTRIAN MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGN means a sign providing
information about any of the following:
         (A)   The name, trade name, or logo of the owner or occupant of any
premise within this district.
         (B)   The identification of any premise within this district.
         (C)   Any accommodations, services, or activities offered or
conducted, other than incidentally, on any premise within this district.
         (D)   Pedestrian directional information.
         (E)   Campus maps and other orientation information.
      (23)   PERMANENT SIGN means any sign that is not a temporary sign as
defined in this section.
      (24)   PROJECTING ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting 18 or
more inches from a building.
      (25)   PROMOTIONAL MESSAGE means a message that identifies, promotes, or
advertises a cultural activity within this district, any event being conducted,
in whole or in part, in this district, or any special event being conducted in
this district.
      (26)   SPECIAL EVENT means a special event as defined in Chapter 42A of
the Dallas City Code.
      (27)   TEMPORARY SIGN means a sign erected for a limited time that
identifies an event or activity of limited duration. Examples include signs
advertising the sale or lease of property, construction activity in progress,
or a special or other cultural event.
      (28)   UPPER LEVEL SIGN AREA means the portion of a facade within the top
45 linear feet of the building measured vertically.
      (29)   VISION GLASS means window glass that is transparent, translucent,
or decoratively fritted.
      (30)   WELCOME MESSAGE means a message that identifies and greets heads
of state; foreign dignitaries; groups using city or county property in
accordance with a contract, license, or permit; or government organizations.
      (31)   WINDOW DISPLAY SIGN means a sign placed within a storefront window
of a building and designed to be viewed from a street or public area. (Ord.
28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2205.   SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this subsection, a person shall not
alter, place, maintain, expand, or remove a sign in this district without first
obtaining a sign permit. A sign permit is not required to:
      (1)   Change the text on a changeable message sign, a window display
sign, a protective sign, or a kiosk.
      (2)   Erect or replace a banner on a street pole using the existing sign
hardware. A sign permit is required to install sign hardware for a banner.
      (3)   Erect a temporary sign that is less than 50 square feet in
effective area.
      (4)   Erect a non-illuminated sign with an effective area of 20 square
feet or less.
   (b)   Sign permit procedures. The procedures for obtaining a sign permit
using the director procedure in Section
51A-7.505(4) apply in this district.
   (c)   Special event signs. Special event signs are governed by the special
event permit. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2206.   IMITATION OF TRAFFIC AND EMERGENCY SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall cause to be erected or maintained any sign using any
combination of forms, words, colors, or lights that imitate standard public
traffic regulatory or emergency signs or signals. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2207.   CREATION OF SITE.
   Except for signs located wholly within the public right-of-way, the building
official shall not issue a permit for construction, erection, placement, or
maintenance of a sign until a site is established in one of the following ways:
      (1)   A lot is part of a plat which is approved by the city plan
commission and filed in the plat records of Dallas County, Texas.
      (2)   Tracts that are governed by a detached sign unity agreement in
accordance with Section
51A-7.213. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2208.   SIGNS OVER THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (a)   Signs may be located in or project over the public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, sidewalks, subject to the licensing and
franchise requirements of Chapter XIV of the city charter, as amended;
Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, as amended; and the requirements of this
section.
   (b)   The traffic engineer shall review the location of any sign located in
or overhanging the public right-of-way to ensure that the sign will not pose a
traffic hazard or visibility obstruction. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2209.   GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   (a)   Except as provided in this division, all signs must comply with
Article VII.
   (b)   Except as provided in this subsection, the minimum setback from back
of curb is two feet. In the Perimeter Corridor, the minimum setback from back
of curb is 10 feet.
   (c)   Signs are not allowed in a visibility triangle.
   (d)   All permanent signs must be premise signs or convey a noncommercial
message.
   (e)   Signs may not be painted onto the roof of a building, and flat
attached signs are not permitted on the roof of a building, except that helipad
signs identifying Parkland Hospital are permitted to be painted onto the roof
of a building.
   (f)   Signs may be internally illuminated.
   (g)   Illuminated signs with an effective area of 500 square feet or less
may not have a luminance greater than 300 foot lamberts, nor may any such sign
have a luminance greater than 300 foot lamberts for any portion of the sign
within a circle two feet in diameter. Illuminated signs with an effective area
greater than 500 square feet may not have a luminance greater than 200 foot
lamberts, nor may any such sign have a luminance greater than 200 foot lamberts
for any portion of the sign within a circle of two feet in diameter. The
measurements of luminance are taken from any other premise or from any public
right-of-way other than an alley.
   (h)   Changeable messages must follow the requirements of Section
51A-7.303(b).
   (i)   There is no limit to the number of words permitted on a sign. (Ord.
28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2210.   MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGNS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Movement control signs may be erected on any premise without limit
as to number.
      (2)   Movement control signs may contain generic graphics.
   (b)   Primary movement control signs. Primary movement control signs:
      (1)   must be monument signs;
      (2)   may not exceed 150 square feet in effective area;
      (3)   may not exceed 20 feet in height; and
      (4)   may only be located in the Perimeter Corridor.
   (c)   Secondary movement control signs. Secondary movement control signs:
      (1)   must be monument signs;
      (2)   may not exceed 100 square feet in effective area;
      (3)   may not exceed 16 feet in height; and
      (4)   may only be located in the Perimeter Corridor.
   (d)   Tertiary movement control signs. Tertiary movement control signs:
      (1)   must be monument signs;
      (2)   may not exceed 50 square feet in effective area;
      (3)   may not exceed 11 feet in height;
      (4)   may be located anywhere in the district; and
      (5)   in the Parkland Corridor, may contain multiple tenant names.
   (e)   Quaternary movement control signs. Quaternary movement control signs:
      (1)   must be monument signs;
      (2)   may not exceed 20 square feet in effective area;
      (3)   may not exceed six feet in height; and
      (4)   may be located anywhere in the district.
   (f)   Overhead movement control signs. Overhead movement control signs:
      (1)   must be pole mounted signs;
      (2)   may not exceed 40 square feet in aggregate effective area of
movement control panels;
      (3)   must have a minimum clearance of 13 feet; and
      (4)   may be located anywhere in the district.
   (g)   Parkland Corridor movement control signs. Parkland Corridor movement
control signs:
      (1)   must be pole mounted signs;
      (2)   may not exceed 25 square feet in effective area of movement control
panels;
      (3)   may also support a banner (the banner square footage is not counted
as part of the square footage);
      (4)   must have a minimum clearance of eight feet; and
      (5)   may be located only in the Parkland Corridor.
   (h)   Pedestrian movement control signs. Pedestrian movement control signs:
      (1)   must be monument signs;
      (2)   may not exceed 20 square feet in effective area;
      (3)   may not exceed 10 feet in height; and
      (4)   may be located anywhere in the district.
   (i)   Parking zone identification signs. Parking zone identification signs:
      (1)   must be pole mounted signs;
      (2)   may not exceed three square feet in effective area;
      (3)   must have a minimum clearance of eight feet; and
      (4)   may be located anywhere in the district.
   (j)   Parking lot identification signs. Parking lot identification signs:
      (1)   must be monument signs;
      (2)   may not exceed 25 square feet in effective area; and
      (3)   may be located anywhere in the district. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2211.   DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   (a)   District identification signs may only identify the name or logo of
this district or an abutting special provision sign district.
   (b)   District identification signs may be internally or externally
illuminated.
   (c)   In the Perimeter Corridor, a maximum of two district identification
signs are permitted. A district identification sign in this corridor may be
attached onto a non-enclosing wall or may be a monument sign.
      (1)   If the sign is attached onto a non-enclosing wall, the sign may not
exceed 10 square feet in effective area.
      (2)   If the sign is a monument sign, the sign may not exceed 20 feet in
height or 150 square feet in effective area.
   (d)   In the Parkland Corridor, district identification signs are
prohibited.
   (e)   In the Service Corridor, a maximum of two district identification
signs are permitted and they must be monument signs. The signs may not exceed
11 feet in height or 45 square feet in effective area. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2212.   BANNER SIGNS.
   (a)   Banner signs may not be illuminated.
   (b)   Banner signs may be attached to Parkland Corridor movement control
sign poles, or may be mounted to street light poles in the Perimeter Corridor
or the Service Corridor.
   (c)   Pole mounted banner signs are not limited in number.
   (d)   Pole mounted banner signs must:
      (1)   meet the sign construction and design standards contained in the
Dallas Building Code;
      (2)   be at least eight feet, but no more than 16 feet, above grade;
      (3)   not project more than three feet from the pole on which they are
mounted;
      (4)   not exceed eight square feet in effective area;
      (5)   be made out of weather-resistant and rust-proof material; and
      (6)   may contain district activity promotional messages, welcome
messages, premise messages, and sponsorship messages.
   (e)   A sign permit is not required to erect or remove a pole mounted
banner. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2213.   BRANDING SIGNS.
   (a)   An unlimited number of branding signs may be located on or
incorporated into manhole covers, street light poles, sidewalks, benches, trash
receptacles, and other improvements.
   (b)   Branding signs may not exceed one square foot in effective area. (Ord.
28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2214.   DONOR RECOGNITION SIGNS.
   (a)   Attached donor recognition signs.
      (1)   Attached donor recognition signs are allowed in the lower level
sign area only.
      (2)   Attached donor recognition signs may not be located on vision
glass, but may be located on non-vision glass or solid surface areas of the
facade.
      (3)   The aggregate square footage of all donor recognition signs on a
facade may not exceed 15 percent of the facade to which they are attached.
      (4)   Attached donor recognition signs may be located anywhere in the
district.
   (b)   Detached donor recognition signs.
      (1)   Detached donor recognition signs may be monument or landscape
signs.
      (2)   Detached donor recognition signs may not exceed 50 square feet in
effective area.
      (3)   Detached donor recognition signs may not exceed 11 feet in height.
      (4)   Detached donor recognition signs may include other non-commercial
messages.
      (5)   Detached donor recognition signs may be located anywhere in the
district. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2215.   STREAMERS, PENNANTS, AND INFLATABLE SEASONAL DECORATIONS
PROHIBITED.
   Streamers, pennants, and inflatable seasonal decorations, including, but not
limited to, balloons, are prohibited. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2216.   ATTACHED SIGNS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, the total effective area for
all attached signs on a facade may not exceed 30 percent of the area of the
facade.
      (2)   Projecting signs and special event signs may not exceed 20 percent
of the area of facade.
      (3)   Attached signs must be securely attached.
      (4)   Attached signs may not project more than four feet above the
surface to which they are attached.
      (5)   Attached signs may only be located in the lower level sign area or
the upper level sign area.
   (b)   Arcade signs.
      (1)   Arcade signs may be located anywhere in the district.
      (2)   An arcade sign must be located at least six feet from any other
arcade sign.
      (3)   Arcade signs may not exceed six square feet in effective area.
      (4)   Arcade signs may not be lower than 10 feet above grade.
   (c)   Awning signs.
      (1)   Awning signs may be located anywhere in the district.
      (2)   Awning signs may not project beyond the surface of the awning or be
lower than 10 feet above grade.
      (3)   Awning signs may not exceed six square feet in effective area.
      (4)   Awning signs must be located over a window or a door.
      (5)   Awning signs may not be backlit.
   (d)   Canopy signs.
      (1)   Canopy signs may be located anywhere in the district.
      (2)   Canopy signs may not:
         (A)   exceed 75 percent of the length of the canopy facade to which it
is attached;
         (B)   project vertically beyond the canopy more than four feet;
         (C)   project horizontally more than 12 inches from the surface of the
canopy; or
         (D)   be lower than 10 feet above grade.
   (e)   Flat attached signs.
      (1)   Except as provided in this division, a flat attached sign may be
located anywhere in the district.
      (2)   The minimum distance between flat attached signs on a retail or
mixed use premise is four feet.
      (3)   The maximum width of a flat attached sign on a retail or mixed use
premise is 75 percent of the facade width.
      (4)   Flat attached signs on a retail or mixed use premise may not be
located more than 20 feet from the ground.
   (f)   Projecting attached signs.
      (1)   Projecting attached signs may be located anywhere in the district.
      (2)   Projecting attached signs on a retail or mixed use premise may not:
         (A)   exceed 20 square feet in effective area;
         (B)   be lower than 10 feet above grade;
         (C)   be closer than 15 feet to any other projecting attached sign on
a retail or mixed use premise; or
         (D)   project vertically above 20 feet. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2217.   WINDOW DISPLAY SIGNS.
   (a)   Window display signs are permitted only on the ground floor of a
retail or mixed-use premise in the Parkland Corridor.
   (b)   Window display signs may not cover more than 25 percent of the surface
area of a window. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2218.   KIOSK SIGNS.
   (a)   A maximum of 10 kiosks are permitted in this district.
   (b)   Kiosks may not be illuminated by a detached, independent external
light source.
   (c)   Kiosks may be changeable message signs.
   (d)   Kiosks must be spaced at least 50 feet apart.
   (e)   Kiosks must be securely anchored to the ground.
   (f)   Kiosks may not exceed 10 feet in height and 50 square feet in
effective area. The display area for each sign on a kiosk may not exceed 20
square feet in effective area. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2219.   CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGNS.
   (a)   Construction barricade signs may not be illuminated or contain any
moving parts.
   (b)   Construction barricade signs must be removed when the construction
barricade is removed.
   (c)   A construction barricade may be fully decorated with a graphic except
that:
      (1)   no decoration or part of the graphic may project more than two
inches horizontally from the barricade facade, or
      (2)   no decoration or graphic may project more than four feet vertically
above the top of the barricade. (Ord. 28950)
SEC. 51A-7.2220.   TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (a)   Temporary signs may be externally or internally illuminated.
   (b)   Temporary signs may be attached or detached.
   (c)   Attached temporary signs may not exceed 125 square feet in effective
area.
   (d)   Detached temporary signs may not exceed 25 square feet in effective
area. (Ord. 28950)
Division 51A-7.2300. Southwestern Medical District Sign District.
SEC. 51A-7.2301.   DESIGNATION OF SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL SPECIAL PROVISION SIGN
DISTRICT.
   (a)   A special provision sign district is hereby created to be known as the
Southwestern Medical District Sign District.
   (b)   This district is that area within the boundaries described in Exhibit
A attached to Ordinance No. 29392, passed by the Dallas City Council on June
25, 2014. (Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2302.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this division is to regulate both the construction of
new signs and alterations of existing signs with a view towards enhancing,
preserving, and developing the unique character of the Southwestern Medical
District area while addressing the public's need to locate and navigate to the
multiple hospital and medical office entrances efficiently.
   (b)   The objectives of this division include those listed in Section
51A-7.101 as well as to:
      (1)   Create an aesthetically pleasing environment that cultivates a
center for healthcare, education, biomedical research, and technology.
      (2)   Designate entries into this district.
      (3)   Communicate clear directions to, within, and through the district.
      (4)   Promote the goods and services available in this district.
      (5)   Ensure that the size and orientation of signs assist pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
      (6)   Enhance economic growth and community identity for local businesses
and residents in the district.
      (7)   Ensure that significant architectural features and buildings within
this district are not obscured by inappropriate signs.
      (8)   Identify and promote special events and cultural activities in this
district.
      (9)   Identify and highlight key features, local amenities, corridors,
and communities in and adjacent to this district. (Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2303.   DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   In this division:
      (1)   BANNER means a sign attached to or applied on a strip of cloth,
vinyl, metal, or similar material and attached to a building, pole, or
structure. Canopy signs and flags are not banners.
      (2)   CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN means a sign displaying static images that
may display different designs, messages, or advertisements and that may include
LED/LCD elements, slide lettering, slated rotating surfaces, or other
changeable message technology.
      (3)   CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGN means a sign that is affixed to a
construction barricade.
      (4)   DISTRICT OR THIS DISTRICT means the Southwestern Medical District
Sign District.
      (5)   EFFECTIVE AREA means the following:
         (A)   For a detached sign, the area within a minimum imaginary
rectangle of vertical and horizontal lines that fully contains all extremities
of the sign, excluding its supports. This rectangle is calculated from an
orthographic projection of the sign viewed horizontally. The viewpoint for this
projection that produces the largest rectangle must be used. If elements of the
sign are movable or flexible, such as a flag or a string of lights, the
measurement is taken when the elements are fully extended and parallel to the
plane of view.
         (B)   For an attached sign, the sum of the areas within minimum
imaginary rectangles of vertical and horizontal lines, each of which fully
contains a word. If a design, outline, illustration, or interior illumination
surrounds or attracts attention to a word, then it is included in the
calculation of effective area.
         (C)   For signs placed on a fence, non-enclosing wall, planter, or
other similar structure that is designed to serve a separate purpose other than
to support the sign, the entire area of such structure is not computed, and the
effective area is to be measured by the rule for effective area for attached
signs.
      (6)   FLAT ATTACHED SIGN means an attached sign projecting 24 inches or
less from a building, and with face parallel to the building facade.
      (7)   GATEWAY SIGN means a district entry monument sign that lets
travelers know they are entering a distinct area within this district.
      (8)   GENERIC GRAPHICS mean a pattern of shapes, colors, or symbols that
does not commercially advertise.
      (9)   GOVERNMENTAL TRAFFIC SIGN means a sign, signal, or other traffic
control device installed by a governmental agency for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a public
roadway, including stop signs, one-way signs, no parking signs, and electronic
pedestrian and vehicular signalization devices and their fixtures.
      (10)   LOGO means a graphic or emblem that is used to identify,
symbolize, and promote an entity or organization.
      (11)   MEDICAL INSTITUTION means healthcare, medical, educational, and
research facilities and destinations within this district that may have a
helipad.
      (12)   MONUMENT SIGN means a detached sign applied directly onto a grade-
level support structure (instead of a pole support) with no separation between
the sign and grade.
      (13)   MOVEMENT CONTROL SIGN means a sign that must direct vehicular or
pedestrian movement into or within this district and may include the name or
logo of this district or of any premise within this district.
      (14)   PERMANENT SIGN means any sign that is not a temporary sign as
defined in this section.
      (15)   PROMOTIONAL MESSAGE means a message that identifies, promotes, or
advertises a cultural activity within this district, any event being conducted,
in whole or in part, within this district, or any special event being conducted
within this district.
      (16)   SIGN HARDWARE means the structural support system for a sign,
including the fastening devices that secure the sign to a building facade or
pole.
      (17)   SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS means gateway
signs, movement control signs, trailblazer signs, and district street topper
signs that designate the boundaries of this district and guide people coming to
medical institution destinations.
      (18)   SPECIAL EVENT means a special event as defined in Chapter 42A of
the Dallas City Code.
      (19)   TEMPORARY SIGN means a sign erected for a limited time that
identifies an event or activity of limited duration. Examples include signs
advertising the sale or lease of property, construction activity in progress,
or a special or other cultural event.
      (20)   TEXAS MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES means the latest
publication of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by
the Texas Department of Transportation.
      (21)   TRAILBLAZER SIGN means a sign placed strategically to guide
travelers to a particular destination within this district.
      (22)   VIDEOBOARD SIGN means a flat screen that is capable of displaying
moving images similar to television images, by light-emitting diode or other
similar technology, and that is mounted to the exterior of a building.
      (23)   WELCOME MESSAGE means a message that identifies and greets heads
of state; foreign dignitaries; groups using city or county property in
accordance with a contract, license, or permit; or government organizations.
(Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2304.    SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGN PERMIT
REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this subsection, a person shall not
alter, place, maintain, expand, or remove a Southwestern Medical District
identification sign in this district without first obtaining a sign permit. A
sign permit is not required to:
      (1)   Change the text on a changeable message sign or a protective sign.
      (2)   Erect or replace a banner on a street pole using the existing sign
hardware. A sign permit is required to install sign hardware for a banner.
      (3)   Erect a temporary sign that is less than 50 square feet in
effective area.
      (4)   Erect a non-illuminated sign with an effective area of 20 square
feet or less.
      (5)   Erect governmental traffic signs.
   (b)   Sign permit procedures.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, the procedures for obtaining
a sign permit using the director procedure in Section
51A-7.505(4) apply in this district.
      (2)   For each sign permit application, a sign plan is required and must
include a:
         (A)   map of the district boundaries with existing and proposed
Southwestern Medical District identification signs shown; and
         (B)   table with the cumulative number of the existing and proposed
Southwestern Medical District identification signs tabulated.
   (c)   Review of application. The director shall review the application and
approve or deny it within 30 days of its receipt.
   (d)   Appeals. Any interested person may appeal the decision of the director
by submitting a written request for appeal to the director within 10 days of
the decision. Within 30 days after receipt of the written request for appeal,
the director shall schedule the appeal on a future city plan commission agenda.
The city plan commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the appeal in
accordance with Section
51A-7.505(6).
   (e)   Special event signs. Special event signs are governed by the special
event permit regulations in Chapter 42A of the Dallas City Code. (Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2305.   IMITATION OF TRAFFIC AND EMERGENCY SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall erect or maintain, or cause to be erected or maintained, any
sign using any combination of forms, words, colors, or lights that imitate
standard public traffic regulatory or emergency signs or signals. (Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2306.   CREATION OF SITE.
   Except for signs located wholly within the public right-of-way, the director
shall not issue a permit for the construction, erection, placement, or
maintenance of a sign until a site is established in one of the following ways:
      (1)   A lot is part of a plat that is approved by the city plan
commission and filed in the plat records of Dallas County, Texas.
      (2)   Tracts that are governed by a detached sign unity agreement in
accordance with Section
51A-7.213. (Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2307.   GOVERNMENT TRAFFIC SIGNS.
   Nothing in this division shall be construed to regulate the display of a
government traffic sign. (Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2308.   SIGNS WITHIN AND OVER THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (a)   Signs may be located within or project over the public right-of-way,
subject to the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, the licensing
and franchise requirements of Chapter XIV of the city charter, Article VI of
Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code, as amended, and the requirements of this
section.
   (b)   The traffic engineer shall review and must approve the location in,
projecting over, or overhanging the public right-of-way to ensure that the sign
complies with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, other city ordinances and state laws, and will not pose a traffic or
safety hazard or visibility obstruction.
   (c)   A minimum clearance over public right-of-way must be maintained in
accordance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (d)   For signs in the right-of-way, if there is a conflict between the text
of this division and the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, the
Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices controls. (Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2309.   GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS.
   (a)   Except as provided in this division, signs must comply with the
provisions for business zoning districts in Article VII.
   (b)   Signs may be illuminated by back lighting or indirect lighting.
   (c)   Neon or single incandescent bulbs are not allowed.
   (d)   Illuminated signs with an effective area of 500 square feet or less
may not have a luminance greater than 300 foot lamberts, nor may any such sign
have a luminance greater than 300 foot lamberts for any portion of the sign
within a circle two feet in diameter. The measurements of luminance are taken
from any other premise or from any public right-of-way other than an alley.
   (e)   Illuminated signs with an effective area greater than 500 square feet
may not have a luminance greater than 200 foot lamberts, nor may any such sign
have a luminance greater than 200 foot lamberts for any portion of the sign
within a circle of two feet in diameter. The measurements of luminance are
taken from any other premise or from any public right-of-way other than an
alley.
   (f)   Changeable messages must follow the requirements of Section
51A-7.303(b).
   (g)   A sign or part of a sign may not move or rotate, with the exception of
a wind device, the motion of which is not restricted.
   (h)   Signs are not allowed in a visibility triangle.
   (i)   The number of words allowed on a sign is not limited, unless otherwise
restricted by the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (j)   All permanent signs must be premise signs, convey a noncommercial
message, list the Southwestern Medical District name and logo, or the name of a
hospital or medical or educational use.
   (k)   Fiberglass as a sign material is allowed.
   (l)   For detached signs, plastic is not permitted as an exterior face of a
sign. Plastic may be used as a backing for routed letters in a sign can or as
decorative ornaments.
   (m)   Except for helipad signs, signs may not be painted onto the roof of a
building, and no flat attached sign is permitted on the roof of a building.
(Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2310.   PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited in this district:
   (a)   Videoboard signs.
   (b)   Supergraphic signs.
   (c)   Streamers, pennants, and inflatable seasonal decorations. (Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2311.   SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   A minimum setback is not required for Southwestern Medical District
identification signs.
      (2)   Southwestern Medical District identification signs may be located
within the public right-of-way in accordance with Section
51A-7.2308.
      (3)   Except for district street topper signs, Southwestern Medical
District identification signs may be illuminated in accordance with the Texas
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      (4)   Southwestern Medical District identification signs may contain
changeable messages.
   (b)   Gateway signs.
      (1)   A maximum of 10 gateway signs are allowed.
      (2)   Gateway signs may not exceed:
         (A)   150 square feet in effective area;
         (B)   20 feet in height; and
         (C)   8 feet in width.
      (3)   Gateway signs may only identify the name or logo of this district
or an abutting special provision sign district.
      (4)   Gateway signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
      (5)   Gateway signs may be located within the right-of-way in accordance
with Section
51A-7.2308.
   (c)   Movement control signs.
      (1)   In general.
         (A)   Movement control signs must be pole signs.
         (B)   Movement control signs may be located within or project over the
public right-of-way in accordance with Section
51A-7.2308.
         (C)   Text size on movement controls signs must comply with the Texas
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      (2)   Large movement control signs.
         (A)   A maximum of 14 are allowed.
         (B)   Large movement control signs may have a maximum effective area
of 270 square feet.
         (C)   Large movement control signs may not exceed three separate
panels.
      (3)   Medium movement signs.
         (A)   A maximum of 14 are allowed.
         (B)   Medium movement control signs may have a maximum effective area
of 120 square feet.
         (C)   Medium movement control signs may only contain one panel.
      (4)   Small movement control signs.
         (A)   A maximum of 60 are allowed.
         (B)   Small movement control signs may have a maximum effective area
of 80 square feet.
         (C)   Small movement control signs may only contain one panel.
   (d)   Trailblazer signs.
      (1)   A trailblazer sign may be a pole sign or mounted on existing
traffic signal posts.
      (2)   Trailblazer signs may have a maximum effective area of 12 square
feet.
      (3)   Trailblazer signs may only contain one panel.
      (4)   Trailblazer signs must comply with the minimum clearance over
public right-of-way requirements in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
   (e)   District street topper signs.
      (1)   District street topper signs must be mounted on a traffic control
pole.
      (2)   District street topper signs may have a maximum effective area of
30 square feet.
      (3)   District street topper signs may only contain the name of this
district.
      (4)   District street topper signs may not be internally illuminated.
(Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2312.   BANNERS.
   (a)   Banners may be illuminated.
   (b)   A banner must display a promotional message, a welcome message, or
generic graphics.
   (c)   No more than 10 percent of the effective area of a banner may contain
a welcome message that identifies and greets a group using city property in
accordance with a contract, license, or permit.
   (d)   To create uniformity throughout this district, banners should, on up
to 10 percent of the effective area, contain the words or logos identifying a
Southwestern Medical District cultural event or activity sponsor if the
sponsor's name is part of the name of the activity or event.
   (e)   A banner having a promotional message or a welcome message may not be
erected for more than 90 days before the beginning of the advertised activity
or event, and must be removed no later than 15 days after that activity or
event ends. The sign hardware for a banner may be left in place between
displays of a banner.
   (f)   Banners may be mounted to street light poles.
   (g)   Pole mounted banners are in addition to other signs allowed on a
premise and the banner and its hardware must:
      (1)   meet the sign construction and design standards in the Dallas
Building Code;
      (2)   be at least eight feet, but no more than 16 feet above grade;
      (3)   not project more than three feet from the pole on which it is
mounted;
      (4)   not exceed eight square feet in effective area; and
      (5)   be made out of weather-resistant and rust-proof material.
   (h)   Pole mounted banners are not limited in number.
   (i)   A sign permit is not required to erect or remove a pole mounted
banner. (Ord. 29392)
SEC. 51A-7.2313.   CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGNS.
   (a)   A construction barricade sign may not be illuminated or contain any
moving parts.
   (b)   A minimum 10 percent of the effective area of a construction barricade
sign must display the names of the owner, occupant, medical institution located
within this district, or the Southwestern Medical District name, brand, or
logo.
   (c)   Except for traffic signs, construction barricade signs are not allowed
in the public right-of-way.
   (d)   A construction barricade sign must be removed when the construction
barricade is removed.
   (e)   A construction barricade may be fully decorated with a graphic, except
that:
      (1)   no decoration or part of the graphic may project more than two
inches horizontally from the barricade; and
      (2)   no decoration or graphic may project more than four feet vertically
above the top of the barricade. (Ord. 29392)
ARTICLE VIII.
PLAT REGULATIONS.
Division 51A-8.100. Title and Purpose.
SEC. 51A-8.101.   TITLE.
   This article is known as the plat regulations of the city of Dallas. (Ord.
Nos. 20092; 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.102.   POLICY.
   (a)   It is the policy of the city of Dallas to subject the subdivision,
platting, replatting, and development of land to the control of the city
pursuant to the city charter, state law, and all other rules, regulations, and
policies the city may adopt.
   (b)   To be platted, land must be of such character that it can be used
safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire,
flood, or other menace.
   (c)   Land must not be platted until proper provision has been made for
paving, drainage, water, wastewater, public utilities, capital improvements,
parks, recreation facilities, and rights-of-way for streets, transportation
facilities, and improvements.
   (d)   These regulations supplement and are intended to facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions and standards of this code, state law, and all
other rules, regulations, and policies which the city may adopt. (Ord. Nos.
20092; 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.103.   PURPOSE.
   The regulations of this article are established in accordance with the city
charter and state law for the purposes stated in Section
51A-1.102 of this chapter and in order to:
   (a)   protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the city;
   (b)   guide the future growth and development of the city;
   (c)   guide public policy and action in order to provide adequate and
efficient transportation, streets, storm drainage, water, wastewater, parks,
and open space facilities;
   (d)   provide for the proper location and width of streets and building
lines;
   (e)   establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for platting
in order to promote the orderly layout and use of land, and to insure proper
legal descriptions and monumenting of platted land;
   (f)   insure that public infrastructure facilities required by city
ordinance are available with sufficient capacity to serve the proposed plat
before issuance of a certificate of occupancy or release of utility connections
or final inspection within the boundaries of the plat;
   (g)   provide that the cost of public infrastructure improvements that
primarily benefit the tract of land being platted be borne by the owners of the
tract in accordance with applicable laws; and
   (h)   prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds by assuring the
adequacy of drainage facilities and by safeguarding the escarpment, flood
plains, and the water table. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 21186; 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.104.   FUNCTION OF COMMISSION.
   (a)   Except administrative plats, the commission shall approve or
disapprove plats, subdivisions, and replats of land within the corporate limits
and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. If a plat conforms to this
article, the state law, and all other rules and regulations pertaining to the
platting of land, the commission shall endorse its approval upon the plat.
   (b)   The rules and regulations of the commission must provide for a
subdivision review committee for the purpose of reviewing appeals of conditions
recommended by the city staff, refusal to approve an administrative plat by the
subdivision administrator, and appeals from the subdivision administrator
regarding satisfaction of preliminary plat conditions. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384;
26529)
SEC. 51A-8.105.   JURISDICTION.
   This article applies to all plats, as defined in Division
51A-8.200, located within the corporate limits, and within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city to the full extent allowed by state law. (Ord. Nos.
20092; 23384)
Division 51A-8.200. Definitions.
SEC. 51A-8.201.   DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions apply to this article:
   (1)   ABANDONMENT means the legal process by which property rights in land
dedicated to public use may be terminated.
   (2)   ACCELERATION/DECELERATION LANE means a lane added to the side of a
street to facilitate ingress to and egress from adjacent property and to help
maintain traffic flow in the travel lanes of the street.
   (3)   ACCESS WAY means an area on private property used by vehicular traffic
for access to and from streets.
   (4)   ACCESS WIDTH means the minimum lot frontage necessary to accommodate a
driveway and its return.
   (5)   ACRE includes fraction of an acre.
   (5.1)   ADMINISTRATIVE PLAT means an amending plat (minor), a certificate of
correction, or a minor plat involving four or fewer lots, that satisfies the
requirements of Section
51A-8.403(c).
   (6)   ALL WEATHER ACCESS means access paved with a cohesive paving material
that holds its form when subjected to vehicular traffic and the normal
variation of weather conditions experienced in the city of Dallas.
   (7)   AMENDING PLAT (MAJOR) means a plat changing a previously approved and
recorded plat in accordance with Texas Local Government Code Section 212.016
that may increase or decrease the number of lots.
   (8) AMENDING PLAT (MINOR) means a plat changing a previously approved and
recorded plat in accordance with Texas Local Government Code Section 212.016
that does not increase or decrease the number of lots.
   (9)   BARRIER-FREE SIDEWALK means a sidewalk designed using ramps, curb
transitions, and additional sidewalk width to facilitate use by persons in
wheel chairs.
   (10) CERTIFICATE OF CORRECTION means an amending plat (minor) in the form of
a document used to make a correction to a recorded plat in cases where a sketch
is not needed for clarity, as determined by the subdivision administrator.
   (11)   COMMISSION means the city plan commission of the city of Dallas.
   (12)   CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL mean conditions imposed on a plat by the
commission that must be satisfied before the subdivision administrator may
submit a plat for endorsement by the commission chair.
   (13)   CORNER CLIP means an area consisting of the triangular extension of
street right-of-way at intersections of streets. This area is used for curb
returns, utilities, barrier-free ramps, and other public facilities.
   (14)   COVENANT means an agreement in writing that touches and concerns real
property platted or developed under this chapter, executed as required by law,
in which a party pledges that something shall be done or shall not be done. A
covenant is binding on successors in title to the real property that is the
subject of the covenant.
   (15)   CUL-DE-SAC means an area of circular pavement constructed at the end
of a dead-end street to facilitate vehicular access and turnaround.
   (16)   DEAD-END STREET OR ALLEY means a street or alley having right-of-way
or pavement that terminates abruptly at one end without intersecting another
street.
   (17)   DETENTION AREA means an area which temporarily stores stormwater
runoff and discharges that runoff at a reduced rate.
   (18)   DEVELOPER means the owner of the property or the person authorized by
the owner to develop the property.
   (19)   DIVIDED THOROUGHFARE means a street on the thoroughfare plan with
travel lanes divided by a median.
   (20)   DRIVEWAY means a private drive on private property used for vehicular
access and maneuvering.
   (21)   DRIVEWAY APPROACH means a paved connection from a street to a
driveway or access way.
   (22)   DUPLEX LOT means a lot in a duplex D(A) zoning district or a lot in
an identifiable duplex component of a planned development district.
   (23)   ENGINEERING PLANS mean drawings and specifications, including paving,
storm water drainage, water, wastewater, or other required plans, submitted to
the department of sustainable development and construction or the water
utilities department for review in conjunction with a plat.
   (24)   ESTATE IN EXPECTANCY means an interest in property that is not yet in
possession, but the enjoyment of which is to begin at a future time.
   (25)   FINAL PLAT means a plat that will be signed by the commission chair
upon satisfaction of all conditions of approval and all other requirements of
this article, and will be effective once it is filed with the county clerk.
   (26)   FLOODWAY means a drainage area designated on a plat to accommodate
the design flood as defined in
Article V of this chapter.
   (27)   FLOODWAY EASEMENT means an easement dedicating a drainage area to the
city for control and maintenance of a flood plain.
   (28)   FLOODWAY MANAGEMENT AREA means a drainage area dedicated in fee
simple to the city for control and maintenance of a flood plain.
   (29)   INFRASTRUCTURE means all streets, alleys, sidewalks, storm drainage
facilities, water and wastewater facilities, utilities, lighting,
transportation, and any other facilities required by law to adequately serve
and support development.
   (30)   MEDIAN OPENING means a gap in a median allowing vehicular passage
through the median.
   (31)   MINOR PLAT means a plat that meets both of the following
requirements:
      (A)   The area proposed for platting must not exceed five acres in size
for residential zoning districts (single family, duplex, and townhouse) and
three acres in size for all other zoning districts; and
      (B)   The proposed plat must not require any public infrastructure. For
example: the plat may not contain any new streets or alleys; it must abut an
approved public or private street of adequate width as specified in Section
51A-8.604(c) or the Thoroughfare Plan for the city of Dallas; adequate water,
wastewater, paving, and drainage improvements must already exist to serve the
proposed plat; and any existing improvements which are to remain must meet all
setback requirements and must not be divided by a proposed lot line or setback
line.
   (32)   MONUMENT means a permanent structure set on a line to define the
location of property lines, important horizontal plat control points, and other
important features on a plat.
   (33)   NONSTANDARD MATERIALS mean any materials not specified in the
Standard Construction Details of the department of transportation and public
works or the North Central Texas Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction of the North Central Texas Council of Governments.
   (34)   OPEN SPACE, IMPROVED means open space containing structures or
improvements, including but not limited to hike and bike trails.
   (35)   OPEN SPACE, UNIMPROVED means open space containing no buildings,
fences, or other structures above or below grade.
   (36)   OWNER means the fee simple owner of property, or the owner’s
representative when authorized by a power of attorney, corporate resolution, or
other appropriate document.
   (37)   PARKWAY means the area between the outside edge of street pavement
and the street right-of-way lines abutting other public or private property.
   (38)   PERMANENT DEAD-END STREET means a street or alley which cannot or
will not be extended to another street in the foreseeable future.
   (39)   PHASE means a portion of an approved preliminary plat that receives
final plat approval and is developed before or during the time the owner
submits the final plat on the remainder of, or on another phase of, the area
shown on the preliminary plat.
   (40)   PLAT means the graphic presentation of one or more lots or tracts of
land, or of a subdivision, resubdivision, combination, or recombination of lots
or tracts.
   (41)   PLAT RELEASE means approval by a department to verify that those
conditions of approval required by that department have been satisfied before
the final plat is endorsed by the commission chair.
   (42)   PRELIMINARY PLAT means the initial plat proposed by the applicant,
which is reviewed by city staff and presented by staff to the city plan
commission for consideration. If the commission determines that approval
subject to conditions is appropriate, the subdivision administrator ensures
that those conditions are met before the plat is finalized for endorsement by
the commission chair.
   (43)   PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT CONTRACT means a contract between a developer and
a contractor for the construction of infrastructure that is to be dedicated to
the public.
   (44)   PRIVATE STREET means a privately owned street that is required by
this article to meet the same standards as a street dedicated to public use.
   (45)   REPLAT means a plat changing a previously approved and recorded plat
that is not an amending plat (minor) or an amending plat (major).
   (46)   RESIDENTIAL REPLAT means a replat without vacation of the preceding
plat for property: (a) any part of which was limited during the preceding five
years by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for
not more than two residential units per lot; or (b) that contains a lot in the
preceding plat that was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not
more than two residential units per lot.
   (47)   SIDEWALK means a paved area dedicated to the public for pedestrian
use.
   (48)   SINGLE FAMILY LOT means a lot in a single family zoning district, or
a lot in an identifiable single family component of a planned development
district.
   (49)   STREET CENTERLINE OFFSET means the distance between the centerlines
of two more or less parallel streets measured along the centerline of an
intersecting street.
   (50)   SUBDIVISION means land included within the boundaries of an original
plat, or any of the following for the purpose of creating a building site for
land development or transfer of ownership:
      (A)   The division of property into two or more parts.
      (B)   The combination of lots or tracts into one or more parts.
      (C)   The redivision or recombination of lots or tracts.
   (51)   SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR means the city staff employee designated by
the city manager to supervise the platting and subdivision process.
   (52)   TEMPORARY DEAD-END STREET means a street that is planned to or can
feasibly be extended in the foreseeable future to another street.
   (53)   TOWNHOUSE LOT means a lot in a townhouse TH(A) zoning district, or a
lot in an identifiable townhouse component of a planned development district.
   (54)   TRAFFIC BARRIER means a physical barrier that prevents the
indiscriminate and unauthorized crossing of traffic between a street or alley
and a thoroughfare. Examples of traffic barriers include a series of posts
connected by a cable or chain, a deep beam highway guard rail, or a New Jersey
barrier-type wall on an engineered foundation.
   (55)   VACATION means the legal process by which unimproved, platted land,
no part of which the city has accepted as a dedication for public use, may be
returned to the legal status of being a parcel of unplatted land.
   (56)   WATER FACILITIES mean the infrastructure required to deliver potable
water to property.
   (57)   WASTEWATER FACILITIES mean the infrastructure required to convey
wastewater from property. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 21186; 23384; 24843; 26529; 28424;
30239; 30654; 32002; 32864)
Division 51A-8.300. RESERVED.
(Ord. 23384)
Division 51A-8.400. Procedures.
SEC. 51A-8.401.   WHEN PLATTING IS REQUIRED.
Platting is required:
   (a)   To create a building site. Platting is required to create a building
site pursuant to Section
51A-4.601(a)(1) of this chapter.
   (b)   To subdivide land. Platting is required to divide a lot or tract into
two or more parcels for development of the parcels. Pursuant to the authority
granted by Section 212.0045 of the Local Government Code to provide exceptions
to state law platting requirements, the city of Dallas shall not require
platting to divide property for transfer of ownership through a metes and
bounds description unless and until a building permit is requested for the
property to be developed as a separate building site. Unless a separate
building site has otherwise been established as provided in Section
51A-4.601, a conveyance of property accomplished through a metes and bounds
description without platting will not be recognized as a separate building
site, nor will the lines of ownership be recognized for purposes of determining
development rights on the parcel conveyed without platting.
   (c)   To combine lots or tracts. Platting is required to combine two or more
lots or tracts into one lot.
   (d)   To amend a plat. Platting is required if property is to be developed
in a manner inconsistent with an existing plat.
   (e)   To include vacated and abandoned property. Platting is required to
incorporate property that has been vacated or abandoned into a legal building
site.
   (f)   To correct errors. Platting is required to correct an error on an
approved and recorded plat.
   (g)   To develop a planned development district. A preliminary plat must be
submitted at the same time as the development plan for a planned development
district. The subdivision administrator and the director shall coordinate the
commission review of the preliminary plat and the development plan in
accordance with Section
51A-4.702. (NOTE: If the property included in a development plan application
has been previously platted or a building site otherwise exists under Section
51A-4.601, this requirement does not apply.)
   (h)   To establish a shared access development. Platting is required to
establish a shared access development as provided in Section
51A-4.411. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 24270; 24731; 24843)
SEC. 51A-8.402.   PLATTING OF STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.
   Platting street right-of-way without platting adjacent property to be served
by the street is prohibited unless the director of development services and the
chief planning officer recommend platting the right-of-way because a graphic
representation of the right-of-way is needed to facilitate thoroughfare or
local street planning. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 22026; 23384; 28424; 29478; 32002)
SEC. 51A-8.403.   PLATTING PROCESS.
   (a)   Plat approval process.
      (1)   Preliminary plat application. An applicant seeking approval of a
plat or replat shall submit a preliminary plat application to the subdivision
administrator on a form available at the subdivision administrator’s office. If
the subdivision administrator determines that the application is complete, the
subdivision administrator shall accept it and route it to all affected
departments. If the subdivision administrator determines that the application
is incomplete, the subdivision administrator shall return it to the applicant
with a description of its deficiencies.
         (A)   The preliminary plat application must include the following
unless the subdivision administrator determines that an item listed is not
applicable and may be omitted:
            (i)   All required fees.
            (ii)   The proposed layout of the plat legibly drawn on a sheet of
paper which measures 24 inches by 30 or 36 inches. The plat must show the
bearings and distances of the property, and must be drawn to a scale of one
inch equals forty feet or the largest practical scale determined to be legible
by the survey section of the department of development services. (Unless
otherwise indicated, all words on a plat must be at least 10 characters per
inch.)
            (iii)   An arrow indicating north.
            (iv)   A vicinity map showing all thoroughfares and existing
streets within the two nearest intersecting arterials of the boundary of the
plat.
            (v)   The proposed name of the subdivision in bold, capital
letters.
            (vi)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the surveyor
performing or preparing the metes and bounds description of the property, and
all owners and developers.
            (vii)   The proposed boundaries of the property indicated with a
bold, solid line, and other boundaries indicated with thinner lines.
            (viii)   The proposed lot and block numbers, and the area of each
lot in square feet.
            (ix)   The location, purpose, and grantee of existing easements,
and the citation to the volume and page of the county records where the
recorded instrument may be found.
            (x)   The location and purpose of all proposed easements and common
areas.
            (xi)   The layout and dimensions of proposed storm drainage areas
and other areas offered for dedication to public use. If the combined on-site
and off-site drainage area is less than one acre, this requirement may be
waived by the director of development services if the impact of the drainage is
not significant.
            (xii)   The layout of platted lots and unplatted parcels, streets,
storm drainage facilities, water and wastewater facilities, public rights-of-
way, and other pertinent features existing within a distance of 150 feet from
the proposed boundary of the plat.
            (xiii)   The location and identification of any structure or
improvement within the boundaries of the property to be platted, and any
significant topographic features located on the property or within l50 feet of
the boundaries of the property. Any of these items that are to be removed or
altered must be identified on the plat.
            (xiv)   The general layout and dimensions of proposed streets and
alleys, and proposed street names.
            (xv)   Contour lines indicating the terrain and drainage pattern of
the area. Contour intervals must be five feet or less unless the director of
development services determines that the slope of the land is less than 1 to
100 (vertical to horizontal). If the director of development services
determines that the property being platted is fully developed, contour lines
are not required.
            (xvi)   A copy of any specific use permit or planned development
district ordinance regulating the property.
            (xvii)   A copy of any deed restrictions regulating the property in
which the city of Dallas is an enforcing party.
            (xviii)   If the plat is a replat in accordance with Subsection (b)
(1) or (2), a certified copy of the original subdivision of the area filed with
the county clerk and a certified copy of the latest replat of the property
filed with the county clerk.
            (xix)   A metes and bounds description of the property included in
the plat, as well as all appropriate language of dedication and acknowledgment.
Signatures are not required at the time of application.
            (xx)   If the property is located in the escarpment area or a
geologically similar area, an escarpment permit is required at the time of
application.
            (xxi)   The location, caliper, and name (both common and
scientific) of all trees near proposed construction (trees in close proximity
that all have a caliper of less than eight inches may be designated as a “group
of trees” with only the number noted).
            (xxii)   A copy of the recorded deed reflecting current ownership
and a copy of the title policy if title insurance is in place (if no title
insurance is in place then a copy of the most recent property tax certificate
must be provided). The ownership indicated in the owner’s certificate on the
plat must match the deed exactly unless documentation is provided to explain
any variation.
            (xxiii)   All requirements set forth in the survey division’s plat
guidelines.
            (xxiv)   A copy of any regulating plan approved pursuant to
Article XIII.
            (xxv)   The location of any open space required pursuant to
Article XIII.
            (xxvi)   Any other information that the subdivision administrator
deems necessary.
      (1.1)   Resubmission application. An applicant seeking approval of a
preliminary plat that was previously disapproved by the commission may submit a
resubmission application to the subdivision administrator on a form available
at the subdivision administrator's office. If the subdivision administrator
determines that the application is complete, the subdivision administrator
shall accept it and route it to all affected departments. If the subdivision
administrator determines that the application is incomplete, the subdivision
administrator shall return it to the applicant with a description of its
deficiencies. If the subdivision administrator determines that the resubmitted
plat contains changes that are not required to address the commission's reasons
for disapproval, the subdivision administrator shall reject the application and
the applicant must submit a new preliminary plat application. The resubmitted
plat application must be submitted with all required fees and contain the
following unless the subdivision administrator determines that an item listed
is not applicable and may be omitted:
         (A)   A copy of the previously disapproved preliminary plat.
         (B)   A copy of the disapproval letter sent by the subdivision
administrator.
         (C)   An explanation of corrections made on the resubmitted plat to
bring the plat in to compliance with the provisions of the Dallas City Code and
state or federal law cited in the disapproval letter sent by the subdivision
administrator.
         (D)   All information required in Paragraph (1)(A)(ii) through (xxvi).
      (2)   Staff review.
         (A)   All affected departments shall review the initial preliminary
plat application and forward their comments, in writing, to the subdivision
administrator within 14 days after the date a complete application is received.
(Holiday scheduling may require an extension of the review period.) The
subdivision administrator shall formulate a staff recommendation from the
comments received in the interdepartmental review process, and submit the
initial plat application to the commission within 30 days after the date a
complete application is accepted by the city (unless it is an approved
administrative plat and the applicant does not appeal any of the conditions).
The subdivision administrator shall formulate a staff recommendation and
forward a preliminary plat application that has been resubmitted under
Subsection (a)(1.1) of this section to the commission with 15 days after the
date a complete application is accepted by the city. If the staff
recommendation is for disapproval of the application, the subdivision
administrator must provide the reasons for disapproval to the commission.
         (B)   The subdivision administrator shall approve an administrative
plat within 18 days after the date a complete application is accepted by the
city if the subdivision administrator finds that it complies with the policies
and purposes of this article. If the subdivision administrator refuses to
approve an administrative plat, the subdivision administrator shall refer the
plat to the commission for consideration within 30 days after the date a
complete application is accepted by the city. The subdivision administrator
shall provide reasons for refusing to approve the plat to the commission.
         (C)   An applicant may appeal staff recommendations on an
administrative plat or on any other plat to the subdivision review committee of
the commission before the plat is considered by the commission, provided the
request for appeal is made in sufficient time to allow staff and commission
compliance with the 30-day action requirement and applicable posting and notice
requirements.
         (D)   If, after city staff or commission review, it is determined that
a minor plat does not comply with the minor plat definition, the application
must be considered as a preliminary plat. The increase in fee must be paid
before the application is processed.
         (E)   If, after city staff review, it is determined that an
administrative plat does not comply with the administrative plat definition, if
city staff refuses to approve an administrative plat, if the applicant appeals
any administrative plat conditions, or if the subdivision administrator refers
the plat to the commission, the application must be considered as a preliminary
plat.
      (3)   Commission action.
         (A)   Initial application. The commission must hold a public hearing
for all replats, and act upon all plat applications, other than approved
administrative plats where the conditions are not appealed, within 30 days
after the date a complete application is accepted by the city. The commission
shall approve the application if it finds that it complies with the policies
and purposes of this article. If the commission disapproves an application, the
reasons for disapproval must be stated in the motion for disapproval, along
with a citation to the relevant section of the Dallas City Code or state or
federal law.
         (B)   Resubmission application. If the commission disapproves a plat
application under Subparagraph (A), the applicant may file a resubmission
application to correct the reasons for disapproval. The commission must hold a
public hearing on all resubmitted applications within 15 days after the date a
complete resubmission application is accepted by the city. The commission shall
approve the application if it finds that it adequately addresses each condition
for disapproval of the previous plat application.
      (4)   Effect of preliminary plat approval and effective period.
         (A)   Approval of a preliminary plat by the commission or the
subdivision administrator is not final approval of the plat, but is an
expression of approval of the layout shown subject to satisfaction of specified
conditions. The preliminary plat serves as a guide in the preparation of a
final plat and engineering and infrastructure plans to serve the plat.
         (B)   All plats other than certificates of correction must be
submitted for final staff review and approval by the subdivision administrator
in the form of a final plat, except that the subdivision administrator may
provide a certificate of approval for an administrative plat in accordance with
Paragraph (8).
         (C)   If the perimeter boundary or any layout design element changes,
or if, in the opinion of the subdivision administrator, any other feature or
condition changes, the plat must be considered again as a preliminary plat by
the commission or the subdivision administrator in the case of an
administrative plat. If a replat must be considered again by the commission
under this paragraph, new notices must be issued for a residential replat, and
a new public hearing must be held.
         (D)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, a preliminary plat
approved by the commission expires five years after the commission action date
approving the plat if no progress has been made toward completion of the
project in accordance with Texas Local Government Code Section 245.005. An
approved minor plat, amending plat (minor), or an administrative plat expires
two years after the commission action date approving the plat or within two
years after the date of the subdivision administrator’s action letter approving
the administrative plat if no progress has been made toward completion of the
project in accordance with Texas Local Government Code Section 245.005.
      (5)   Action letter.
         (A)   Commission-approved plats. Within seven days after the
commission action date, the subdivision administrator shall send an action
letter to the applicant. If the commission disapproved the application, the
letter must contain the reasons for disapproval. If the commission approved the
application, the letter must contain all conditions of approval. The letter
must contain a citation to the relevant section of the Dallas City Code or
state or federal law for each reason for disapproval or condition of approval.
         (B)   Administrative plats. Within two days after the subdivision
administrator approves an administrative plat, the subdivision administrator
shall send an action letter to the applicant with all conditions of approval.
The letter must contain a citation to the relevant section of the Dallas City
Code or state or federal law for each condition of approval.
      (6)   Satisfaction of conditions required. The subdivision administrator
shall endorse the administrative plat or submit the plat for endorsement
pursuant to Paragraph (8) as soon as the owner has complied with the following
requirements: (Any proposed change to a preliminary plat condition must be
resubmitted to the commission as a preliminary plat.)
         (A)   All conditions to approval must be satisfied, including:
            (i)   On-site easements and rights-of-way must be properly
described and noted on the proposed plat.
            (ii)   Off-site easements and rights-of-way must be dedicated by
the respective owners and filed of record with the county.
            (iii)   All proposed easements and public right-of-way dedications
created by the plat must be properly described by bearings and distances.
            (iv)   Approved language of easement and dedication must be stated
on the final plat, executed, and properly acknowledged.
            (v)   All required licenses and railroad agreements must be
executed by the owner, the railroad, utilities, and the city council.
            (vi)   All required abandonments of public rights-of-way or
easements must be approved by the city council, and the abandonment ordinance
numbers must be shown on the plat.
            (vii)   All required infrastructure plans must be approved.
            (viii)    All required private develop-ment contracts must be
executed and approved.
            (ix)   All required covenants must be approved by the city and
filed of record with the county.
            (x)   All monuments required in Section
51A-8.617 must be installed on the property.
            (xi)   The apportionment deter-mination pursuant to Section
51A-1.109.
         (B)   All required fees must be paid.
         (C)   All taxes assessed by the city against the property must be
paid.
         (D)   Releases must be secured by the applicant from the department of
development services, the city controller, and the city attorney.
         (E)   The plat must be endorsed with properly acknowledged original
signatures and seals of all owners of the property and surveyors.
         (F)   For a plat that includes dedication of any streets or alleys,
the lienholder must provide a letter of consent subordinating the lienholder’s
interest to the dedicated area, and if the owner has a title insurance policy
for the platted area, the policy must be updated to within ninety days prior to
the date the plat is signed by the commission chair. This provision does not
apply to a residential replat that meets the criteria set forth for a minor
plat.
         (G)   All plats other than minor plats must be provided to the chief
city surveyor in an electronic format approved by the geographic information
systems section of the department of development services.
      (7)   Appeal.
         (A)   Adverse decisions of the subdivision administrator regarding
whether a preliminary plat condition has been satisfied may be appealed to the
subdivision review committee by the applicant or by the owners, as ownership
appears on the last approved ad valorem tax roll, of all lots that are:
            (i)   within the original subdivision; or
            (ii)   in single-family or duplex districts and within 200 feet of
the lot or lots for which the replat is requested.
The appeal must be made in writing on a form furnished by the subdivision
administrator.
         (B)   The subdivision review committee shall render a final decision
on the appeal within 21 days after the date a complete application for an
appeal is made.
         (C)   The decision of the subdivision review committee is final unless
appealed by the applicant to the commission within 7 days after the date a
final decision is made.
      (8)   Certificate of approval.
         (A)   Commission-approved plats. If the subdivision administrator
determines that the applicant has satisfied all the conditions and requirements
of Paragraph (6), the administrator shall immediately forward the final plat to
the chair of the commission, who shall endorse the final plat with a
certificate indicating approval of the plat. The secretary of the commission
shall attest the signature of the chair on the certificate of approval and
shall, within five working days, give notice to the applicant that the
certificate of approval has been signed. Notice is given by depositing the
notice properly addressed and postage paid in the United States mail. The
notice must be sent to the address shown on the application.
         (B)   Administrative plats. If the subdivision administrator
determines that the applicant has satisfied all the conditions and requirements
of Paragraph (6), the administrator shall endorse the final plat with a
certificate indicating approval of the plat. A notary public shall attest the
signature of the administrator on the certificate of approval and the
subdivision administrator shall, within five working days, give notice to the
applicant that the certificate of approval has been signed. Notice is given by
depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid in the United States
mail. The notice must be sent to the address shown on the application.
      (9)   Final plat.
         (A)   Commission-approved plats. A final plat may be submitted only
after the commission action letter regarding the preliminary plat has been
received by the applicant. If engineering plans are required as a condition of
approval of a preliminary plat, the final plat cannot be submitted until all
engineering plans have been approved in accordance with Section
51A-8.404, to avoid the necessity of multiple submissions. All staff comments
shall be forwarded to the subdivision administrator within 21 days of the
routing date of the final plat. The director shall notify the applicant of the
results of the review. If further modifications are required, the director may
require additional submissions of the final plat and fees in accordance with
the fee schedule.
         (B)   Administrative plats. A final plat may be submitted only after
the subdivision administrator action letter regarding the administrative plat
has been received by the applicant. All staff comments shall be forwarded to
the subdivision administrator within 13 days after the final plat is submitted.
The subdivision administrator shall notify the applicant of the results of the
review. If further modifications are required, the subdivision administrator
may require additional submissions of the final plat and fees in accordance
with the fee schedule.
      (10)   Phasing of final plats. After a preliminary plat has been approved
by the commission, a final plat may be submitted that includes less than all of
the area shown in a preliminary plat if:
         (A)   the proposed phase conforms to the approved preliminary plat;
         (B)   the proposed phase meets all conditions of approval of the
preliminary plat;
         (C)   the proposed phase provides a logical progression of
development;
         (D)   the proposed phase being submitted could function as an
independent development even if no other phases were ever submitted or
approved;
         (E)   enough area remains outside the phase, but within the boundaries
of the preliminary plat, to independently satisfy the minimum zoning
requirements of the property;
         (F)   the area outside the phase has at least the minimum frontage
required; and
         (G)   all fees have been paid in accordance with the fee schedule.
   (b)   Replatting.
      (1)   Replatting without vacating preceding plat. A replat of a
subdivision or part of a subdivision that does not meet the amending plat
(minor) criteria in Subsection 51A-8.403(c)(1)(A) and (B) may be recorded and
is controlling without vacating the preceding plat if the replat:
         (A)   is signed and acknowledged by the owners of the property being
replatted;
         (B)   is approved after a public hearing on the matter by the
commission;
         (C)   does not amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
         (D)   meets all requirements of the plat approval process in
Subsection (a).
      (2)   Residential replat. In addition to compliance with Paragraph (1), a
residential replat without vacating the preceding plat must comply with the
requirements of this subsection if:
         (A)   during the preceding five years, any of the area to be replatted
was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use
for not more than two residential units per lot; or
         (B)   any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions
to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot.
      (3)   Notice and protest for a residential replat.
         (A)   Notice. Before the 15th day before the date of the public
hearing, notice of the required public hearing on a replat must be:
            (i)   published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation in the county in which the municipality is located; and
            (ii)   mailed, along with a copy of the required provisions of
state law, to the owners, as ownership appears on the last approved ad valorem
tax roll, of all lots that are within 200 feet of the lot or lots for which the
replat is requested, and are:
               (aa)   within the original subdivision;
               (bb)   in single-family, town-house, or duplex districts; or
               (cc)   shown on the zoning map to be restricted to single-
family, townhouse, or duplex use.
         (B)   Protest.
            (i)   In general. If the proposed replat requires a variance and
the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of the lots or land immediately
adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and extending 200 feet from
that area, but within the original subdivision, protest the replat in
accordance with state law, the commission may approve the proposed plat only
upon the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members present of
the commission. A protest must be filed with the commission before the close of
the public hearing at which the plat is to be considered.
            (ii)   Form of protest. A protest must be in writing and, at a
minimum, contain the following information:
               (aa)   A description of the property at issue by address or lot
number.
               (bb)   The names of all persons protesting the proposed replat.
               (cc)   A description of the area of lots or land owned by the
protesting parties that is immediately adjoining the area covered by the
proposed replat and extending 200 feet from that area, but within the original
subdivision.
               (dd)   The mailing addresses of all persons signing the protest.
               (ee)   The date and time of its execution.
               (ff)   The protest must bear the original signatures of all
persons required to sign under this paragraph.
         (C)   Who must sign.
            (i)   A protest must be signed by the owner of the property in
question, or by a person authorized by power of attorney to sign the protest on
behalf of the owner. If the property is owned by two or more persons, the
protest must be signed by a majority of the owners, or by a person authorized
by power of attorney to sign the protest on behalf of a majority of the owners,
except that in the case of community property, the city shall presume the
written protest of one spouse to be the protest of both.
            (ii)   In the case of property owned by a corporation, the protest
must be signed by the president, a vice president, or by an attorney in fact
authorized to sign the protest on behalf of the corporation. In the case of
property owned by a general or limited partnership, the protest must be signed
by a general partner or by an attorney in fact authorized to sign the protest
on behalf of the partnership.
            (iii)   Lots or land subject to a condominium regime are presumed
to be commonly owned in undivided interests by the owners of all condominium
units and under the control of the governing body of the condominium. For such
lots or land to be included in calculating the lots or land area protesting a
replat, the written protest must state that the governing body of the
condominium has authorized a protest in accordance with procedures required by
its bylaws, and that the person signing the protest is authorized to act on
behalf of the governing body of the condominium. A written protest signed by
the owner of an individual condominium unit shall not be accepted unless the
filing party produces legal documents governing the condominium which clearly
establish the right of an individual owner to act with respect to his or her
respective undivided interest in the common elements of the condominium.
         (D)   When signatures must be acknowledged.
            (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this subparagraph, all
signatures on a written protest must be acknowledged before a notary public.
            (ii)   A signature on an original reply form sent by the city to
the mailing address of the property owner need not be acknowledged.
            (iii)   A signature on a protest delivered in person by the person
signing need not be acknowledged if its reliability is otherwise established to
the satisfaction of the subdivision administrator. In such a case, a summary of
the evidence of reliability considered by the subdivision administrator must be
endorsed on the protest by the subdivision administrator.
         (E)   Presumptions of validity.
            (i)   In all cases where a protest has been properly signed
pursuant to this paragraph, the city shall presume that the signatures
appearing on the protest are authentic and that the persons or officers whose
signatures appear on the protest are either owners of the property or
authorized to sign on behalf of one or more owners as represented.
            (ii)   In cases of multiple ownership, the city shall presume that
a properly signed protest, which on its face purports to represent a majority
of the property owners, does in fact represent a majority of the property
owners.
            (iii)   The presumptions in this subparagraph are rebuttable, and
the city attorney may advise the commission that a presumption should not be
followed in a specific case based on extrinsic evidence presented.
         (F)   Conflicting instruments. In the event that multiple protests and
withdrawals are filed on behalf of the same owner, the instrument with the
latest date and time of execution controls.
   (c)   Administrative plat process.
      (1)   Delegation of authority to subdivision administrator. The
subdivision administrator may approve the following administrative plats as
authorized by Texas Local Government Code Section 212.0065(a)(1) and (2) and
this article:
         (A)   An amending plat (minor) that is filed only for one or more of
the following:
            (i)   To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the
preceding plat.
            (ii)   To add a course or distance that was omitted on the
preceding plat.
            (iii)   To correct an error in a real property description shown on
the preceding plat.
            (iv)   To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or
retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting
monuments.
            (v)   To show the location or character of a monument that has been
changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or
character on the preceding plat.
            (vi)   To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or
omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for
approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and
identification of adjacent recorded plats.
            (vii)   To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines
between two adjacent lots if:
               (aa)    both lot owners join in the application for amending the
plat;
               (bb)   neither lot is abolished;
               (cc)    the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded
covenants or restrictions; and
               (dd)   the amendment does not have a material adverse effect on
the property rights of the other owners in the plat. In this provision,
material adverse effect means a significant and unwanted or negative result on
the property rights of other owners in the plat.
         (B)   An amending plat (minor) that is not in a residential district
and that is filed only for one or more of the following:
            (i)   To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent
encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement if
the amendment does not increase or decrease the number of lots.
            (ii)   To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more
adjacent lots if:
               (aa)   the owners of all those lots join in the application for
amending the plat;
               (bb)   the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded
covenants or restrictions; and
               (cc)   the amendment does not increase or decrease the number of
lots.
            (iii)   To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street
if:
               (aa)   the owners of all the lots join in the application for
amending the plat;
               (bb)   the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded
covenants or restrictions;
               (cc)   the amendment does not increase or decrease the number of
lots; and
               (dd)   the amendment does not create or require the creation of
a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities.
         (C)   A minor plat involving four or fewer lots fronting on an
existing street, that is not in a residential district, and that does not
require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal
facilities.
      (2)   A certificate of correction may be used to make the corrections
listed in Subparagraph (1)(A), unless the subdivision administrator determines
that a sketch is needed for clarity, in which case an amending plat must be
submitted. A certificate of correction must be certified by a registered
professional surveyor in a form approved by the chief city surveyor.
      (3)   Except as provided in this subsection, notice, a hearing, and the
approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of
an administrative plat.
   (d)   Vacation plat.
      (1)   Any plat may be vacated upon application of the owners of the land
in accordance with state law and this article.
      (2)   A vacation plat must be approved by the commission.
      (3)   An approved vacation plat must be recorded with the vacated plat
and operates to destroy the effect of recording the vacated plat and to divest
all public rights to the streets, alleys, and other public areas laid out or
described in the vacated plat.
      (4)   Vacation of a park is prohibited unless approved as required by
state law. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 21186; 22053; 22026; 23384; 24843; 25047; 26529;
26530; 27495; 28073; 28424 ; 31394; 32002)
SEC. 51A-8.404.   ENGINEERING PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Generally. A person seeking approval of engineering plans for
infrastructure must not submit those plans until a preliminary plat has been
approved for the property which the infrastructure is to serve. After approval
of the preliminary plat, plans for the infrastructure must be submitted to the
department. The director shall review the plans submitted under this section
for completeness.
   (b)   Contents of engineering plans. Plans submitted must include the
following:
      (1)   All required fees.
      (2)   A completed private development checklist on a form provided by the
department. The form must be signed by the professional engineer responsible
for the plans.
      (3)   A completed fee receipt on a form approved by the director.
      (4)   Two blueline prints of the approved preliminary plat.
      (5)   Two sets of infrastructure plans.
      (6)   A copy of any specific use permit or planned development district
ordinance regulating the property.
      (7)   A copy of any deed restrictions regulating the property in which
the city of Dallas is an enforcing party.
   (c)   Staff review of engineering plans. All affected divisions of the
department shall review the engineering plans against the established criteria
and forward their comments to the director. Changes or corrections in the
design or right-of-way requirements must be itemized and forwarded, in writing,
to the responsible engineer and the owner as those persons are reflected on the
private development checklist.
   (d)   Required off-site easements. If off-site easements or rights-of-way
are required to accomplish the construction shown in the engineering plans,
field notes describing the easements or rights-of-way, sketches showing the
required easements or rights-of-way, copies of recorded deeds for all affected
property, and agreements from the owners of the off-site property must be
submitted before approval of the plans. The agreements are acceptable only if
they are from the current owners and were executed less than one year before
the time they are submitted.
   (e)   Director action. The director shall approve, approve with conditions,
or disapprove engineering plans within 30 days after the date a complete
application is filed under Subsection (b). The director shall not approve
engineering plans that do not comply with the requirements of this article, the
Dallas City Code, or state and federal law.
   (f)   Action letter. The director shall send an action letter to the
applicant within 30 days after the date a complete application is filed under
Subsection (b). If the director disapproved the engineering plans, the letter
must contain the reasons for disapproval. If the director approved the
engineering plans, the letter must contain all conditions of approval. The
letter must contain a citation to the relevant section of the Dallas City Code
or state or federal law for each reason for disapproval or condition of
approval.
   (g)   Resubmission application.
      (1)   If the director approves an engineering plan with conditions or
disapproves an engineering plan under Subsection (e), the applicant may file a
resubmission application to address the conditions for approval or correct the
reasons for disapproval. If the director determines that the application is
complete, the director shall accept it and route it to all affected
departments. If the director determines that the application is incomplete, the
director shall return it to the applicant with a description of its
deficiencies. If the director determines that the resubmitted engineering plan
contains changes that are not required to address the conditions of approval or
reasons for disapproval, or that the resubmitted application creates new
conditions that do not comply with this article, the Dallas City Code, or state
or federal law, the director shall reject the application and the applicant
must submit a new engineering plan application. The director must approve,
approve with conditions, or disapprove all resubmitted applications within 15
days after the date a complete resubmission application is accepted by the
city. The director shall approve the application if he finds that it adequately
addresses each condition for approval or reason for disapproval of the previous
engineering plan application.
      (2)   The resubmission engineering plan application must contain all
required fees and the following unless the director determines that an item
listed is not applicable and may be omitted:
         (A)   A copy of the conditionally approved or previously disapproved
engineering plan.
         (B)   A copy of the action letter sent by the director.
         (C)   An explanation of corrections made on the resubmitted
engineering plan to bring the plan in to compliance with the provisions of the
Dallas City Code and state or federal law cited in the disapproval letter sent
by the director.
         (D)   All information required in Subsection (b)(2) through (7).   
   (h)   Infrastructure plans approval. Upon approval of the infrastructure
engineering plans, the applicant shall be notified by the director and advised
of the documents needed to secure a final release from the department.
   (i)   Extension of infrastructure plan approval. An extension of the
approval of the street paving, storm drainage, bridge, and culvert plans will
be considered upon a formal request by the owner to the director of development
services. Six-month extensions may be granted only if the conditions
surrounding the plat, as well as the standards, criteria, and requirements
listed in Section
51A-8.601 do not require a redesign of the infrastructure improvements. (Ord.
Nos. 20092; 23384; 25047; 28073; 28424; 31394; 32002)
SEC. 51A-8.405.   APPORTIONMENT OF EXACTIONS AND PARK LAND DEDICATION.
   (a)   See Section
51A-1.109 for regulations and procedures concerning apportionment of exactions.
   (b)   See Division
51A-4.1000 for regulations and procedures concerning park land dedication.
(Ord. Nos. 26530; 30934)
Division 51A-8.500. Subdivision Layout and Design.
SEC. 51A-8.501.   COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (c), all plats must be
drawn to conform to the zoning regulations currently applicable to the
property. If a zoning change is contemplated for the property, the zoning
change must be completed before the approval of any final plat of the property.
A plat submission reflecting a condition not in accordance with the zoning
requirements must not be approved by the commission until any available relief
from the board of adjustment has been obtained.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (c), no plat or replat may
be approved which leaves a structure located on a remainder lot.
   (c)   Subsections (a) and (b) do not apply to a parcel, lot, or remainder
lot that constitutes or is a part of a building site established pursuant to
Section
51A-4.601(a)(5), (6), or (7) of this chapter. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 25809)
SEC. 51A-8.502.   DESIGNATION OF ABANDONED, FRANCHISED, OR LICENSED PROPERTY.
   (a)   Indication of abandonment. Any abandoned public right-of-way that is
to be incorporated into a platted lot must be indicated by a dashed line on the
plat. The ordinance number for the ordinance abandoning the property must be
reflected on the plat. Incorporation of property improperly abandoned is
prohibited.
   (b)   Indication of franchise or license. Any franchise or license
agreements affecting the property must be indicated on the plat.
   (c)   Estate in expectancy. Any property dedicated to the city as an estate
in expectancy must be clearly indicated graphically, and labeled on the plat.
   (d)   Revocation of offer to dedicate through platting. Property previously
offered for public dedication by the filing of a plat but not developed in any
manner may be revoked through the filing of a replat of the property or a
vacation plat if:
      (1)   the dedicated property was never used for the public purpose
indicated on the plat dedicating the property or for utility or communication
facilities; and
      (2)   no formal acceptance of the dedication was made by the city council
or any city department. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.503.   LOTS.
   (a)   Residential lot size. The size of each platted lot must comply with
the minimum regulations for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
Lots must conform in width, depth, and area to the pattern already established
in adjacent areas, having due regard to the character of the area, its
particular suitability for development, and taking into consideration the
natural topography of the ground, drainage, wastewater facilities, and the
proposed layout of streets.
   (b)   Frontage.
      (1)   All lots must front upon either a dedicated public street or a
private street, unless this requirement is waived by an ordinance establishing
a planned development district in which adequate access is provided by access
easement. Platted lots may front upon a private street only if that street has
been approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   For the purposes of this subsection:
         (A)    the frontage of a lot is the length of the lot’s intersection
with a public or private street right-of-way line; and
         (B)   all of the property in a shared access development is considered
to be one lot.
      (3)   Except in planned development districts, the minimum frontage
requirement is 10 feet. The minimum frontage requirement for a planned
development district is 10 feet unless otherwise provided in the ordinance
establishing the district.
      (4)   If four or more single family, townhouse, and duplex lots share a
private driveway, a private driveway easement must be provided. The private
driveway easement must provide a minimum access width of 20 feet with a flare
to 30 feet at its intersection with the curb line of a minor street, and a
flare to 40 feet at its intersection with the curb line of a thoroughfare. The
private driveway access easement need not be exclusive to a particular lot, but
must be indicated on the plat, and must have direct access to a dedicated
public street or a private street approved in accordance with this chapter. No
more than four lots may share a private driveway access easement unless, upon
recommendation from the director and the chief planning officer, the commission
finds that the extraordinary topography or shape of the property unduly limits
the development potential of the property, and that the proposed development is
consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter. The shared access area
in a shared access development is not subject to this paragraph.
      (5)   Single family, duplex, or townhouse lots having frontage on two
opposite sides are prohibited unless the commission finds that this design is
essential to provide proper orientation of residential lots to thoroughfares.
Shared access developments may have frontage on two opposite sides.
   (c)   Residential access to thoroughfares. Where single family, townhouse,
or duplex lots abut a divided thoroughfare, driveway access to the thoroughfare
is prohibited unless, upon recommendation of the director and the chief
planning officer, the commission finds that the extraordinary topography or
shape of the property unduly limits the development potential of the property,
and the proposed development is consistent with the spirit and intent of this
chapter. If the commission permits access under this subsection, the traffic
barrier otherwise required in Section
51A-8.618 is waived.
   (d)   Municipal boundary lines. Plats divided by municipal boundary lines
must be approved by the appropriate body of each affected municipality to be
effective. Any building permit issued based on a plat divided by a municipal
boundary line is void if the requisite approval has not been obtained.
   (e)   Lot lines and existing structures.
      (1)   No plat may be approved if an existing improvement on the property
would encroach upon a proposed lot line or setback line, unless the existing
improvement is to be removed or relocated, or unless the encroachment is
authorized by the Dallas Building Code.
      (2)   No plat may be approved if the location of a proposed lot line
would create a structure not in strict compliance with the Dallas Building
Code, as amended, or the Dallas Development Code, as amended, unless the
existing structure is to be removed, relocated, or altered to comply.
      (3)   Notwithstanding Paragraphs (1) and (2), dedications for public
infrastructure may be accomplished even if a structure encroaches, provided
appropriate language is executed to convey an estate in expectancy. (Ord. Nos.
20092; 21186; 23384; 24731; 25047; 28073; 29478 ; 31394)
SEC. 51A-8.504.   BLOCKS.
   (a)   Block length. Block lengths in plats for single family lots should not
exceed 1200 feet measured from block corner to block corner. The length may be
extended if, upon recommendation from the director and the chief planning
officer, the commission finds that the extraordinary topography or shape of the
property unduly limits the development potential of the property, and that the
proposed development is consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter.
   (b)   Other considerations. Block length and width must be designed to
accommodate the type of use anticipated and must provide for safe and
convenient access and circulation. Block design must take into account the
physical characteristics of the topography. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 25047;
28073; 29478)
SEC. 51A-8.505.   BUILDING LINES.
   (a)   Building lines that establish a minimum front, side, or rear yard
setback greater than the current zoning setback requirements, building lines
for lots that border a natural creek channel, and building lines established by
Section
51A-4.401(a)(3) must be shown on the plat.
   (b)   A building line may establish a minimum front, side, or rear yard
setback greater than the minimum front yard setback required by zoning
regulation only if the building line is part of a plan for the orderly
development of a subdivision. Except as provided in Section
51A-8.510, a building line may not establish a minimum front, side, or rear
yard setback less than the minimum front, side, or rear yard setback required
by zoning regulation. The building line for lots that border a natural creek
channel must provide the setback required by Section
51A-5.106. No other building lines may be shown on the plat.
   (c)   If an existing platted building line establishes a minimum front,
side, or rear yard setback greater than the minimum front, side, or rear yard
setback required by zoning regulation, relief from the platted building line
must be sought through a replat submitted to the commission. The commission may
approve a relocation or removal of the platted building line with a minimum
front, side, or rear yard setback greater than required by zoning regulation
only:
      (1)   upon the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the
commission members present; and
      (2)   if the commission finds that relocation or removal of the platted
building line will not:
         (i)   require a minimum front, side, or rear yard setback less than
required by zoning regulation;
         (ii)   be contrary to the public interest;
         (iii)   adversely affect neighboring properties; and
         (iv)    adversely affect the plan for the orderly development of the
subdivision.
   (d)   If relief is sought from the minimum front, side or rear yard setback
required by zoning regulation, approval must be obtained from the board of
adjustment.
   (e)   A building line platted and recorded prior to December 13, 2006,
indicating that a front yard setback has been reduced remains enforceable.
Removal of the platted building line may be sought through a replat that
complies with this section.
   (f)   The subdivision administrator may not approve an administrative plat
that adds, moves, or removes a building line. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 26529;
26531)
SEC. 51A-8.506.   STREET LAYOUT.
   (a)   Generally. Streets must be designed in relation to the thoroughfare
plan, existing and proposed streets, the terrain, streams, and other physical
conditions. The arrangement of streets must provide for the continuation of
streets between adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for the
safe and efficient movement of traffic, or for utility efficiency. Minor
streets should be oriented in a manner that discourages their use by through
traffic, and to allow efficient drainage systems, utility systems, and general
street improvements. All streets must be designed and constructed in accordance
with this section and Section
51A-8.604.
   (b)   Dead-end streets.
      (1)   Temporary dead-end streets. If adjacent property is undeveloped and
a street must terminate temporarily, the right-of-way must extend to the
boundary of the plat. When a temporary dead-end street is shown on a plat, a
temporary circular or “T” shaped turnaround must be provided and shown as an
easement on the subdivision plat, and must be indicated on the plat by dotted
lines. No turnaround is required if the street is 150 feet or less in length,
measured from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines with the
subdivision boundary to the street’s intersection with a through street. All
temporary turnarounds are subject to approval by the director.
      (2)   Permanent dead-end streets.
         (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, if a permanent
dead-end street is created within a proposed plat, a circular turnaround or
other approved turnaround must be provided. The minimum radius for the circular
turnaround is 50 feet for the right-of-way and 43.5 feet for the pavement
measured to the back of the curb. The length of permanent dead-end streets must
not exceed 600 feet, measured along the centerline from the block corner to the
center of the cul-de-sac. The length of a permanent dead-end street may be
extended upon recommendation of the director and the chief planning officer if
they find that the extraordinary topography or shape of the property unduly
limits the development potential of the property, and that the proposed
development is consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter.
         (B)   A waiver to the requirement of a turnaround for a dead-end
street may be obtained from the director and the chief planning officer only
upon their determination that a turnaround is not needed to serve the traffic
on the street or otherwise needed to protect the public interest.
   (c)   Intersections. The following regulations govern the alignment of
intersections:
      (1)   All streets must intersect as close to a right angle as permitted
by topography or other natural physical conditions. A street must not intersect
with another street or railroad at an angle of more than 105 degrees or less
than 75 degrees.
      (2)   The intersection of two streets must not be located within 100 feet
of a railroad right-of-way if one of the streets crosses the railroad right-of-
way at grade. This 100 foot separation is measured from the nearest point of
the intersection of the street right-of-way and the nearest point of the
railroad right-of-way.
      (3)    A driveway or alley approach must not be located within 100 feet
of a railroad right-of-way.
      (4)   An intersection must not have more than four street approaches.
      (5)   Proposed intersections along one side of an existing cross street
must, wherever practical, align with existing intersections on the opposite
side of the cross street. Street centerline offsets of less than 150 feet are
not permitted unless the cross street is divided by a median without openings
at either intersection.
      (6)   If served by a median opening, minor streets that intersect divided
thoroughfares must be spaced at least 360 feet apart, measured from centerline
to centerline unless otherwise approved by the traffic engineer.
   (d)   Private streets. If a private street is indicated in the street
layout, it must be designed and constructed in accordance with this section and
Section
51A-8.604.
   (e)   Street names. The naming of public or private streets created through
the platting process is the responsibility of the applicant. Street names must
conform to the standards for street names contained in Division
51A-9.300 of this chapter. All proposed street names must be reviewed by the
fire department, the department of development services, and the police
department before consideration by the commission. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 21186;
23384; 25047; 28073; 28424; 29478; 31314; 32002)
SEC. 51A-8.507.   ALLEYS.
   (a)   When required. Alleys are required only in residential zoning
districts, and then only when required under Section
51A-8.604 based on accommodation of street pavement width and zoning density.
Alleys must provide continuous vehicular access regardless of zoning.
   (b)   Regulations. All alleys must meet the following standards:
      (1)   Alleys must have a minimum right-of-way of 15 feet in width.
      (2)   Alley right-of-way must not exceed 20 feet in width.
      (3)   Alleys must consist of at least 10 feet of pavement.
      (4)   Permanent dead-end alleys are not allowed unless all access is
prohibited between the alley and public rights-of-way. Alleys must either
intersect with a dedicated public or private undivided street or an existing
alley. If a dead-end alley is shown on a proposed plat, an approved turnaround
must be provided unless a waiver is obtained from the director and the chief
planning officer. A waiver is permitted only if the director and the chief
planning officer determine a turnaround is not necessitated by the amount of
traffic on the alley, nor otherwise needed to protect the public interest.
      (5)   Alleys must function without reliance on fire lanes or access
easements. An alley must provide vehicular access from a dedicated public
right-of-way or easement to another dedicated public right-of-way along
pavement which is all within dedicated public right-of-way.
      (6)   Alleys adjoining and parallel to divided thoroughfares must be
separated from the thoroughfare by a traffic barrier in accordance with Section
51A-8.618 of this article.
      (7)   Dedications for an alley are required as provided in Section
51A-8.604(c). Where an alley intersects a street, a 15-foot visibility triangle
(alley sight easement) is required. Measurements are taken along the property
line.
      (8)   Alleys must be designed and constructed according to the
requirements of the Street Design Manual and the Standard Details for Public
Works Construction of the department of transportation and public works.
   (c)   Private alleys. If a private alley is indicated, it must be designed
and constructed in accordance with all of the requirements in this section, and
must be labeled as a private alley on the proposed plat. Easements for
utilities and franchises must be dedicated in private alleys under the same
circumstances and in the same manner as required for private streets pursuant
to Section
51A-8.610 . (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 25047; 28073; 28424; 29478; 30239; 30654;
31314; 32864)
SEC. 51A-8.508.   PARKS AND COMMON AREAS.
   (a)   Generally. If any portion of property subject to a plat application
qualifies as a prospective park site pursuant to the standards and guidelines
contained in the Long Range Physical Plan for Park and Recreational Facilities,
the director of parks and recreation must be notified and given an opportunity
to negotiate for the acquisition of the property by the city before a final
plat is approved. If the applicant elects to make a commitment to sell that
portion of the property to the city, he may designate the portion as a
reservation for park use if the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The portion is of a suitable size, dimension, topography, and
general character for its intended purpose.
      (2)   Adequate access to the portion is provided.
      (3)   The dimensions of the portion are clearly identified on the plat.
      (4)   Any development shown on the portion complies with the standards of
the park and recreation department.
   (b)   Proper access. Land reserved for recreation sites and parks is
considered to have proper access and visibility if:
      (1)   the property has frontage of at least 100 feet on an improved
public street; or
      (2)   the property has a high degree of visibility and has paved public
vehicular access to an improved public street. The paved access must be at
least 20 feet in width and must comply with the construction standards of the
department of transportation and public works.
   (c)   Utilities. Water, wastewater, and electrical facilities must be
provided to the perimeter of the site.
   (d)   Common areas. Areas retained in private ownership but intended for the
benefit of the owners of lots in the plat must be shown as common areas on the
plat. A permanent maintenance plan must be approved for the area before release
of the final plat. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 28424; 30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 51A-8.509.   FIRE AND POLICE ACCESS.
   (a)   Generally. The layout design of a plat must take into consideration
the provision of adequate fire and police access.
   (b)   Water supply. Provisions must be made for the extension of water lines
and the appropriate placement of fire hydrants as required by the department
before approval of the final plat. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 25047; 28073)
SEC. 51A-8.510.   COMMUNITY UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   To encourage reasonable flexibility of design and arrangement in the
development of residential communities in residential zoning districts, the
following provisions are made for the approval of community unit developments
(“CUD’s”):
   (a)   A CUD must be submitted for approval to the commission as a
subdivision.
   (b)   A CUD must comply with the maximum lot coverage or density
requirements for the district in which it is located. For purposes of
calculating maximum lot coverage in a CUD, the calculation is made using either
the actual size of the lot or the minimum lot area specified for the zoning
district in which the lot is located, whichever is greater.
   (c)   The minimum lot area of any lot within the CUD may be reduced by an
amount not to exceed 25 percent of the minimum lot area for the zoning district
in which the CUD is located. Any reduction in minimum lot area must be
compensated proportionally on a square foot for square foot basis by the
establishment of permanent community open space to serve the property being
platted. If five percent or more of the community open space is unimproved and
in a flood plain (as defined in
Article V), the minimum lot area may be reduced by up to 30 percent.
   (d)   Front yard, side yard, and rear yard requirements may be uniformly
reduced on all lots and must establish a uniform pattern within the boundaries
of the property being platted. The reduction in front yard, side yard, and rear
yard must not exceed the total percentage reduction of lot area within the
boundaries of the property being platted.
   (e)   The CUD must not be used to increase the number of lots which could
normally be accommodated by the size of the site.
   (f)   The CUD provisions are not applicable to property located in a planned
development district.
   (g)   Open space provided in a CUD must be approved as appropriate for its
intended purpose by the director and the chief planning officer. The open space
area must be within 1320 feet, measured radially, of any residential lot that
is reduced in size in accordance with Subsection (c) of this section.
      (1)   Unimproved open space:
         (A)   may extend into floodway easements or floodway management areas;
         (B)   must be indicated on the plat with a prohibition of structures
and parking areas; and
         (C)   must have a minimum of 10,000 square feet.
      (2)   Improved open space:
         (A)   must not extend into floodway easements or floodway management
areas unless the proposed improvements are in compliance with Division
51A-5.100 of this chapter; and
         (B)   must be developed in accordance with a site plan approved by the
city council after recommendation by the commission. The site plan must include
the location and dimensions of all improvements and structures planned for the
open space.
   (h)   A maintenance agreement for the open space area must be provided in a
community unit development. The agreement must be approved as to form by the
city attorney and executed by the owner(s) or homeowners’ association. (Ord.
Nos. 20092; 22053; 22150; 23384; 25047; 28073; 29478)
SEC. 51A-8.511.   CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
   (a)   The owner of the property to be platted may provide an easement on all
or part of the property to conserve trees and other natural features, subject
to acceptance by the city, to the city or jointly to the city and a nonprofit
association dedicated to the conservation of land. Before the city may consider
accepting the easement, or consider approving the acceptance of an easement
with a nonprofit association as the joint grantee of a conservation easement,
the owner shall provide the building official with a list of the protected
trees by name (both common and scientific) and caliper or an estimate thereof
calculated and documented in a manner approved by the city arborist, written
consent by any lienholder of the property to subordination of the lienholder’s
interest to the conservation easement area, and a preservation strategy for the
easement. The grantee of a conservation easement, if not the city, should be an
eligible grantee such that the grantor will have the option of receiving a
property tax benefit on the assessed value of the conservation easement area.
The conservation easement area should be accessible to the public for walking,
upon trails if the area exceeds 30 acres, unless this activity poses a risk to
endangered species.
   (b)   The easement must be approved by the building official and approved as
to form by the city attorney.
   (c)   The owner may offer a conservation easement to the city through the
city arborist, or to a nonprofit association approved by the city (a list of
such associations may be obtained from the city arborist). (Ord. Nos. 22053;
23384; 24843)
SEC. 51A-8.512.   SHARED ACCESS DEVELOPMENT.
   See Section
51A-4.411 for regulations concerning shared access developments. (Ord. 26333)
Division 51A-8.600. Infrastructure Design and Construction.
SEC. 51A-8.601.   GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (a)   Infrastructure design and construction for water and wastewater mains
must comply with
Chapter 49 of the Dallas City Code, as amended, and all other applicable
requirements of the water utilities department. All other infrastructure design
and construction must comply with this section.
   (b)   All street paving, storm drainage, bridge, and culvert design and
construction must conform to the standards, criteria, and requirements of the
following, as they may from time to time be amended by those responsible for
their promulgation, except that the design criteria in effect on the date the
commission approves the preliminary plat must be used to design the
infrastructure.
      (1)   The Thoroughfare Plan for the city of Dallas, as amended.
      (2)   The Central Business District Streets and Vehicular Circulation
Plan, as amended.
      (3)   The Long Range Physical Plan for Parks and Recreational Facilities.
      (4)   The Street Design Manual of the city of Dallas.
      (5)   The Drainage Design Manual of the city of Dallas.
      (6)   The latest version of the Drainage, Paving, and Traffic Engineering
Checklist of the planning and development department.
      (7)   The Standard Construction Details of the department of
transportation and public works.
      (8)   The Texas Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual, as amended.
      (9)   The most recently adopted Dallas Bike Plan.
   (c)   If the infrastructure construction is not included in a city-approved
private development contract within two years from the preliminary plat
approval date, then the infrastructure must be redesigned using the most
current criteria. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 21186; 23384; 25047; 28073; 28424; 30239;
30654; 31314; 32864; 33070)
SEC. 51A-8.602.   DEDICATIONS.
   (a)   Generally. The owner of the property to be platted must provide an
easement or fee simple dedication of all property needed for the construction
of streets, thoroughfares, alleys, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities,
floodways, water mains, wastewater mains and other utilities, and any other
property necessary to serve the plat and to implement the requirements of this
article. Dedications shown on plats are irrevocable offers to dedicate the
property shown. Once the offer to dedicate is made, it may be accepted by an
action by the city council, by acceptance of the improvements in the dedicated
areas for the purposes intended, or by actual use by the city. No improvements
may be accepted until they are constructed according to the approved plans,
details, and specifications, and the final plat is filed for record in the
office of the county clerk of the county in which the property is located.
   (b)   Apportionment of exactions. See Section
51A-1.109 for regulations and procedures concerning apportionment of exactions.
   (c)   Streets.
      (1)   The percentage of right-of-way dedication required for streets is
as follows:
         (A)   When the full right-of-way width of a street is contained within
the boundaries of a proposed plat, the entire required right-of-way contained
within the boundaries of the plat must be dedicated.
         (B)   When a thoroughfare is along the perimeter of a proposed plat,
sufficient right-of-way must be dedicated to provide one-half of the
thoroughfare plan requirement, measured from the centerline of the existing
right-of-way or, if there is no existing right-of-way, the proposed right-of-
way as determined by the director and the chief planning officer. If the
property on the side of the thoroughfare opposite the property to be platted is
railroad right-of-way or a utility or floodway easement, or if some physical or
topographical condition makes the property on that side of the street
undesirable for street right-of-way, the commission may require a
correspondingly greater dedication.
         (C)   When a thoroughfare has a city council approved detailed
alignment, all right-of-way falling within the approved alignment and within
the boundaries of the proposed plat must be dedicated.
         (D)   If substandard right-of-way exists for an existing perimeter
thoroughfare based on the thoroughfare plan requirements, and the plat includes
property on both sides of the existing thoroughfare, sufficient right-of-way
must be dedicated to meet the entire right-of-way requirement.
         (E)   When substandard right-of-way exists based on this article for a
perimeter minor street, sufficient right-of-way must be dedicated to meet one-
half of the entire right-of-way width requirement.
         (F)   When no right-of-way exists and a minor street is proposed,
whether perimeter or contained within the boundaries of the proposed plat, the
full right-of-way width must be dedicated.
      (2)   The amount of right-of-way, pavement width, and minimum centerline
radius for all minor streets must be provided in accordance with the chart in
Section
51A-8.604.
      (3)   When property has been previously platted and improvements have
been constructed, accepted, and used, the commission may waive the requirements
for additional right-of-way for existing streets if:
         (A)   no realignment of any minor street is proposed;
         (B)   no change in zoning classification is proposed;
         (C)   the street has been improved with the required number of lanes,
and the full right-of-way standard is not warranted by expected traffic
volumes, property access requirements, truck, bus, and taxi loading, or
pedestrian use;
         (D)   the director and the chief planning officer recommend the
waiver; and
         (E)   the commission finds that the area is a redeveloping area.
   (d)   Corner clips and sight easements.
      (1)   Corner clips must be dedicated at all intersections by means of a
street easement. A corner clip is a triangle with the legs along the edges of
the street rights-of-way. The size of the corner clip is based on the city's
current design standards. Corner clips must be sized to provide an adequate
turning radius, or to maintain public appurtenances within the area of the
corner clip.
      (2)   Sight easements must be provided if required by the Street Design
Manual of the city of Dallas.
   (e)   Alley sight easements. Alley sight easements must be granted at the
intersection of any alley with a street. The size of the sight easement is that
of a triangle with legs along the property lines equaling 15 feet.
   (f)   Utilities and drainage easements. Easements necessary for poles,
wires, conduits, wastewater, gas, water, telephone, electric power, storm
drainage, and any other utilities needed to serve the property being platted
must be granted. All easements must comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Unless the grantee of an easement gives express written approval,
no structures, fences, trees, shrubs or any other improvement may be placed in,
on, above, over, or across the easement. An exception to this rule is that
paving for parking, walkways, and driveways may be constructed over or across
utility or drainage easements unless such construction is specifically
prohibited by the plat or easement instrument.
      (2)   Any structures, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements,
including paving, exist at the pleasure of the grantee. The owner of the
subservient estate is liable for the full cost for any adjustments,
relocations, restorations, replacements, or reconstruction to any item placed
within the easement other than the utilities. The grantee has no responsibility
for any destruction or damage to items other than utilities placed within the
easement. Grantees of easements have the right of ingress and egress to their
respective easements for the purposes of constructing, inspecting, and
maintaining their improvements.
      (3)   If alleys are not provided, rear lot drainage easements and
facilities may be required to prevent cross-lot drainage.
   (g)   Floodways. Floodway management areas and floodway easements must be
dedicated or granted in accordance with Section
51A-8.611. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 21186; 23384; 24843; 24859; 25047; 26530; 28073;
28424; 29478; 30239; 30654; 31314)
SEC. 51A-8.603.   CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED.
   (a)   All public and private streets and alleys within or along the
perimeter of the proposed plat must be improved to the standards of this
article.
   (b)   Storm drainage improvements, bridges, and culverts must be provided as
needed to serve the subdivision in accordance with this article.
   (c)   Sidewalks must be provided in accordance with Section
51A-8.606 of this article.
   (d)   Median openings, extra lanes, and driveways must be provided in
accordance with Section
51A-8.607 of this article.
   (e)   Street appurtenances must be provided in accordance with Section
51A-8.608 of this article.
   (f)   Railroad crossing facilities must be provided in accordance with
Section
51A-8.609 of this article.
   (g)   Utility facilities must be provided in accordance with Section
51A-8.610 of this article.
   (h)   Monumentation must be provided in accordance with Section
51A-8.617 of this article. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.604.   STREET ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Generally. Streets, whether dedicated to the public use or privately
owned, must be designed in accordance with the Street Design Manual of the city
of Dallas. The geometrics of streets must be designed to provide appropriate
access for passenger, delivery, emergency, and maintenance vehicles.
   (b)   Street construction required.
      (1)   Within the boundaries of the proposed plat, the owner must
construct all thoroughfares, minor streets, and alleys shown on the proposed
plat.
      (2)   When a minor street is along the perimeter of the proposed plat and
the street is not improved with an approved all weather paving material to a
width of 20 feet, the owner must improve the street to that standard along the
length of the proposed plat.
      (3)   When a thoroughfare is along the perimeter of the proposed plat for
1000 feet or more, the owner must construct thoroughfare, sidewalk, and storm
drainage improvements to complete one-half of the thoroughfare requirements
along the entire length of the plat, adjusted for any participation in the
construction under Section
51A-8.614.
   (c)   Minor street criteria. If additional right-of-way for a minor street
has been waived by the commission in accordance with Section
51A-8.602 (c)(3), the amount of street construction required for the streets on
which the requirements have been waived is determined by the director of
development services. Additional street construction may be required, if
necessary, based on the existing condition or width of the streets, and if
warranted by the expected traffic volumes, property access requirements, or
truck, bus, and taxi loading. If additional right-of-way has not been waived,
minor streets must be designed and constructed to meet criteria given in the
Street Design Manual of the city of Dallas.
   (d)   Private streets criteria. When permitted, private streets are governed
by the following regulations:
      (1)   Private streets must be constructed and maintained to the standards
for public rights-of-way and must be approved by the director and the chief
planning officer. Sidewalks are required and must be constructed and maintained
to the standards for sidewalks in the public right-of-way. Water and wastewater
mains must be installed in accordance with the applicable ordinances.
      (2)   A legal entity must be created that is responsible for street
lighting, street maintenance and cleaning, and the installation and maintenance
of interior traffic control devices. The legal instruments establishing the
responsibility for a private street or alley must be submitted to the
commission for approval, be approved as to legal form by the city attorney, and
be recorded in the appropriate county. A provision must be included in the
legal instruments that addresses the consequences of failure to maintain the
private street or alley and its appurtenances, including the right, but not the
obligation, of the city to take any action needed to bring the private street
or alley into compliance.
      (3)   Private streets must contain private service easements including,
but not limited to the following easements: utilities; storm drainage; fire
lane; street lighting; government vehicle access; mail collection and delivery
access; and utility meter reading access.
      (4)   Street lights comparable with those required on public rights-of-
way must be provided. Street lighting design plans must be approved by the
director based upon applicable guidelines.
      (5)   Design plans and location of all traffic control devices must be
approved by the traffic engineer. The design, size, color, and construction of
all traffic control devices must comply with the requirements for those located
in public rights-of-way.
      (6)   The fire protection standards in
Article XIII of the Dallas Fire Code must be followed.
      (7)   A public school, park, or other public facility must be accessible
from public rights-of-way in accordance with this code.
      (8)   Private streets must comply with the thoroughfare plan and must not
interrupt public through streets.
      (9)   Private street names and numbers must be approved by the
commission.
      (10)   At all entrances to subdivisions with private streets, signs
identifying the streets as private must be posted. Private street signs must
be:
         (i)   black on a yellow background;
         (ii)   diamond-shaped;
         (iii)   a minimum of 24 by 24 inches; and
         (iv)   installed pursuant to city traffic standards.
      (11)   Private streets and the area they serve must be platted.
      (12)   A guard house may be constructed at any entrance to a private
street. All guard houses must be at least 30 feet from a public right-of-way.
      (13)   Any structure that restricts access to a private street must
provide a passageway 20 feet wide and 14 feet high.
      (14)   One private street entrance must remain open at all times. If an
additional private street entrance is closed at any time, it must be
constructed to permit opening of the passageway in emergencies by boltcutters
or breakaway panels.
      (15)   A private street system serving an area containing over 150
dwelling units must have a minimum of two access points to a public street.
      (16)   A private street system may serve no more than 300 dwelling units.
      (17)   The city has no obligation to maintain a private street. (Ord.
Nos. 20092; 21186; 22392; 23384; 23535; 25047; 27495; 28073; 28424; 29478;
30239; 30654; 31314; 32002)
SEC. 51A-8.605.   SANITATION COLLECTION ACCESS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Access required. The owner or homeowners’ association must provide
access for city sanitation collection. If unmanned gates are used, the gates
must remain open during routine collection hours (Monday through Saturday
between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m.) A notation must be placed on a plat for single
family or duplex lots indicating that it is the responsibility of the owner or
homeowners’ association to provide adequate access for city sanitation
collection.
   (b)   Indemnity agreement. If sanitation collection occurs on a private
access easement, the owner or homeowners’ association must execute an agreement
with the city department of street, sanitation, and code enforcement services
indemnifying the city against damages to any private streets in the development
caused by the city’s provision of routine sanitation collection. The agreement
must be approved as to form by the city attorney’s office. (Ord. Nos. 20092;
23384)
SEC. 51A-8.606.   SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   Required. Sidewalk construction is required along all public and
private streets unless waived by the director.
   (b)   Design. All sidewalks must be designed and constructed to be barrier-
free to the handicapped, and in accordance with the requirements contained in
the Street Design Manual, the Standard Construction Details, and any other
council approved plan as amended. When poles, standards, and fire hydrants must
be placed in the proposed sidewalk alignment, the sidewalk must be widened as
delineated in the Standard Construction Details to provide a three-foot-wide
clear distance between the edge of the obstruction or overhang projection and
the edge of the sidewalk.
   (c)   Timing of construction. All sidewalks in the parkways of thoroughfares
must be constructed concurrently with the thoroughfare or, if the thoroughfare
is already constructed, before the acceptance of any improvements. Construction
of sidewalks along improved minor streets must be completed before a
certificate of occupancy is issued or before a final inspection of buildings or
improvements constructed on the property.
   (d)   Waiver of sidewalks. A person desiring a waiver of a sidewalk
requirement shall make application to the director.
      (1)   In this subsection:
         (A)   MID-BLOCK LOT means a lot that is not a corner lot.
         (B)   CORNER LOT means a lot that is located at the intersection of
two or more streets.
      (2)   The director may grant a waiver under these conditions:
         (A)   In general. These conditions apply to all waiver requests.
            (i)   If sidewalk construction would cause drainage, safety, or
other engineering issues that cannot be feasibly addressed as determined by the
director.
            (ii)   If a city approved and funded sidewalk construction project
is planned to begin within one year of the waiver application submittal.
             (iii)   If the waiver will not have an adverse effect on
neighboring properties.
         (B)   Mid-block lot. If sidewalks do not exist on the adjacent lots
and on more than 80 percent of the lots on the same blockface.
         (C)   Corner lot. If sidewalks do not exist on any of the mid-block
lots on the same blockface and the lot is not located within one-quarter mile,
as measured along street frontages, from a transit stop, school, park,
playground, or other pedestrian accessible destination.
      (3)   The denial of a waiver application must clearly state the specific
reasons why the waiver conditions were not satisfied.
      (4)   Waivers for sidewalks on separate frontages of corner lots shall be
determined independently for each blockface, but will require only one fee.
      (5)   Granting a waiver does not preclude the city from installing
sidewalks at some later time and assessing the abutting owners for the cost of
the installation. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 25047; 28073; 29478; 30933; 31314)
SEC. 51A-8.607.   MEDIAN OPENINGS, EXTRA LANES, AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   Generally. All median openings, driveway approaches, driveways, and
extra lanes including left turn lanes, right turn lanes, acceleration/
deceleration lanes, and other extra lanes must be located, designed, and
constructed in accordance with the current standards of the department of
transportation and public works.
   (b)   When required. Left turn lanes are required to serve median openings
providing access to the proposed plat. Other extra lanes must be designed and
constructed as part of the subdivision infrastructure improvements when:
      (1)   they are required by the thoroughfare plan;
      (2)   they are required by the zoning district in which the property is
located; or
      (3)   they are recommended and approved by the director and the chief
planning officer for proper traffic management.
   (c)   Spacing of openings. Median openings must be at least 400 feet from
median openings serving thoroughfare intersections with divided thoroughfares,
measured between the noses of the median. Median openings serving minor streets
and driveway approaches along a divided thoroughfare must be at least 300 feet
apart, measured between the noses of the median, unless the traffic engineer
determines that the potential vehicular traffic in the area does not require
300-foot spacing. The minimum median opening width is 60 feet. Wider openings
may be required in order to facilitate truck turning movements. Median openings
and left turn pockets must be constructed at the intersection of all streets
and drive approaches that generate 250 trips in a 12-hour period.
   (d)   Relocation of openings. Existing median openings may be relocated if:
      (1)   the existing opening does not provide service to a public or
private street;
      (2)   the proposed median opening meets the spacing requirements stated
in Subsection (c) of this section;
      (3)   the existing opening is no longer in use or the owners of the
properties being served by the existing opening sign a document requesting or
approving the change, and the document is approved by the city attorney’s
office; and
      (4)   the proposed relocation is shown on engineering plans approved by
the director.
   (e)   Driveways and driveway approaches. Driveways must be designed and
constructed to provide proper site drainage and to maintain the conveyance of
existing drainage in public and private streets. A separate street cut permit
is required for each driveway approach accessing a thoroughfare. Driveways may
be constructed concurrently with street construction, or with building
construction, but must be completed before the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, or final inspection of the buildings or improvements on the
property. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 21186; 22026; 23384; 25047; 28073; 28424; 29478;
30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 51A-8.608.   STREET APPURTENANCES.
   (a)   Generally. Installation of the following items is required at the time
the municipal infrastructure additions or improvements are constructed:
      (1)   Street lights.
      (2)   Traffic signals.
      (3)   Traffic signs and street name blades.
      (4)   Pavement markings.
      (5)   Temporary traffic control devices for use during construction.
   (b)   Street lights. The engineering, material, installation, and activation
of street lights must be provided as required by the approved street lighting
plans. All plan approvals, construction scheduling, and reimbursements must be
coordinated through the director of transportation and public works.
   (c)   Traffic signals. When the area being platted adds a driveway or street
approach to an existing signal, the signal hardware must be modified to serve
the development. The engineering, material, and construction of the upgrade to
the existing signal must be provided.
   (d)   Traffic signs and street name blades. All of the required traffic
signs and street name blades must be provided as determined by the traffic
engineer. All signs must meet the standards of the department of transportation
and public works and may be obtained from the department of transportation and
public works or any other source if city standards are met. All necessary
posts, hardware, and concrete required to complete the sign assembly
installation must be provided as determined by the director of transportation
and public works. A maintenance bond sufficient in amount to maintain all
developer installed traffic signs and street name blades for one year must be
posted by the owner.
   (e)   Pavement markings. Pavement markings must be provided as necessary to
serve the property being platted in accordance with the approved plans.
   (f)   Traffic control during construction. The owner is responsible for
installing and maintaining all necessary barricades, temporary signs, pavement
transitions, and pavement markings to safely convey traffic through the
construction area in accordance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, and
the Barricade Manual of the department of transportation and public works. The
owner is also responsible for the removal of all barricades, temporary signs,
pavement transitions, and pavement markings. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 22026; 23384;
26530; 28424; 30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 51A-8.609.   RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   (a)   Generally. All engineering plans and construction of infrastructure in
the railroad right-of-way must be approved by the department and the railroad.
   (b)   Pipeline license agreements. All underground improvements in the
railroad right-of-way require pipeline license agreements. The owner of the
property to be platted is responsible for securing railroad approval and all
costs associated with plan approval, insurance, and construction.
   (c)   Railroad agreements. All surface improvements in the railroad right-
of-way require railroad agreements. The owner of the property to be platted is
responsible for securing railroad approval and all costs associated with plan
approval, insurance, and construction.
   (d)   Agreement processing. Both railroad agreements and railroad license
agreements are processed in the following manner:
      (1)   The owner of the property to be platted submits the executed
agreement to the director for approval.
      (2)   Upon approval, all required funding must be submitted to the
director, who coordinates the receipt of documents and funding and schedules
the items for city council approval.
      (3)   No improvements are permitted until all agreements are accepted and
executed, and all funding has been received by the city.
      (4)   No improvements may be accepted until receipt and approval of final
invoices from the railroad.
      (5)   The owner is responsible for any shortfall in funding.
      (6)   The city refunds any remaining funds to the owner should the final
cost prove less than the funding supplied by the developer.
   (e)   No work permitted until agreements complete. Infrastructure work in
the railroad right-of-way is not permitted until:
      (1)   completed agreements have been executed between the city and the
property owner;
      (2)   completed agreements have been executed between the city and the
railroad; and
      (3)   all required funding for the agreements is received by the city.
   (f)   Payment to railroad. The city shall forward funds received from the
owner to the railroad upon acceptance of the improvements by both the director
and the railroad, and after receipt and approval of the final invoices from the
railroad. The owner is responsible for any additional costs or cost overruns on
the work, and the city shall refund any remaining funds to the developer should
the final cost be less than the funding supplied by the developer. (Ord. Nos.
20092; 22026; 23384; 23694; 25047; 28073)
SEC. 51A-8.610.   UTILITIES.
   The owner shall provide all necessary utility facilities to serve the
subdivision, including easements, materials, construction, service connections,
and funding as required by the various utility companies. No utility
connections may be made until the final plat has been approved and recorded
with the county. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.611.   STORM DRAINAGE DESIGN.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   Drainage systems, including all conveyances, inlets, conduits,
structures, basins, or outlets used to drain storm water, must be designed and
constructed to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the property owner
and the public. Adequate provision must be made for the acceptance, collection,
conveyance, detention, and discharge of storm water runoff drainage onto,
through, and originating within the subdivision. No final plat release may be
issued until proper provision has been made for drainage.
      (2)   Private drainage systems are those which serve one lot or tract, or
any open system that serves more than one lot or tract for which a private
entity has maintenance obligations. Private systems are owned and maintained by
a private entity. Easements must be provided to allow access by the city to any
open system in the event that private system failure or diminished function
jeopardizes the public's health, safety or welfare. Private storm water
drainage systems must be designed in general conformance with the design
standards of the department of water utilities as set forth in the Drainage
Design Manual of the city of Dallas. Private enclosed systems are not required
to be constructed according to the Standard Construction Details, File 251D-1.
      (3)   Public drainage systems are those systems which serve more than one
lot or tract, excluding open systems maintained by a private entity. The
portion of a drainage system located downstream from a lot or tract boundary,
and the portion of any drainage system within the lot or tract boundary which
conveys storm drainage from outside the lot or tract boundary are public
systems. Public storm water drainage systems must be designed and constructed
in strict conformance with department of water utilities requirements.
      (4)   The city owns and maintains public systems that have been
constructed and accepted pursuant to Section
51A-8.612.
      (5)   All storm drainage facilities must be designed and constructed to
safely drain a one-percent annual chance storm event as outlined in the
Drainage Design Manual of the city of Dallas. Paved streets and alleys,
ditches, and swales may be used for emergency overflow capacity in parallel
with enclosed systems provided the requirements of the Drainage Design Manual
of the city of Dallas are met.
      (6)   Storm water must be discharged in an acceptable form and at a
controlled rate so as not to endanger human life or public or private property.
      (7)   The owner shall fund and construct all storm drainage outfalls
necessary to safely and adequately drain the subdivision.
      (8)   The city may provide new public drainage outfalls and public
drainage system upgrades to serve existing and future subdivisions through
specific items in the capital improvement bond programs.
   (b)   Erosion and sedimentation control.
      (1)   The owner shall provide erosion control plans for review and
subsequent approval by the department of development services for any
development requiring grading or clearing where sediments can be carried to
natural or manmade drainageways. Erosion and sedimentation control plans are
required in the following instances:
         (A)   When the property to be platted is located in the escarpment or
in a geologically similar area (See Division
51A-5.200).
         (B)   Where ground cover is disturbed over an area larger than three
acres.
         (C)   If required as a condition of approval of the preliminary plat.
      (2)   Erosion control plans must include the following:
         (A)   A timing schedule indicating the starting and completion dates
of the development activities sequence and the time of exposure of each area.
Written approval of the director of development services is necessary to
authorize any time of exposure exceeding six months.
         (B)   A complete description of all control measures designed to
control erosion and sedimentation of soils during and after construction. The
owner is responsible for maintenance of erosion and sedimentation control
measures during development and shall remove sediment from city right-of-way or
storm drainage systems that occurs during the construction phase. Revegetation
of the disturbed area is required as a part of the approved erosion control
plan.
   (c)   Detention.
      (1)   Detention facilities required in this subsection must be designed
to provide detention for the one-percent, two-percent, 10 percent, and 50
percent annual chance storm events. Detention must be provided in the following
instances:
         (A)   The property to be platted is in or drains through the
escarpment zone or a geologically similar area as defined in Division
51A-5.200 of this chapter.
         (B)   The development of the platted area results in an increase to
the existing rate of runoff due to a rezoning of the platted area that allows
higher density. Detention will not be required if:
            (i)   the rezoned area is in the redeveloped area and there is no
increase in impermeable surface;
            (ii)   the change in zoning results in less than a 20 percent
increase in the runoff, and the area rezoned is less than 3 acres, or an
adequate outfall exists to handle the developed discharge; or
            (iii)   the rezoned area is less than one acre in size and adds
less than 5,000 square feet of additional impervious surface relative to
existing conditions.
         (C)   The proposed development does not have adequate outfall to carry
the one-percent annual chance storm event without damaging property downstream,
or the owner of downstream property refuses to provide the needed easements to
the city. Detention will not be required under this subparagraph if the owner
funds and constructs the storm drainage system to provide a one-percent annual
chance storm event runoff carrying capacity.
         (D)   The property to be platted contributes to the storm drainage of
a neighboring municipality having detention requirements, provided there are
written agreements with the neighboring municipalities.
      (2)   Detention facilities must be designed and constructed in
conformance with the Drainage Design Manual of the city of Dallas.
      (3)   Detention area easements must be dedicated on the plat when
detention facilities are on-site, and dedicated by a separate instrument when
detention facilities are off-site.
      (4)   Each adjoining property owner and his successors and assigns shall
be responsible for simple, routine maintenance of the detention area easement.
The city of Dallas is responsible for any major maintenance and repair work
necessary for the public safety and welfare.
      (5)   The constructed detention facilities and pond area must remain to
line and grade and must not be altered without the approval of the director of
water utilities.
      (6)   If detention is provided due to inadequate outfall pursuant to
Section
51A-8.611(c)(1), then upstream storm drainage systems must be designed for a
one-percent annual chance storm event, up to the outfall into the detention
basin. Drainage systems constructed downstream must be designed for a one-
percent annual chance storm event of the drainage basin without taking into
consideration the reduction in flow provided by the detention facility
upstream, unless a lesser criteria is approved by the director of water
utilities when the proposed development does not increase the stormwater
drainage from the property and the director determines that the drainage system
is not necessary to preserve public health or safety.
      (7)   Storm water runoff from any plat into a contiguous city may be
required to comply with the criteria of the contiguous city as directed by the
director of development services provided there is a written agreement in
effect at the time.
      (8)   When development of the property downstream results in the
construction of facilities designed to accommodate the one-percent annual
chance storm event, and the detention facilities upstream are no longer
necessary, the detention facilities may be abandoned and the land reclaimed for
other purposes.
   (d)   Floodways.
      (1)   Generally. Floodways must be provided in accordance with the
recommendation of the director of water utilities and the requirements of the
commission to accommodate the one-percent annual chance storm event drainage
flows. Floodway dedications must be identified on the plat and monumented on
the ground. Floodway conditions must be satisfied before submitting a final
plat for a certificate of approval. Division
51A-5.100 applies to all floodways.
      (2)   Floodway easements.
         (A)   Floodway easements are drainage areas dedicated to the city as
an easement to prevent obstructions of floodway capacity in a flood plain.
Except as provided in Paragraph (3), a floodway easement is required for any
portion of a property that is within a flood plain.
         (B)   A 15-foot wide floodway access easement from a publicly
dedicated right-of-way may be required and may extend along a creek, parallel
to the top of the bank to inspect or maintain a floodway easement.
         (C)   The owner of a lot that includes a floodway easement is liable
for floodway easement maintenance in compliance with this subsection, taxes,
and all other standard property owner liabilities.
         (D)   Unless approved by the directors of development services and
water utilities in an instrument filed in the county deed records or by a city
council approved tree mitigation plan, structures, fencing, trees, shrubs, or
any other improvement or growth may not be placed in or across any floodway
easement.
         (E)   Common areas, such as in a CUD, may be located within floodway
easements. Before the release of a final plat, access to the common area must
be shown on the plat and a permanent maintenance plan must be approved as to
form by the city for a common area within a floodway easement. Owners of a
common area within a floodway easement are jointly and severally liable for the
floodway easement common area maintenance in compliance with this subsection,
taxes, and all other standard property owner liabilities.
         (F)   For purposes of this subsection, "maintenance" means removing
any object or condition that, as determined by the director of water utilities,
impedes the free flow of water. Maintenance includes:
            (i)   keeping the floodway easement free from any structures;
            (ii)   removing debris;
            (iii)   desilting lakes, ponds, and detention areas; and
            (iv)   controlling the growth of vegetation.
         (G)   The city retains the right, but not the obligation, to enter
onto the floodway easement to inspect or maintain the easement. If the floodway
easement is not maintained in compliance with this subsection, the city has the
right, but not the obligation, to put the floodway easement in compliance with
this subsection. The owner of the floodway easement must pay the city for
maintenance work performed within 180 days after the date of presentation of
the bill. If a bill is not paid by the owners when due, the city shall file a
lien statement that includes expenses assessed, the name of the owner, if
known, and the legal description of the lot with the county clerk of the county
where the lot is located.
      (3)   Floodway management areas.
         (A)   Floodway management areas are drainage areas dedicated to the
city in fee simple to prevent obstructions of floodway capacity in a flood
plain. All floodways not dedicated as a floodway management area must be
dedicated as a floodway easement.
         (B)   If any portion of the subject property is (1) within a flood
plain and (2) abuts a public park, green belt, open space, trail system, or the
Trinity River that has been recommended for improvement in a flood plain
management plan, the Trinity River corridor plan, the park and recreation long
range development plan, the park and recreation master plan, the trail network
plan, or any other master plan adopted by the park and recreation board or city
council, the directors of water utilities, development services, and parks and
recreation must be notified and given an opportunity to negotiate for the
acquisition of the property for a floodway management area before a final plat
is approved. The property owner is encouraged, but not required, to donate the
floodway management areas to the city.
         (C)   If the applicant donates or commits to sell that portion of the
property to the city, the applicant must designate that portion as a dedication
or reservation on the plat. Upon acquisition of the property, the city
maintains the floodway management area.
         (D)   The area for each floodway management area must be identified on
the plat in square feet or in acres.
         (E)   No lot may extend into a floodway management area.
   (e)   Lot to lot drainage. Each lot must be drained to an abutting street or
alley unless the director of development services determines that drainage to a
street or alley is infeasible. If the director of development services
determines that street or alley drainage is not feasible, drainage may be
provided as follows:
      (1)   If no more than the rear 15 feet of a lot drains toward the rear
lot line, a well-pronounced swale must be provided as approved by the director
of development services.
      (2)   If more than the rear 15 feet of a lot drains toward the rear lot
line, a paved invert in a common area or a drainage easement is required. In
order to accommodate the one-percent annual chance storm event, an enclosed
drainage system with inlets may be designed. Each portion of the system that
drains one lot must be a private system. Each portion of the system that drains
more than one lot must be a public system within an easement. (Ord. Nos. 20092;
23384; 25047; 27333; 27572; 27697; 30994; 31314; 32002)
SEC. 51A-8.612.   PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT CONTRACTS.
   (a)   Generally. Once the infrastructure plans and apportionment
determination have been approved, but before the final release of a plat or
approval of a zoning district classification or boundary change requiring an
exaction, private development contracts must be executed by the chief engineer
for development services to build the proposed infrastructure facilities.
Private development contracts for water and wastewater improvements, if needed,
must comply with
Chapter 49 of the Dallas City Code. Private development contracts for other
infrastructure improvements must comply with this section. In addition, to
ensure that the city will not incur claims or liabilities as a result of the
developer's failure to make payment in accordance with the terms of a private
development contract, the director may require the developer, as a precondition
of approval or release of a final plat or approval of a zoning district
classification or boundary change requiring an exaction, to provide sufficient
surety guaranteeing satisfaction of claims against the development in the event
such default occurs. The surety shall be in the amount of the private
development contract. The surety shall also be in the form of a bond, escrow
account, cash deposit or unconditional letter of credit drawn on a state or
federally chartered lending institution. The form of surety shall be reviewed
and approved by the city attorney. If a bond is furnished, the bond shall be on
a form provided by the director and approved by the city attorney. The bond
shall be executed by the developer and at least one corporate surety authorized
to do business and licensed to issue surety bonds in the State of Texas and
otherwise acceptable to the city. If a cash deposit is provided, the deposit
shall be placed in a special account and shall not be used for any other
purpose. Interest accruing on the special account shall be credited to the
developer. If an escrow account is provided, the account shall be placed with a
state or federally chartered lending institution with a principal office or
branch in Texas, and any escrow agreement between the developer and the
escrowing institution shall provide for a retainage of not less than ten
percent of the private development contract amount, to be held until the
director gives written approval of the construction of the facilities.
   (b)   Cost. The cost of infrastructure construction is the responsibility of
the developer of the property to be platted except as provided in Sections
51A-1.109 and
51A-8.614.
   (c)   Form. The private development contract must be on a form provided by
the director and approved by the city attorney.
   (d)   Bonds. The private development contract must include performance and
payment bonds equivalent to those the city uses and requires in its standard
specifications, and the city must be a named obligee in the bonds.
   (e)   Duplicate plans. As part of the contract submission, duplicate sets of
approved plans must be submitted to the director in sufficient number to meet
the current contract plan distribution requirements of the city.
   (f)   Construction inspection. Before the approval of a private development
contract, the owner shall submit to the director the name of the engineer
licensed to practice in the State of Texas with whom he has contracted to
provide the required construction inspection. The engineer performing the
construction inspection shall attest to the director that the engineer, or a
qualified member of the engineer’s firm, made periodic visits to the worksite,
as dictated by recognized and customary practice, to inspect the construction
of the storm drainage, street paving, bridge, culvert, and traffic signal
improvements, and to assure that the improvements were constructed according to
the approved plans, profiles, details, and specifications for the project. The
engineer shall submit copies of the construction inspection reports along with
his declaration.
   (g)   Material testing. Before the approval of a private development
contract, the name of a local materials testing company that is:
      (1)   competent in the field of testing pertinent to the contract; and
      (2)   under contract with the owner; must be submitted to and approved by
the director. Materials testing and certification must comply with the standard
specifications for public works construction.
   (h)   Authorization to begin. No construction of infrastructure improvements
may begin until a letter authorizing the construction has been issued by the
director.
   (i)   Order of construction.
      (1)   Except where the contractor has obtained a permit to barricade and
occupy existing street right-of-way, paving and storm drainage construction
which must be accomplished in existing public right-of-way must be completed
and accepted by the department before the issuance of any building permits for
structures in the platted area unless waived by the director when sequencing of
the work is infeasible. If paving and storm drainage work in existing right-of-
way and work requiring a building permit are allowed to occur simultaneously,
the paving and storm drainage work must be completed and accepted by the
department before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or authorization
for utility connections.
      (2)   In order to obtain building permits for structures to be
constructed in the platted area:
         (A)   all required infrastructure work must have been completed and
accepted; or
         (B)   the necessary infrastructure work to satisfy the fire department
requirements must have been completed, and the developer must have furnished
satisfactory evidence in the form of a development bond, approved by the city
attorney and furnished by the property owner with the city of Dallas named as
the obligee on the bond, in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the
uncompleted infrastructure. The estimated cost of the uncompleted
infrastructure must be approved by the director.
      (3)   Private development contracts for paving must not be approved by
the city until the related storm drainage construction is completed and
acceptable, and a water and wastewater release is issued by the director of
water utilities approving the related water facilities construction work
beneath or in close proximity to the proposed pavement.
   (j)   Assurance of compliance. The owner of the property to be platted is
responsible for all construction and inspection services required for paving
and drainage improvements. The owner shall ensure that the work is performed
and completed in conformance with the approved plans, the standard
specifications for public works construction, and the standard construction
details. The responsible engineer shall certify in writing that the materials
and work are in conformance with all plans and specifications.
   (k)   Letter of acceptance. No infrastructure improvements are considered
accepted until:
      (1)   the owner has filed an affidavit affirming that:
         (A)   all parties to the private development contracts have been paid
except for the normal and usual 10 percent retainage; and
         (B)   no liens exist on the property dedicated;
      (2)   the department has a copy of the approved recorded plat;
      (3)   the director has inspected the infrastructure improvements and
determined that they comply with the approved plans and specifications and all
applicable city ordinances;
      (4)   all fees required by this chapter or another city ordinance for the
construction of the infrastructure improvements have been paid to the city;
      (5)   a letter of acceptance has been issued by the director; and
      (6)   the engineer of record has certified that all addition corners have
been set pursuant to Section
51A-8.617.
   (l)   Maintenance and repairs. The contractor responsible for the
construction of the infrastructure shall make maintenance repairs and replace
all defective materials and workmanship for a period of one year from the date
of the acceptance of the improvements. The decision of the director is
conclusive on the determination as to needed maintenance or defective materials
or workmanship. The director’s determination shall be based upon applicable
guidelines. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 21045; 21491; 22022; 23384; 25047; 25048; 26530;
28073; 30239; 30654; 32002)
SEC. 51A-8.613.   COVENANT PROCEDURES.
   (a)   An owner who desires to plat more property than he is willing to
construct or design paving, storm drainage, water, or wastewater facilities to
serve may plat the property if he executes a covenant for the benefit of the
city in accordance with this section. The covenant must run with the land. As
part of the covenant, the owner shall agree to, at his cost: submit any needed
additional plans; construct the required infrastructure; and secure or dedicate
easements and rights-of-way necessary to serve the development at the owner’s
cost. Covenants involving water or wastewater facilities must be approved in
accordance with
Chapter 49 of the Dallas City Code, as amended.
   (b)   Upon approval of the terms of the paving and storm drainage covenant
by the director, the owner shall execute the covenant on a form provided by the
director. Executed covenants must be submitted to the department for
processing.
   (c)   All covenants must be approved in accordance with the procedure set
out in Section
2-11.2 of this code.
   (d)   If a covenant is not fulfilled, no building permit or certificate of
occupancy may be issued for any property included within the boundaries of the
plat which the covenant was executed to serve.
   (e)   Upon determination by the director that all conditions of a covenant
have been fulfilled, the city manager may execute, and cause to be filed of
record, a release of the covenant without the necessity of city council
approval. In the event of a conflict between this subsection and other
provisions in the Dallas City Code, this subsection controls. (Ord. Nos. 20092;
22026; 23384; 23694; 25047; 28073)
SEC. 51A-8.614.   COST SHARING CONTRACT.
   (a)   Generally. All funding requests for city cost sharing participation in
municipal infrastructure additions or improvements must be approved by the city
council. City participation is generally limited to items that benefit a broad
population segment. The developer’s apportioned share of any exaction pursuant
to Section
51A-1.109 is the responsibility of the developer unless the developer, as
documented in a cost sharing contract, volunteers to pay a greater proportion.
If the developer volunteers to pay a greater proportion, the city has no
obligation for the amount volunteered. All city participation is subject to the
availability of funds. City participation must comply with Subchapter C of
Chapter 212 and Chapter 252 of the Texas Local Government Code. (Ord. Nos.
20092; 20730; 21186; 23384; 25047; 26530)
SEC. 51A-8.615.   NONSTANDARD MA- TERIALS.
   (a)   Generally. Nonstandard materials may be used in the public right-of-
way for paving, parkway, sidewalk, driveway, and other street enhancement if
the criteria in this section are met.
   (b)   Plans. Plans indicating the nonstandard materials must be approved by
the director of transportation and public works.
   (c)   Samples. Samples of each material used for a walking or traveling
surface in the public right-of- way must be submitted to and approved by the
director of transportation and public works.
   (d)   Standards. All street paving, sidewalk, driveway, curb, and gutter
construction must conform to the Standard Construction Details and the Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction of the department of
transportation and public works.
   (e)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks must be designed barrier-free to the handicapped.
   (f)   Landscaping. Proposed landscaping in the public right-of-way must
conform to the park and recreation beautification plan or be approved by the
director of transportation and public works, and must not interfere with
utilities or any authorized use of the public right-of-way.
   (g)   Central business district. If the proposed plat is within the central
business district, the nonstandard materials must meet all provisions of the
Dallas Central Business District Pedestrian Facilities Plan Update.
   (h)   Written approval. Written approval must be obtained from the director
of transportation and public works before any work is done.
   (i)   Liability. The responsibility and liability for all claims or damages
resulting from injury or loss due to the use or presence of nonstandard work or
materials is governed by Sections 43-33 and 43-34 of the Dallas City Code, as
amended, and no liability is assumed by the city for approving plans including
nonstandard materials.
   (j)   Agreements required. A written agreement must be executed between the
owner of the property to be platted and the city for the use of nonstandard
materials in the public right-of-way. The agreement must be executed before the
construction of any improvement consisting of nonstandard materials. If the
nonstandard material is to be located in a street or alley, or is otherwise
intended for vehicular travel, a covenant agreement is required which provides
a plan of perpetual maintenance at no cost to the city. If the nonstandard
material is for a driveway, a sidewalk, or for another surface outside of the
area between street curbs, or is not intended for vehicular travel, a written
agreement is required between the owner of the property to be platted and the
city. The owner is responsible for securing all required sidewalk, driveway, or
street cut permits.
   (k)   Maintenance of nonstandard material in public rights-of-way. All
improvements in the public rights-of-way exist at the pleasure of the city and
must be maintained to the satisfaction of the city. The owner of the property
to be platted is responsible for all maintenance and replacement of nonstandard
materials and all preparatory work, including subgrade and base maintenance and
replacement necessary due to work performed by the city or utility companies in
the discharge of their responsibilities. Failure to maintain and replace
defective nonstandard materials and workmanship constitutes just cause for the
city to remove any portion or all of the nonstandard work and replace it with
standard materials. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 28424; 30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 51A-8.616.   RESERVED.
(Ord. 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.617.   MONUMENTATION.
   (a)   Minimum monumentation standards.
      (1)   At all angle points, points of curve, and points of tangency on the
perimeter of the platted boundary, a minimum three inch metallic cap disc must
be affixed to a metal pipe or rod and stamped with the addition name and the
registered professional land surveyor number of the surveyor of record, or the
name of the surveying company.
      (2)   At all block corners, a minimum two inch metallic cap must be
affixed to a metal pipe or rod. The cap must be stamped with the block number
and registered professional land surveyor number of the surveyor of record, or
the name of the surveying company.
      (3)   At all lot corners, points of curve, and points of tangency of
curves, a minimum 1/2-inch diameter metal pipe or rod is required with a cap
stamped with the registered professional land surveyor number of the surveyor
of record, or the name of the surveying company.
      (4)   All monuments installed must contain a cap or disc imprinted with
the addition name, if required, and the registration number of the surveyor or
the name of the engineering or surveying firm that prepared the plat. In
locations where such monuments cannot be installed, alternate types of
monuments may be installed with the prior approval of the chief city surveyor.
A request for alternate monumentation must be made in writing by the surveyor
of record, and must include the City Plan File Number and the reason for the
alternate monumentation request.
      (5)   Any points of monumentation that can not be set at the designated
place must be referenced with sufficient witness monumentation.
   (b)   Placement of a monument on the boundary of property being platted in
which no areas are to be dedicated to the public.
      (1)   Monuments must be installed on the boundary of such property being
platted at all corners, angle points, and points of curvature and tangency.
      (2)    The size, shape, and substance of monuments found or installed on
the perimeter of the platted boundary must be described on the drawing and in
the owner’s certificate of the submitted plat.
   (c)   Placement of monuments on and within the boundary of property being
platted in which areas are to be dedicated to the public. Monuments must be
installed on the boundary of such property being platted at all corners, angle
points, and points of curvature and tangency, except those points falling
within areas to be dedicated. In areas to be dedicated, all points on new
right-of-way lines must be monumented. Monuments must be installed within the
boundary of such property being platted at the following points:
      (1)   All corners of parks, squares, or other portions intended for
public use.
      (2)   All block corners.
      (3)   On the right-of-way lines of all alleys and public and private
streets at all points of intersections, angle points, and points of curvature
and tangency.
   (d)   Placement of monuments on floodways, conservation easement areas, and
escarpment lines.
      (1)   Monuments must be installed on each lot line and boundary line
where these lines are intersected by or tangent with a floodway management
area, floodway easement, conservation easement area, or the escarpment zone.
      (2)    Monuments for floodway management areas, floodway easements, and
detention areas must be installed at all angle points and points of curvature
or tangency.
      (3)    Floodway management areas, detention areas, escarpment zones, and
conservation easement areas must be monumented with a minimum 1/2-inch iron rod
with a cap stamped with the registered professional land surveyor number of the
surveyor of record, or the name of the surveying company.
      (4)   Floodway easement areas must be monumented in accordance with the
dimensions and specifications set forth under City File No. 424-109.
   (e)   Registered Professional Land Surveyor’s certificate. The final plat of
the area being platted must contain a certificate that the land being platted
was surveyed under the supervision of a registered professional land surveyor.
The certificate must contain the registered professional land surveyor’s name
and registration number, and must be sworn to before a notary public.
   (f)   Monument verification. After required monumentation has been set, a
letter stating this must be sent to the chief city surveyor, for field
inspection and verification of the platted property. The letter must be from
the surveyor of record and must include the City Plan File Number and the
addition name. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 24843)
SEC. 51A-8.618.   TRAFFIC BARRIERS.
   (a)   When required. For all property being platted with identifiable single
family, duplex, or townhouse components that front on both an arterial and a
public or private street or alley, traffic barriers must be constructed that
separate the property from the arterial. See Section
51A-8.507(b)(6) for alley requirements.
   (b)   Easement. The owner must dedicate an exclusive barrier easement along
the lots or alleys perimeter to the thoroughfare depending on who will maintain
the barrier. Barrier easements must have a minimum width of three feet. If a
screening wall serves as a traffic barrier, maintenance of the wall is the
responsibility of each individual owner abutting the easement or the
homeowners’ association.
   (c)   Design. The design and construction of traffic barriers must be
approved by the director. If concrete is used for traffic barriers, it must be
reinforced and have a minimum compressive strength of 3000 pounds per square
inch at 28 days test. The traffic barrier must be at least 24 inches in height.
All traffic barriers must be maintained by the property owner or a homeowners
association.
   (d)   Timing of construction. All traffic barriers required by this article
must be constructed concurrently with the adjoining street or, if the
thoroughfare is already constructed or is not to be constructed with the
subdivision infrastructure, before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
or utility connection for any structure within the boundaries of the plat.
   (e)   Acceptance of construction. All traffic barriers must be constructed
under a private development contract in accordance with Section
51A-8.612. If a screening wall serves as a traffic barrier, it must be designed
by an engineer and approved by the director.
   (f)   Maintenance and repair. Each adjacent property owner is responsible
for simple routine maintenance and cleaning of all barriers to which his
property is adjacent. The city of Dallas is responsible for any major
maintenance and repair work necessary for the traffic barrier if the city has
accepted it for maintenance. Any other type of traffic barriers is the
responsibility of the homeowners’ association or the owner. (Ord. Nos. 20092;
21186; 23384; 25047; 28073)
SEC. 51A-8.619.   SCREENING WALLS.
   If the screening wall serves as a traffic barrier, it must meet the
standards of Section
51A-8.618. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.620.   RETAINING WALLS.
   All retaining walls located on private property along public rights-of-way
or easements must be constructed of reinforced concrete or other materials
determined to be sufficiently durable by the director. Retaining wall design
must be approved by the director of transportation and public works to ensure
site conditions are adequately addressed by the design. Engineer certification
and building permits may be required by other applicable regulations. (Ord.
Nos. 23384; 25047; 28073; 28424; 30239; 30654; 32864)
Division 51A-8.700. Administration.
SEC. 51A-8.701.   NOTHING DEEMED SUBMITTED UNTIL FEES PAID.
   Whenever a requirement exists for the submission of plans and a fee exists
for the processing of the plans, no submission is complete until all required
fees have been paid. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.702.   EARLY RELEASE OF BUILDING OR FOUNDATION PERMIT.
   (a)   Generally.  No building or foundation permit may be issued before the
completion and filing for record of a final plat except in accordance with this
section. The recipient of an early release permit bears the entire risk that
improvements may need to be modified or removed based on engineering plan
review or final plat disapproval. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until the final plat is properly filed for record as required by this article
and state law, and all conditions of preliminary plat approval and all other
applicable rules and regulations have been satisfied.
   (b)   Application. An application for an early release must be submitted to
the building official. The building official shall review the application and
determine whether an early release is appropriate. If the building official
recommends the early release, a building or foundation permit may be issued.
The application for early release must include:
      (1)   the number of copies required for circulation and review;
      (2)   a copy of the approved preliminary plat;
      (3)   the file number assigned to the plat application by the city;
      (4)   a copy of the action letter from the subdivision administrator
outlining the conditions of preliminary plat approval;
      (5)   all requisites for building or foundation permit applications,
whichever apply; and
      (6)   a site plan showing the following:
         (A)   Boundary lines of the property.
         (B)   Existing streets.
         (C)   Pavement widths and surface compositions for existing and
proposed driveways, sidewalks, and areas intended for vehicular travel.
         (D)   Improvements existing on the property, and all proposed
improvements.
         (E)   All dedications required by the preliminary plat.
   (c)   Fee. Refer to Section 303.13.4 of Chapter 52 of the Dallas City Code.
   (d)   Requirements for approval. No early release may be authorized until:
      (1)   clearance has been received from all affected departments;
      (2)   the commission or the subdivision administrator has approved a
preliminary or final plat subject to conditions in accordance with this
article.
      (3)   all submitted plans conform to all applicable city ordinances,
requirements, and conditions of plat approval, and compliance can otherwise be
enforced;
      (4)   all affected departments have determined the basic requirements
necessary for final approval;
      (5)   the proposed building site has adequate all-weather access through
public or private right-of-way;
      (6)   adequate storm drainage outfall exists to safely discharge on-site
drainage of a one-percent annual chance flood;
      (7)   adequate assurance has been received that off-site easements
necessary for infrastructure to serve the plat have been secured;
      (8)    the proposed site has adequate water facilities for emergency fire
service;
      (9)   infrastructure plans for the proposed plat have been submitted to
the department and are in general conformance with city standards;
      (10)   if required by the director, private development contracts and
bonds have been submitted;
      (11)   the application complies with all applicable laws;
      (12)   the only requirement preventing the building or foundation permit
from being issued is the completion and filing for record of the plat;
      (13)   the building or foundation permit clearly states that no
certificate of occupancy will be issued for the property or, for residential
applications, no final inspection will be made until all platting requirements
have been met;
      (14)   the owner acknowledges in writing concurrence with the conditions
under which the permit is issued; and
      (15)   the fee required by Subsection (c) is paid to the building
official. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 21431; 23384; 25047; 26529; 28073; 31314; 31394;
32676)
SEC. 51A-8.703.   CIRCUMVENTION OF REGULATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Recording of plat. All plats must be signed by the property owners and
filed and recorded with the county clerk of the county in which the property is
located in accordance with the requirements of state law. No person may file or
cause to be filed for record with the county clerk a proposed plat before the
final plat of the property has been endorsed by the commission chair or the
subdivision administrator in accordance with this article.
   (b)   Building permit. No building permit may be issued for the construction
of any building or structure located on a tract that was not created in
accordance with this article, except that building permits may be issued for:
      (1)   remodeling or repair of existing structures on such a tract; and
      (2)   infrastructure construction.
   (c)   No public or private improvements. No construction of any public or
private improvements may be commenced or continued except in conformity with
this article.
   (d)   Certificates of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy may be issued
and no final inspection for residential property may be made for property which
was not developed in strict compliance with this article, or for property upon
which all conditions of plat approval have not been met. The fact that a
building permit was issued for the property does not excuse compliance with all
regulations, and a certificate of occupancy may be denied if a building permit
is issued in error. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 26529)
SEC. 51A-8.704.   UTILITIES.
   Utility connections are not authorized until a final plat has been approved
by the commission in accordance with this article and filed for record with the
county clerk. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.705.   TAXES.
   No final plat may be filed with the county clerk until all taxes assessed by
the city against the property have been paid. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384; 26529)
SEC. 51A-8.706.   APPROVALS AND AGREEMENTS IN WRITING.
   Whenever a requirement exists for approval by an official body, a city
official, or a city employee, or for an agreement, concurrence, or
acknowledgement from an applicant, the approval, agreement, concurrence, or
acknowledgement must be expressed in written form. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 23384)
SEC. 51A-8.707.   PLATTING IN THE ESCARPMENT ZONE AND IN THE GEOLOGICALLY
SIMILAR AREA.
   (a)   The commission or the subdivision administrator shall refuse
permission to plat property in the escarpment zone or in the geologically
similar area, as defined in the escarpment regulations of this chapter, unless
the director has first issued an escarpment permit for the development
proposed.
   (b)   When property in the escarpment zone or in the geologically similar
area is platted:
      (1)   the escarpment zone or the geologically similar area must be shown
on the plat; and
      (2)   the plat must provide any dedications necessary for maintenance,
drainage, or compliance with Division
51A-5.200, “Escarpment Regulations”; and
      (3)   the property owner is encouraged, but not required, to dedicate the
escarpment zone or geologically similar area to the city as park. (Ord. Nos.
20092; 23384; 25047; 26000; 26529; 28073)
SEC. 51A-8.708.   WAIVER BY CITY COUNCIL.
   Nothing in this division shall preclude the city council from waiving, in
whole or in part, any provision of this division in connection with the
abandonment, conveyance, or closure of streets or alleys. (Ord. 23384)
ARTICLE IX.
THOROUGHFARES.
Division 51A-9.100. Thoroughfare Plan Amendments.
SEC. 51A-9.101.   THOROUGHFARE PLAN DEFINED.
   For the purposes of Section 8, Chapter XV, Dallas City Charter, as approved
by the citizens of Dallas at an election held on January 17, 1981, the
thoroughfare plan of the City consists of Ordinance No. 20860, THOROUGHFARE
PLAN - CITY OF DALLAS, TEXAS, as amended, and Ordinance No. 13262, CBD STREETS
AND VEHICULAR CIRCULATION, as amended. These two ordinances, as amended, are
hereby designated and will be referred to as the “thoroughfare plan.” (Ord.
Nos. 19455; 21186)
SEC. 51A-9.102.   THOROUGHFARE PLAN AMENDMENT PROCESS.
   (a)   Initiation of thoroughfare plan amendments.
      (1)   Proposed changes in the thoroughfare plan may be initiated by the
city staff, city plan commission, thoroughfare committee, or the city council
by referring the proposed change to the city manager for study and
recommendation.
      (2)   Proposed changes in the thoroughfare plan may also be initiated by
any person who submits the following to the department of planning and urban
design:
         (A)   An application, on a form provided for that purpose, with all
required information completed.
         (B)   The required fee.
      (3)   For the purpose of this article “city manager” means the city
manager or his designee.
   (b)   Commission report and recommendation required.
      (1)   The commission shall make a report and recommendation to the city
council on all proposed amendments to the thoroughfare plan. The commission may
appoint a thoroughfare committee to study proposed amendments to the
thoroughfare plan.
      (2)   The city manager shall conduct those studies necessary for the
commission to make its recommendation and report to city council.
      (3)   The commission shall hold a public hearing to allow proponents and
opponents of an amendment to the thoroughfare plan to present their views.
      (4)   Before the commission holds the public hearing on an amendment to
the thoroughfare plan the city manager shall give notice of the public hearing
in the official newspaper of the city at least 10 days before the hearing.
      (5)   In addition to notice by publication, if the amendment to the
thoroughfare plan is a change in a thoroughfare classification or route
description, the city manager shall send written notice of a public hearing on
the proposed change to all owners of real property in the area of change lying
within 200 feet of the existing right-of-way line if the proposed change will
narrow the right-of-way, or within 200 feet of the proposed right-of-way line
if the proposed changes will widen the right-of-way. The measurement of the 200
feet includes streets and alleys. The notice must be given not less than 10
days before the date set for the hearing by depositing the notice properly
addressed and postage paid in the United States mail to the property owners as
evidence by the last approved city tax roll.
      (6)   The commission shall make its recommendation on a proposed
amendment to the thoroughfare plan from staff reports of the city manager,
field inspections and the evidence presented at the public hearing.
      (7)   The city manager shall forward to the city council the commission’s
recommendation and report as well as the staff recommendation on amendments to
the thoroughfare plan.
   (c)   City council action.
      (1)   Before the city council holds the public hearing on an amendment to
the thoroughfare plan, the city manager shall give notice of the public hearing
in the official newspaper of the city at least 15 days before the hearing.
      (2)   In addition to notice by publication, if the amendment to the
thoroughfare plan is a change in a thoroughfare classification or route
description, the city manager shall send written notice of a public hearing on
the proposed change to all owners of real property in the area of change lying
within 200 feet of the existing right-of-way line if the proposed change will
narrow the right-of-way, or within 200 feet of the proposed right-of-way line
if the proposed change will widen the right-of-way. The measurement of the 200
feet includes streets and alleys. The notice must be given not less than 10
days before the date set for the hearing by depositing the notice properly
addressed and postage paid in the United States mail to the property owners as
evidence by the last approved city tax roll.
      (3)   The written notice of a hearing before the city council may be
combined with the written notice of a hearing before the commission if the date
of the city council hearing is known at the time of sending commission hearing
notices.
      (4)   An amendment to the thoroughfare plan requires the favorable vote
of a majority of the members of the city council present. (Ord. Nos. 19455;
22026; 25047; 28424; 29478; 29882, eff. 10/1/15)
Division 51A-9.200. Approval of Alignment of Thoroughfares.
SEC. 51A-9.201.   PROCEDURES FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF THOROUGHFARE ALIGNMENT.
   (a)   In cases where the city must purchase right-of-way to construct a
freeway, thoroughfare, or a street in the CBD, before initiating purchasing
procedures, the city manager shall present to the city council, the city staff
recommendation for alignment of the roadway and its appurtenant facilities
based on engineering criteria.
   (b)   If the city council determines that the nature of the proposed
alignment does not warrant a public hearing, the city council may approve the
alignment by majority vote of city council members present.
   (c)   If the city council determines that the nature of the proposed
alignment requires notification of affected property owners and a public
hearing, the city manager shall send written notice of a public hearing on the
proposed alignment to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the
proposed right-of-way line. The measurement of the 200 feet includes streets
and alleys. The notice must be given not less than 10 days before the date set
for the hearing by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid,
in the United States mail to the property owners as evidenced by the last
approved city tax roll.
   (d)   After a public hearing the city council may approve an alignment by a
majority vote of the city council members present.
   (e)   After an alignment has been approved by the city council, the
alignment may not be changed in a way that will require the purchase of
additional right-of-way unless the change is approved by the city council
following the same procedures for approval of an original alignment in
accordance with Subsections (b) and (c).
   (f)   For the purpose of this article, “alignment” means the location of
right-of-way lines, curb lines, and roadway placement of a freeway,
thoroughfare, or a street in the CBD. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 21186)
SEC. 51A-9.202.   PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF STATE OR COUNTY THOROUGHFARE
IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Before the city gives its approval of a construction plan for a
freeway, thoroughfare, or a street in the CBD by the state or county, the city
manager shall present the proposed construction plan to the city council for
review.
   (b)   If the city council determines that the nature of the proposed
construction plan does not warrant a public hearing, the city council may
approve the construction plan by majority vote of the city council members
present.
   (c)   If the city council determines that the nature of the proposed
construction plan requires notification of affected property owners and a
public hearing, the city manager shall send written notice of a public hearing
on the proposed construction to all owners of real property lying within 200
feet of the proposed right-of-way line. The measurement of the 200 feet
includes streets and alleys. The notice must be given not less than 10 days
before the date set for the hearing by depositing the notice properly addressed
and postage paid in the United States mail to the property owners as evidenced
by the last approved city tax roll.
   (d)   After a public hearing the city council may approve a construction
plan by the state or county by a majority vote of the city council members
present.
   (e)   The public hearing on a construction plan of the state or county may
be held jointly with the state or county. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 21186)
Division 51A-9.300. Street Naming and Name Change Process.
SEC. 51A-9.301.   DEFINITIONS.
In this division:
   (1)   DIRECTIONAL PREFIX means an indicator of the direction a roadway
passes from an official base line established pursuant to
Article V, “Building Numbering,” of
Chapter 43, “Streets and Sidewalks,” of the Dallas City Code, as amended. For
example, in the street name “North Franklin Road,” North is the directional
prefix.
   (2)   DIRECTIONAL SUFFIX means an indicator of address location. For
example, in the address “137 Franklin Road W,” W is the directional suffix.
   (3)   FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION means the systematic classification of
roadways in categories according to their access and movement attributes. Minor
streets, residential and community collectors, minor and principal arterials,
and freeways and expressways are functional classifications of roadways. Minor
streets usually provide access to individual lots. Collector streets provide
access between the minor streets and arterials. Arterials link areas of the
city and carry traffic to freeways and expressways, which primarily provide
movement to locations throughout the region.
   (4)   HISTORIC STREET NAME means a street name that commemorates:
      (A)   a person who significantly contributed to the cultural, economic,
social, religious, or political heritage of the city;
      (B)   a site or area where there occurred historic events which
significantly contributed to the cultural, economic, social, religious, or
political heritage of the city; or
      (C)   a person or family founding or traditionally associated with the
area where the street is located.
   (5)   LABEL means the portion of a street name that attaches a creative
identity to a roadway. For example, in the street name “Franklin Road,”
Franklin is the label.
   (6)   Reserved.
   (7)   MAJOR ROADWAY means a roadway on the city’s thoroughfare plan.
   (8)   MINOR ROADWAY means a roadway not on the city’s thoroughfare plan.
   (9)   ROADWAY means any official vehicular course for travel, regardless of
length or service characteristics.
   (10)   STREET NAME means the street label together with the street-type
designation, but does not include a directional prefix or suffix. For example,
in the street identified as “North Franklin Road,” Franklin Road is the street
name.
   (11)   TYPE means the portion of a street name that identifies the kind of
roadway, but does not necessarily attach a functional classification. For
example, in the street name “Franklin Road,” Road is the type. (Ord. Nos.
19832; 21186; 22224)
SEC. 51A-9.302.   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Only public street names may be changed by the process contained in
this division.
   (b)   A street name change application may be initiated only by:
      (1)   an owner of property abutting the street;
      (2)   the director of the department if necessary to address public
safety concerns;
      (3)   a city council member with concurrence by two other city council
members; or
      (4)   the city plan commission by majority vote.
   (c)   The definitions and standards in this division apply to both original
street naming and street name changes. Applicable procedures for assigning
original street names are contained in
Article VIII, “Plat Regulations.” (Ord. Nos. 19832; 22224; 25047; 28073)
SEC. 51A-9.303.   APPLICATION.
   An application for a street name change must be filed with the department on
an application form furnished by that department. The application must include
the following:
   (1)   The application fee. The city council may waive the application fee if
the city council finds that payment of the fee would result in substantial
financial hardship to the applicant.
   (2)   A statement of the reasons supporting a street name change.
   (3)   The existing and proposed street names.
   (4)   The roadway’s status as a major roadway or a minor roadway.
   (5)   For all applications except those made by the director, a city council
member, or the city plan commission, a petition indicating that at least 51
percent of the owners of all lots abutting the street favor the name change.
   (6)   A site plan showing the location of the street. (Ord. Nos. 19832;
22224; 25047; 28073)
SEC. 51A-9.304.   STANDARDS FOR STREET NAMES AND STREET NAME CHANGES.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   A proposed label in a street name may not duplicate any existing
label.
      (2)   A proposed street name may not be similar to an existing street
name so that it creates confusion or an obstacle to the provision of emergency
services.
      (3)   If all of the standards in this section are met, a roadway that
extends into the city of Dallas from a contiguous municipality must adopt the
street name given the street by the contiguous municipality.
      (4)   A street name that uniquely identifies a particular tract, tenant,
or product name is prohibited.
      (5)   A street name may not contain more than 14 characters providing,
however, that the street-type designation may be abbreviated to comply with
this requirement.
      (6)   Hyphenated and apostrophied street names are prohibited.
   (b)   Number of names for a roadway.
      (1)   Except as provided in Paragraph (2), a roadway must have only one
name.
      (2)   Different names must be given to the same roadway under the
following conditions:
         (A)   If a minor roadway deviates from its predominant course at a 90
degree angle for a distance of more than 300 feet, a different name must be
used for the predominant course and for each portion of the roadway deviating
from the predominant course.
         (B)   If two segments of a minor roadway are separated by an
intervening land use that prohibits vehicular passage, and if future
connections of the street segments through the use is unlikely, the segments of
roadway on each side of the intervening use must have different names.
         (C)   If a street is interrupted and offsets more than 150 feet at a
cross street, different names must be given to the offset street segments.
   (c)   Historic street names.
      (1)   A historic street name may not be changed.
      (2)   A street name commemorating a person or a historic site or area is
prohibited until at least two years after the death of the person to be honored
or the occurrence of the event to be commemorated.
   (d)   Street type and label designation.
      (1)   A street name may not contain more than one street-type
designation. For example, the street name “John Doe Place Road” is not
permitted.
      (2)   The designation of the street type must be based upon the features
of the roadway, such as the traffic volumes carried by the roadway, its
physical design and construction characteristics, and its role in the
surrounding street network.
      (3)   No street name may have more than two labels before the street-type
designation.
   (e)   Directional prefix and suffix.
      (1)   A directional prefix is permitted only when the roadway intersects
one of the official baselines used by the city.
      (2)   A directional suffix is permitted as an indicator for address
location.
   (f)   Guidelines.
      (1)   A street name may be based upon physical, political, or historic
features of the area.
      (2)   The name of a subdivision and names thematically related to the
name of a subdivision may be given to a street within the subdivision.
   (g)   Waiver. The city council, by a three-fourths vote of its members, may
waive any of the standards contained in this section when waiver would be in
the public interest and would not impair the public health, safety, or welfare.
(Ord. Nos. 19832; 23407)
SEC. 51A-9.305.   REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   (a)   Within 10 working days after receipt of a complete application for a
street name change, the subdivision administrator shall request comment
regarding the potential impacts of the name change on the operations of the
following departments and other affected entities:
      (1)   Department of transportation and public works.
      (2)   Office of budget and management services.
      (3)   Fire-rescue department.
      (4)   Department of development services.
      (5)   Police department.
      (6)   Water utilities department.
      (7)   Department of sanitation services.
      (8)   Department of code compliance.
      (9)   Contiguous municipalities if any property abutting the street is
within the contiguous municipality.
      (10)   Dallas County Historical Commission.
      (11)   TXU Electric, or its successor.
      (12)   TXU Gas, or its successor.
      (13)   Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, or its successor.
      (14)   U.S. Postal Service.
   (b)   The subdivision administrator shall formulate a recommendation on the
proposed street name change based upon his own review of the application, the
standards in Section
51A-9.304, and the comments received from those listed in Subsection (a). The
subdivision administrator shall set a date for review of the application before
the subdivision review committee of the city plan commission.
   (c)   Notice of the public hearing before the subdivision review committee
must be advertised in the official newspaper of the city no fewer than 15 days
before the date of the hearing. The subdivision administrator must also send
written notice of the public hearing to abutting property owners as ownership
appears on the last approved ad valorem tax roll no fewer than 15 days before
the date of the hearing. Notification signs must be posted along the street for
no fewer than 15 days before the date of the hearing.
   (d)   The subdivision review committee shall formulate a recommendation
based upon their review of the application, the standards contained in Section
51A-9.304, and the recommendation of the subdivision administrator. (Ord. Nos.
19832; 22026; 23694; 24410; 24843; 25047; 27204; 28073; 28424; 30239; 30654;
31658; 32002; 32864)
SEC. 51A-9.306.   HEARING BEFORE THE CITY PLAN COMMISSION.
   (a)   After review of the application by the subdivision review committee,
the subdivision administrator shall set the application for hearing by the city
plan commission.
   (b)   Notice of the public hearing before the city plan commission must be
advertised in the official newspaper of the city no fewer than 30 days before
the date of the hearing. The subdivision administrator must also send written
notice of the public hearing to abutting property owners as ownership appears
on the last approved ad valorem tax roll no fewer than 30 days before the date
of the hearing. Notification signs must be posted along the street for no fewer
than 30 days before the date of the hearing.
   (c)   The city plan commission shall make a recommendation to the city
council of either approval or denial of the application based upon the
testimony presented at the public hearing, the recommendations of the
subdivision review committee and the subdivision administrator, and the
standards contained in Section
51A-9.304. (Ord. Nos. 19832; 22224; 27204)
SEC. 51A-9.307.   HEARING BEFORE THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (a)   If the city plan commission recommends denial of a street name change,
the action of the city plan commission is final unless the applicant files a
request for appeal to the city council within 10 days of the hearing at which
the action was taken. The request for appeal must be in writing and must be
submitted to the subdivision administrator.
   (b)   The subdivision administrator shall schedule a city council hearing on
all applications for street name change in which the commission recommends
approval, and in all applications in which the commission recommends denial if
an appeal is requested in accordance with this section.
   (c)   Notice of the public hearing before the city council must be
advertised in the official newspaper of the city no fewer than 15 days before
the date of the hearing. The subdivision administrator must also send written
notice of the public hearing to abutting property owners as ownership appears
on the last approved ad valorem tax roll no fewer than 15 days before the date
of the hearing. Notification signs must be posted along the street for no fewer
than 15 days before the date of the hearing.
   (d)   The favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the city council
is required if:
      (1)   the street name change has been recommended for denial by the city
plan commission; or
      (2)   a written protest against the street name change has been signed by
the owners of 20 percent of all lots abutting the street.
   (e)   The city council shall either approve or deny the application based
upon the testimony presented at the public hearing, the recommendations of the
city plan commission, the subdivision review committee, and the subdivision
administrator, and the standards contained in Section
51A-9.304. (Ord. Nos. 19832; 20037; 22224; 27204)
SEC. 51A-9.308.   NOTIFICATION OF NAME CHANGE.
   If the request for a name change is approved by the city council, the city
secretary shall notify those listed in Section
51A-9.305 and others requesting notification of the name change. The
subdivision administrator shall send written notice of the city council’s
action to abutting property owners. (Ord. 19832)
SEC. 51A-9.309.   EFFECTIVE DATE OF NAME CHANGE.
   Providing that all required fees have been paid by the applicant, a name
change approved by the city council takes effect 60 days after the date of its
approval unless city council sets a later effective date. (Ord. Nos. 19832;
27204)
Division 51A-9.400. Four-Way/All-Way Stop Controls at Residential
Intersections.
SEC. 51A-9.401.   APPLICATION.
   (a)   Prerequisites for accepting an application. An application for
installation or removal of four-way/ all-way stop controls at residential
intersections must be filed with the traffic engineer. The traffic engineer
shall not accept an application unless it has the support of at least two-
thirds of the owners or tenants residing within 600 feet of the intersection at
issue.
   (b)   Calculation of votes. The following rules apply for purposes of
calculating the extent to which an application has the support of owners or
tenants:
      (1)   Lots containing no more than four dwelling units receive one
application vote per unit.
      (2)   Lots containing more than four dwelling units receive no votes
unless the application is signed by the owner or property manager, in which
case the lot is allocated a number of application votes based on the following
formula:
Number of votes = Length of street frontage of the lot containing the dwelling
units (in feet) divided by the average single family lot width (in feet) in the
area within 600 feet of the intersection at issue.
   (c)   Owner or manager of a residential building may sign application. The
owner or manager of a residential building may sign the application on behalf
of the tenants.
   (d)   Public meeting. The traffic engineer may supplement the petition
process with a public meeting, as needed. If a public meeting is held, the
traffic engineer shall post the notice of the meeting on the city or
department's website not less than 10 calendar days before the meeting. (Ord.
Nos. 24177; 28424; 32093)
SEC. 51A-9.402.   STANDARDS OF REVIEW.
   (a)   Standards for installation. The traffic engineer shall grant
applications to install four-way/all-way stop controls at the intersection of
two or more streets if an applicant shows that:
      (1)   the intersecting streets are residential;
      (2)   the intersecting streets are local;
      (3)   the subject street is not a fire-rescue department emergency
response route;
      (4)   the subject street is used by less than 6,000 vehicles per day; and
      (5)   it is in the public interest to grant the application.
   (b)   Standard for removal. The traffic engineer shall grant applications to
remove four-way/all-way stop controls installed pursuant to this section if an
applicant shows that it is in the public interest to grant the application.
   (c)   Notice required. The traffic engineer shall send written notice of his
or her decision approving or denying the application to the applicant within 10
days of the date of the decision. Notice is given by depositing the notice
properly addressed and postage paid in the United States mail. (Ord. Nos.
24177; 28424)
SEC. 51A-9.403.   APPEALS.
   (a)   Appeal to the city plan commission. An applicant who is dissatisfied
with the decision of the traffic engineer may appeal that decision to the city
plan commission. A written notice of appeal must be signed by the applicant or
its legal representative and filed with the traffic engineer within 30 calendar
days of the date that notice of the traffic engineer's decision is given.
   (b)   Public hearing before the commission; notice requirements. The city
plan commission shall hold a public hearing to allow interested parties to
express their views regarding the appeal. The traffic engineer shall give
notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
at least 15 calendar days before the hearing. In addition, the traffic engineer
shall send written notice of the hearing to all owners of real property lying
within 600 feet of the intersection at issue. The notice must be given not less
than 10 calendar days before the date set for the hearing by depositing the
notice properly addressed and postage paid in the United States mail to the
property owners as evidenced by the last approved city tax roll.
   (c)   Decision of the commission. The city plan commission may reverse or
affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision of the traffic engineer
based upon testimony presented at the public hearing, technical information
provided by city staff, and the standards contained in this division. The
decision of the commission shall be final unless the applicant files a notice
of appeal to the city council in accordance with this section.
   (d)   Appeal to the city council. An applicant who is dissatisfied with the
decision of the city plan commission may appeal that decision to the city
council. A written notice of appeal must be signed by the applicant or its
legal representative and filed with the traffic engineer within 30 calendar
days of the commission's decision.
   (e)   Public hearing before the city council; notice requirements. The city
council shall hold a public hearing to allow interested parties to express
their views regarding the appeal. The traffic engineer shall give notice of the
public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15
calendar days before the hearing. In addition, the traffic engineer shall send
written notice of the hearing to all owners of real property lying within 600
feet of the intersection at issue. The notice must be given not less than 10
calendar days before the date set for the hearing by depositing the notice
properly addressed and postage paid in the United States mail to the property
owners as evidenced by the last approved city tax roll.
   (f)   Decision of the city council. The city council may reverse or affirm,
in whole or in part, or modify the decision of the city plan commission based
upon testimony presented at the public hearing, technical information provided
by city staff, and the standards contained in this division. The favorable vote
of two-thirds of all members of the city council is required to grant an
application that has been recommended for denial by the commission. (Ord. Nos.
24177; 28424; 32093)
Division 51A-9.500. Ceremonial Street Naming.
SEC. 51A-9.501.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to commemorate individuals who have made
significant contributions to the community, but without causing any disruption
of the existing street names and abutting uses. (Ord. 31040)
SEC. 51A-9.502.   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Only public streets may be granted ceremonial street naming by the
process contained in this division.
   (b)   A ceremonial street naming application may only be initiated by:
      (1)   an owner of property abutting the portion of the street to receive
the ceremonial street naming if the property owner submits a petition showing
51 percent of the owners of all abutting lots of that portion of the street are
in support of the ceremonial street name; or
      (2)   a city council member with concurrence of two other council
members.
   (c)   Ceremonial street names must be a person's name. (Ord. 31040)
SEC. 51A-9.503.   PROCESS.
   (a)   Application. An application for a ceremonial street naming must be
filed with the department on an application form furnished by the director. The
application must include the following:
      (1)   The application fee for an owner initiated ceremonial street
naming.
      (2)   A statement of the reasons supporting a ceremonial street naming
including a showing that the prospective honoree had a minimum of 10 years
community involvement and demonstrated an extraordinary and consistent
voluntary commitment and dedication to the community, or has contributed
significantly to City of Dallas.
      (3)   A map showing the location of the street and the portion of the
street receiving the ceremonial street name.
   (b)   Notice.
      (1)   Prior to the public hearing before the city council, the director
shall give notice of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the city
at least 15 days before the hearing.
      (2)   Notice of the public hearing must be given to the abutting property
owners not less than 15 days before the date set for the hearing by depositing
the notice properly addressed and postage paid in the United States mail to the
property owners as evidenced by the last approved tax roll. This notice must be
written in English and Spanish if the area of request is located wholly or
partly within a census tract in which 50 percent or more of the inhabitants are
persons of Spanish origin or descent according to the most recent federal
decennial census.
      (3)   Required notification signs must be posted along the street at
least 15 days before the date of the hearing.
   (c)   Public hearing. The city council may approve the application based on
the testimony presented at the public hearing and a determination that the
application meets the ceremonial street naming criteria standards. The
application may be approved by a majority vote of the members present, except
the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the city council is
required if a written protest against the ceremonial street naming has been
signed by 20 percent of all abutting property owners.
   (d)   Early removal. The same application, notice, and hearing process must
be followed to remove a ceremonial street name. (Ord. 31040)
SEC. 51A-9.504.   STANDARDS FOR CEREMONIAL STREET NAMING.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection:
         (A)   Prospective honorees must have had a minimum of 10 years
community involvement and demonstrated an extraordinary and consistent
voluntary commitment and dedication to the community, or have contributed
significantly to the City of Dallas.
         (B)   Use of a ceremonial street naming is prohibited until at least
two years after the death of the person to be honored.
         (C)   Individuals who have already been honored on one street, whether
ceremonial or official, may not be honored on another street.
      (2)   The standards in this subsection may be waived by a three quarters
vote of the city council.
   (b)   Additional standards.
      (1)   Ceremonial street naming cannot contain a product name or be used
for a commercial purpose.
      (2)   Ceremonial street naming must be a person's name.
      (3)   A ceremonial street naming sign topper must have "In Honor of" as
the top line.
      (4)   No portion of a street may have more than one ceremonial street
name. (Ord. 31040)
SEC. 51A-9.505.   NOTIFICATION OF CEREMONIAL STREET NAMING.
   If the request for a ceremonial street naming is approved by the city
council, the subdivision administrator shall send written notice of the city
council's action to abutting property owners. (Ord. 31040)
SEC. 51A-9.506.   EFFECTIVE DATE OF CEREMONIAL STREET NAME AND END DATE.
   Providing that all required fees have been paid by the applicant, a
ceremonial street name approved by the city council takes effect 60 days after
the date of its approval unless city council sets a later effective date. The
ceremonial street name ends 10 years after the effective date. (Ord. 31040)
SEC. 51A-9.507.   INSTALLATION AND REPLACEMENT.
   (a)   Installation. The director of the transportation and public works
department is responsible for the fabrication and installation of the
ceremonial street name toppers.
   (b)   Removal. The department is not responsible for replacing ceremonial
street naming toppers due to vandalism, theft, and normal wear and tear. The
department may remove any ceremonial street name topper that has become
unsightly without replacing it. (Ord. Nos. 31040; 32864)
Division 51A-9.600. First Responder Street Topper.
SEC. 51A-9.601.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to commemorate City of Dallas first
responders who have paid the ultimate sacrifice and died in the line of duty.
(Ord. 32821)
SEC. 51A-9.602.   DEFINTIONS.
   In this division,
      (1)   FIREFIGHTER has the meaning given that term in Chapter 614 of the
Texas Government Code, as amended.
      (2)   FIRST RESPONDER means a peace officer or firefighter employed by
the City of Dallas.
      (3)   LINE OF DUTY has the meaning given that term in Section 615.021 of
the Texas Government Code, as amended.
      (4)   PEACE OFFICER has the meaning given that term in Section 2.12 of
the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. (Ord. 32821)
SEC. 51A-9.603.   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Only public streets may be granted first responder street toppers by
the process contained in this division.
   (b)   A first responder street topper application may be initiated when a
peace officer or a firefighter:
      (1)   died in the line of duty; and
      (2)   was employed at the time by the City of Dallas.
   (c)   First responder street toppers must be of the peace officer's or
firefighter's name, rank, and identification number, and a statement, "End of
Watch" the date of that occurrence. (Ord. 32821)
SEC. 51A-9.604.   PROCESS.
   (a)   Application. An application for a first responder street topper must
be submitted by the chief of police or the fire chief to the city manager. The
application must include the following:
      (1)   A statement of how the first responder died and supporting
information of the first responder including the amount of service time the
first responder spent serving the City of Dallas.
      (2)   A map showing the location of the street and the portion of the
street receiving the first responder street topper.
   (b)   Notification. Upon receipt of the application, the city manager shall
notify the councilmember in whose district the topper will be placed.
   (c)   Council committee. Prior to approval, the city manager must brief and
seek input from the appropriate city council committee.
   (d)   Determination. The city manager may approve the application based on
the determination that the application meets the first responder naming
criteria standards. (Ord. 32821)
SEC. 51A-9.605.   STANDARDS FOR FIRST RESPONDER STREET TOPPER.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Prospective first responder honorees must have died in the line of
duty while serving the City of Dallas.
      (2)   When more than one first responder has died in the line of duty at
the same location, the applicant will assign the locations where first
responder street toppers will go to best honor all the fallen first responders,
if the honorees will not fit on the multi-honoree sign.
   (b)   Additional standards.
      (1)   First responder street toppers cannot contain a product name or be
used for a commercial purpose.
      (2)   First responder street toppers must be a person's name, rank, and
identification number.
      (3)   A first responder street topper sign must have the following:
         (A)   "End of Watch" with the date.
         (B)   For peace officer signs, "Gone But Not Forgotten."
         (C)   For firefighter signs, "Caring, Serving, and Protecting."
      (4)   Each sign must follow the format as designed by the Department of
Transportation and approved by the chief of police, the fire chief, and city
manager. (Ord. 32821)
SEC. 51A-9.606.   EFFECTIVE DATE OF FIRST RESPONDER STREET TOPPER AND END DATE.
   First responder street toppers approved by the city manager take effect
immediately after the date of its approval unless the city manager sets a later
effective date. The first responder street toppers have no end date. (Ord.
32821)
SEC. 51A-9.607.   INSTALLATION AND REPLACEMENT.
   (a)   Installation. The director of the Department of Transportation is
responsible for the fabrication and installation of the first responder street
toppers.
   (b)   Removal. The Department of Transportation is responsible for replacing
first responder street toppers that have become damaged due to vandalism,
theft, and normal wear and tear. The department may remove any first responder
street topper that has become unsightly until a new topper can be installed.
(Ord. 32821)
ARTICLE X.
LANDSCAPE AND TREE CONSERVATION REGULATIONS.
Division 51A-10.100. In General.
SEC. 51A-10.101.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   AGE CLASS means a distinct group of trees originating from a single
natural event or regeneration activity (i.e., a 10-year age class), as used in
inventory management.
      (2)   ANSI A300 means the American National Standard for Tree Care
Operations, including all parts, as amended.
      (3)   APPROVED TREE LIST means the list of replacement and landscape
trees approved by the director.
      (4)   ARTIFICIAL LOT means an area within the building site that is
delineated by the building official or the director of park and recreation for
the sole purpose of satisfying the requirements of this article (see Section
51A-10.122).
      (5)   BOUNDARY TREE means:
         (A)   a tree growing on a property boundary line between two private
lots resulting in joint ownership by the adjacent property owners when the
trunk exists on each property; or
         (B)   a tree that has 20 percent or more of its tree canopy cover
extending over a property line into an adjacent building site.
      (6)   BROWNFIELD means a building site, the expansion, redevelopment, or
reuse of which may be complicated by the presence or potential presence of a
hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant.
      (7)   CALIPER means the thickness of a tree trunk measured in inches.
      (8)   CANOPY TREE means a species of tree that normally bears crown
foliage no lower than six feet above ground level upon maturity.
      (9)   CLASS 1 TREE means a tree located in a primary natural area or a
geologically similar area within 50 feet above the escarpment zone.
      (10)   CLASS 2 TREE means a tree that is not otherwise classified as a
Class 1 tree or Class 3 tree.
      (11)   CLASS 3 TREE means black willow, cottonwood, hackberry,
honeylocust, mesquite, mimosa, mulberry, ornamentals, pinus spp., Siberian elm,
silver maple, sugarberry, or a small tree.
      (12)   CLEARING means any activity that removes or seriously injures one
or more trees or the vegetative ground cover of one or more trees, such as root
mat removal or topsoil removal.
      (13)   COVERED SOIL AREA means an area of soil that is under nonpermeable
pavement and is designed to accommodate tree root growth.
      (14)   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE means the circular area of ground surrounding a
tree extending a distance of one foot per diameter inch of the tree, measured
from the tree trunk or stem.
      (15)   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT AREA means the area of land or vegetation
alteration within a property including, but not limited to, clearing, grading,
excavating, filling, and any construction site operations, paving, or any other
installation.
      (16)   DIAMETER means the thickness of a tree trunk.
      (17)   DRIP LINE means a vertical line that runs from the outermost point
of the crown of a tree to the ground.
      (18)   ENHANCED PAVEMENT means any permeable or nonpermeable decorative
pavement material intended for pedestrian or vehicular use approved by the
director. Examples of enhanced pavement include, but are not limited to, brick
or stone pavers, grass paver, exposed aggregate concrete, and stamped and
stained concrete.
      (19)   EVERGREEN TREE OR SHRUB means a tree or shrub of a species that
normally retains its leaves throughout the year.
      (20)   FACADE PLANTING AREA means the portion of a lot abutting a
storefront, office, or mixed use building facade.
      (21)   FLOOD PLAIN means any land area susceptible to inundation by the
one-percent annual chance flood.
      (22)   FOREST STAND DELINEATION ("FSD") means a comprehensive assessment
of the conditions of a property using multiple types of information, including,
but not limited to, a tree survey, aerial imagery collected from private or
public sources, natural resources assessments, topographic maps, management
plans, a map of conservation areas, land use maps, etc., to provide the
required data to determine tree replacement requirements and forest
conservation objectives.
      (23)   GRADING means any digging, scooping, removing, depositing, or
stockpiling of earth materials.
      (24)   GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE means the ecological framework of trees and
vegetation used in conjunction with engineered systems for the effective and
resilient processes of stormwater management, climate adaptation, urban heat
abatement, biodiversity, improved air quality, clean water, and healthy soils,
for sustainable social, health, and economic benefits of the urban community.
      (25)   GROUND COVER means natural mulch, or plants of species that
normally reach a height of less than three feet upon maturity, installed in
such a manner so as to form a continuous cover over the ground.
      (26)   HABITAT PRESERVATION AND RESTORATION AREA means a designated area
on a landscape plan dedicated to the restoration and preservation of an
undeveloped site through active or passive management practices.
      (27)   HISTORIC TREE means a tree, or grove of trees, that has been
recognized by resolution of the city council as having cultural or historical
significance.
      (28)   INTERIOR ZONE means the area of a lot not included in a street
buffer zone or a residential buffer zone.
      (29)   INVASIVE PLANT means a plant that has been classified as invasive
to the Dallas region by Texas Parks and Wildlife or the Texas Department of
Agriculture.
      (30)   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT means a person licensed to use the title of
"landscape architect" in the State of Texas in accordance with state law.
      (31)   LANDSCAPE AREA means an open soil area covered by natural grass,
ground cover, stone aggregate or river rock, or other plant materials for the
purpose of landscaping or the growth and establishment of trees and other
vegetation.
      (32)   LANDSCAPE BUFFER STRIP means a landscape area that serves a buffer
function.
      (33)   LARGE SHRUB means a shrub that normally reaches a height of six
feet or more upon maturity.
      (34)   LARGE TREE means a tree species that typically attains a height
and canopy width of at least 50 feet at maturity, or as classified by the
director.
      (35)   LEGACY TREE means a large or medium tree planted in a landscape
area in accordance with Section 51A-10.104 and Section 51A-10.135.
      (36)   LOT means:
         (A)   a "lot" as defined in Section
51A-2.102; and
         (B)   an "artificial lot" as defined in this section.
      (37)   LOT WITH RESIDENTIAL ADJACENCY means any of the following:
         (A)   A building site containing a multifamily use that is adjacent to
or directly across:
            (i)   a street 64 feet or less in width; or
            (ii)   an alley;
from private property in a single family, duplex, townhouse, CH, or RTN
district or a residential planned development district.
         (B)   A building site containing a nonresidential use that is adjacent
to or directly across:
            (i)   a street 64 feet or less in width; or
            (ii)   an alley;
from private property in an agricultural, single family, duplex, townhouse, CH,
multifamily, manufactured housing, or RTN district, or a residential planned
development district.
         (C)   An artificial lot containing a multifamily use if the lot is
less than 200 feet from private property in a single family, duplex, townhouse,
CH, or RTN district, or a residential planned development district.
         (D)   An artificial lot containing a nonresidential use if the lot is
less than 200 feet from private property in an agricultural, single family,
duplex, townhouse, CH, multifamily, manufactured housing, or RTN district, or a
residential planned development district.
      (38)   MEDIUM TREE means a tree that typically attains a canopy height of
at least 30 feet and a width between 15 feet and 50 feet in width at maturity,
or as otherwise classified by the director.
      (39)   NONPERMEABLE COVERAGE means coverage with any pavement that is not
"permeable pavement" as defined in this section.
      (40)   NURSERY STOCK means a plant grown in or obtained from a nursery.
      (41)   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD means the flood having a one
percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. This flood is
based upon the drainage area being fully developed to current zoning
limitations.
      (42)   OPEN SOIL AREA means an unpaved area of soil.
      (43)   PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY means an area intended for use by pedestrians
or non-motorized vehicles that is physically or visually distinguishable from
parking and driving surfaces by concrete curbs, wheel stops, or other permanent
barriers, landscape barriers, or a change in surface materials such as pavers,
patterned concrete, or flagstones.
      (44)   PERMEABLE PAVEMENT means director approved paving systems, pavers,
or other structural surfaces that allow stormwater infiltration.
      (45)   PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED SITE means a building site that has been
substantially altered through paving, construction, or other activity that
requires or required permitting or licensing through a regulatory agency.
      (46)   PRIMARY NATURAL AREA means an ecologically sensitive area
including one-percent annual chance floodplain and riparian areas, wetlands or
50-foot wetland buffer, perennial and intermittent streams measured to 50 feet
above top of bank, and the escarpment zone.
      (47)   PRIVATE PROPERTY means any property not dedicated to public use,
except that "private property" does not include the following:
         (A)   A private street or alley.
         (B)   Property on which a utility and public service use listed in
Section
51A-4.212 is being conducted as a main use.
         (C)   A railroad right-of-way.
         (D)   A cemetery or mausoleum.
      (48)   PROTECTED TREE means:
         (A)   a tree of any species that has a minimum diameter of eight
inches that is not classified as unprotected in this article;
         (B)   any tree in a stand which projects a tree canopy over a building
site when identified within a forest stand delineation review; or
         (C)   a tree that was planted as a replacement tree.
      (49)   REMOVE OR SERIOUSLY INJURE means an intentional or negligent
action that will more likely than not cause a tree to decline and die within
five years of the act. Actions that constitute removing or seriously injuring a
tree include, but are not limited to: cutting down a tree; excessively pruning
or topping a tree; compacting the soil above the root system of a tree;
changing the natural grade above the root system of a tree; damaging the root
system or the trunk of a tree (such as by operating machinery near, or by
clearing or grading the area around, the trunk of a tree); failing to repair an
injury to a tree from fire or other causes, which results in or permits tree
infections or pest infestations into or on the tree; applying herbicidal or
other lethal chemicals; and placing nonpermeable pavement over the root system
of a tree.
      (50)   RESPONSIBLE PARTY means the property owner and any other person or
entity responsible for removing or seriously injuring a protected tree.
      (51)   REPLACEMENT TREE means a tree that is planted in accordance with
Section
51A-10.134.
      (52)   ROOT PATH means a path constructed using aeration or drainage
strips providing roots a route under pavement from a tree to an adjacent
landscape area.
      (53)   SCREENING means screening that complies with Section
51A-4.602, except as those regulations may be expressly modified in this
article.
      (54)   SECONDARY NATURAL AREA means undisturbed areas on a building site
other than primary natural areas.
      (55)   SIGNIFICANT TREE means a protected healthy tree whose age, size,
unique type, or natural or historical character are of special importance to
the city, and meets the following species and size requirements:
         (A)   Post oaks with a minimum diameter of 12 inches.
         (B)   Trees of the following species having a minimum 24-inch
diameter: American elm, bois d'arc, cedar elm, chittamwood, common persimmon,
eastern red cedar, green ash, all other oaks, pecan, all walnut species, and
white ash.
      (56)   SMALL TREE means a tree that typically attains a maximum height of
30 feet at maturity or is classified as a small tree by the director.
      (57)   SOIL means a medium that plants will grow in.
      (58)   STAND means a group of trees or other growth occupying a specific
area that is sufficiently similar in species composition, size, age,
arrangement, and condition, to be distinguishable from adjacent forest.
      (59)   SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE ("SDI") means a method of
compliance that applies sustainable development, tree preservation practices,
and tree mitigation reductions.
      (60)   TOPPING means the reduction of tree size using internodal cuts
without regard to tree health or structural integrity.
      (61)   TREE CANOPY COVER means the amount of ground area directly beneath
a tree's crown to the drip line or the combined crowns of a stand of trees,
measured in square feet.
      (62)   TREE REMOVAL PROPERTY means the lot, parcel, right-of-way, or
tract of land where a protected tree will be or has been removed or seriously
injured.
      (63)   TREE SURVEY means a report that meets all of the requirements for
a tree survey in Section 51A-10.132.
      (64)   UNPROTECTED TREE means the following:
         (A)   Arizona ash.
         (B)   Callery pear (all cultivars).
         (C)   Chinaberry.
         (D)   Chinese tallow.
         (E)   Ilex species (except for yaupon holly and Possumhaw holly).
         (F)   Palm (all plants in Palmae).
         (G)   Tree-of-heaven or Ailanthus.
         (H)   Other trees listed as invasive plants.
         (I)   Trees with a diameter of less than 10 inches at the point on the
trunk 4.5 feet above the ground, located on a lot with an existing single
family or duplex use that is occupied at the time of removal.
      (65)   UNRESTRICTED ZONE means the area on a lot where tree mitigation is
not required.
      (66)   URBAN STREETSCAPE means the pedestrian-oriented street environment
between the back of curb and building facade for frontages that have a required
front yard of 15 feet or less in depth.
      (67)   WATER COURSE means a natural or constructed channel for the flow
of water. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20496; 22053; 25155; 30929; 31314; 32340)
SEC. 51A-10.102.   PURPOSE.
   The process of urban growth and development with its alteration of the
natural topography, vegetation, and creation of impervious cover can have a
negative effect on the ecological balance of an area by causing increases in
air temperatures and accelerating the processes of runoff, erosion, and
sedimentation. The economic base of the city can and should be protected
through the conservation and enhancement of the unique natural beauty,
environment, and vegetative space in this area. Recognizing that the general
objectives of this article are to promote and protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public, the city council further declares that this article is
adopted for the following specific purposes:
      (1)   To aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by
contributing to the processes of air purification, oxygen regeneration, ground-
water recharge, and storm water runoff retardation and filtration, while at the
same time aiding in noise, glare, wind, and heat abatement.
      (2)   To provide visual buffering between land uses of differing
character to alleviate the harshness of urban life.
      (3)   To enhance the beautification of the city.
      (4)   To safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and
private investment.
      (5)   To conserve energy.
      (6)   To provide habitat for wildlife.
      (7)   To encourage the preservation of large trees which, once removed,
can be replaced only after generations.
      (8)   To conserve water.
      (9)   To recognize and conserve the urban forest as part of the city's
green infrastructure. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 22053; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.103.   ACCEPTABLE PLANT MATERIALS.
   (a)   Artificial plant materials, including synthetic turf, may not be used
to satisfy the requirements of this article.
   (b)   In satisfying the requirements of this article, the use of high-
quality, hardy, and drought-tolerant plant materials is recommended and
encouraged.
   (c)   For a lot or tract of land two acres in size or greater, no one
species of tree may constitute more than 35 percent of the replacement trees
planted on the lot or tract of land.
   (d)   Palm trees may not be used to satisfy the requirements of this
article.
   (e)   Invasive plants are prohibited in required landscapes.
   (f)   The director shall maintain a list of acceptable plant materials for
required landscapes.
   (g)   All nursery stock and transplanted ash tree species are prohibited in
required landscaping or on city property. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 25155; 30929;
32340)
SEC. 51A-10.104.   SOIL AND PLANTING AREA REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In general. Planting areas dedicated to the growth of roots may
include open soil areas, covered soil areas, root paths, and drainage.
   (b)    Soil areas. Except as provided in this section, required landscape
areas must include the following:
      (1)   Soil resource plan. A soil resource plan is required with the
submission of a landscape plan or tree protection plan. A soil resource plan is
used to distinguish landscaping zones from construction zones on the building
site and to determine soil protection or soil modification for vegetation, if
applicable. Zones that are required to be shown include:
         (A)   protected zones where existing soil and vegetation will not be
disturbed;
         (B)   zones for soil amendment or treatment with minimal disturbance;
         (C)   zones where construction traffic and staging will be allowed;
and
         (D)   zones for stockpiling topsoil and imported soil amendments.
      (2)   Soil resource assessment. A soil resource assessment is only
required in conjunction with sustainable development incentive requirements and
installation of legacy trees.
         (A)   A soil resource assessment must be provided before submittal of
a building permit.
         (B)   A soil resource assessment may be included in other engineering
site assessments for the property.
         (C)   A soil resource assessment must include information on all
proposed landscape planting areas that delineates, quantifies, and
characterizes the topsoils and subsoils of a site before these materials are
excavated for reuse on site.
         (D)   The ranges for physical, chemical, and biological indicators of
soil quality for urban trees is determined from the ISA Best Management
Practices for Soil Management for Urban Trees, or in another publication
approved by the building official.
      (3)   Additional minimum soil quality requirements. Soils used in
landscape areas for tree planting must be shown on a landscape plan or a tree
protection plan in protected zones where existing soil and vegetation is not
disturbed, or in zones modified to correct limiting factors for tree
establishment and longevity.
   (c)   Planting area requirements. Except as provided in this section,
planting areas must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   For each small tree installation, a minimum of 24 inches of soil
depth and 25 square feet of open soil area (total of 50 cubic feet) must be
provided.
      (2)   For each large or medium tree installation, a minimum of 36 inches
of soil depth and 160 square feet of open soil area (total of 480 cubic feet)
must be provided.
      (3)   Except as provided in this section, trees may share open soil
areas.
      (4)   Except as provided in this section, large trees and medium trees
must be planted a minimum of four feet from pavement.
      (5)   The planting areas must have native soils, prepared soils, or
structural soils, and may include permeable pavement, sidewalk support, and
soil cells.
      (6)   Required areas for plant materials must be protected from vehicular
traffic through the use of concrete curbs, wheel stops, or other permanent
barriers.
      (7)   Planters may be used to satisfy the requirements of this article
provided that the soil requirements in Section 51A-10.104(b) are met.
   (d)   Legacy tree soil and planting area requirements.
      (1)   Except as provided in this paragraph, large legacy trees must be
planted in a minimum 500 square foot open soil area with a minimum average soil
depth of 36 inches (1500 cubic feet) per tree. For locations with shallow soils
of less than 36 inches in average depth, the open soil area must be a minimum
750 square feet.
      (2)   Except as provided in this paragraph, medium legacy trees must be
planted in a minimum 400 square foot open soil area with a minimum average soil
depth of 36 inches (1200 cubic feet) per tree. For locations with shallow soils
of less than 36 inches in average depth, the open soil area must be a minimum
750 square feet.
      (3)   Legacy trees must be a minimum of 30 feet measured horizontally
from the closest point of a building or other structure on the property or an
adjacent property at the time of installation.
      (4)   Legacy trees may not share required minimum open soil areas with
large or medium trees.
   (e)   Alternative planting area requirements.
      (1)   Planting areas in an urban streetscape or located above underground
buildings or structures must have the following open soil area depths and
dimensions:
         (A)   For each small tree installation, a minimum of 30 inches of soil
depth and 25 square feet of open soil area (total of 62.5 cubic feet).
         (B)   For each large or medium tree installation, a minimum of 36
inches of soil depth and 25 square feet of open soil area and a combination of
open soil area, covered soil area, and root paths for a minimum of 240 cubic
feet of soil volume. Large or medium trees planted in less than 480 cubic feet
of soil volume do not count as replacement trees for purposes of Division 51A-
10.1300.
      (2)   Trees may share open soil areas.
   (f)   Waiver. The building official may waive the minimum open soil and
planting area requirements if a landscape architect certifies that:
      (1)   the proposed alternative soil depths and dimensions are sufficient
to support the healthy and vigorous growth of the plant materials affected;
      (2)   the depth to impermeable subsurface prohibits minimum soil depth
requirements; or
      (3)   that the proposed structural soils or suspended paving system are
sufficient to support the healthy and vigorous growth of the plant materials.
   (g)   Adequate space. All required trees must be planted in adequate space
to allow unobstructed growth to maturity.
   (h)   Tree locations.
      (1)   In general. All required trees must be located a minimum distance
of:
         (A)   two feet from side yard and rear yard property boundaries;
         (B)   20 feet from traffic signs and light poles;
         (C)   two-and-one-half feet from pavement; and
         (D)   five feet from electrical transmission boxes, fire hydrants, in-
ground or above-ground utility access, underground local utility lines, and
water meters.
      (2)   Small trees. Small trees must be located a minimum distance of:
         (A)   five feet from buildings; and
         (B)   10 feet from all other trees.
      (3)   Medium trees. Medium trees must be located a minimum distance of:
         (A)   12 feet from buildings;
         (B)   10 feet from small trees;
         (C)   20 feet from other medium trees;
         (D)   20 feet from large trees; and
         (E)   15 feet from the closest point of an overhead electric line.
      (4)   Large trees. Large trees must be located a minimum distance of:
         (A)   15 feet from buildings;
         (B)   10 feet from small trees;
         (C)   20 feet from medium trees;
         (D)   25 feet from other large trees; and
         (E)   20 feet from the closest point of an overhead electric line.
      (5)   Legacy trees. Legacy trees must be located a minimum distance of 30
feet from the closest point of an overhead electric line.
      (6)   Measurement. For purposes of this subsection, all distances are
measured horizontally from the center of the tree trunk. (Ord. Nos. 22053;
25155; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.105.   MEASUREMENTS.
   (a)   Caliper. For nursery stock trees:
      (1)   caliper is measured at six inches above soil level; which should be
at or near the top of the root flare, and six inches above the root flare for
bare root plants, up to and including the four-inch caliper size interval
(i.e., from four inches up to, but not including, four and one-half inches);
      (2)   if the caliper measured at six inches is four and one-half inches
or more, the caliper must be measured at 12 inches above the ground level, soil
line, or root flare, as appropriate; and
      (3)   if a tree has multiple stems, caliper is one-half of the combined
caliper of the three largest trunks.
   (b)   Diameter.
      (1)   Diameter at breast height. Diameter at breast height [“DBH”] is the
measurement of a tree trunk at a height of four and one-half feet above the
ground, on the uphill side of the tree, or as recommended in the Landscape and
Tree Manual for special situations for tree fork, leaning trees, or on slopes.
      (2)   Multiple stems. For trees with multiple stems, the diameter of the
trunk is measured at the narrowest point below branching when branching occurs
below DBH, or near DBH.
      (3)   Branching. When branching occurs at or lower than 12 inches above
the ground, diameter of the trunk includes the diameter of the largest stem
plus the average diameter of the remaining stems, measured at DBH. (Ord. Nos.
22053; 25155; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.106.   IRRIGATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, automatic irrigation systems
must be installed in conjunction with new required landscaping for commercial
and multifamily uses with combined landscape areas of 500 square feet or more
per building site.
      (2)   The automatic irrigation system must be:
         (A)   shown on a landscape plan or irrigation plan; and
         (B)   adequate to maintain the plant materials in a healthy, growing
condition at all times.
   (b)   Renovations and additions that require landscaping. For building sites
or artificial lots with an area of two acres or less, all required plant
materials must be located a maximum of 100 feet from an irrigation source with
a permanently installed threaded hose connection. Proposed watering methods
(irrigation or otherwise) must be:
      (1)   shown on the landscape plan, if any; and
      (2)   capable of maintaining the plant materials in a healthy, growing
condition at all times.
   (c)   Alternate irrigation. The building official may authorize an alternate
method of irrigation for required landscape areas if the alternate irrigation
method is:
      (1)   certified by a landscape architect or licensed irrigator;
      (2)   shown on a stamped landscape plan or irrigation plan; and
      (3)   capable of maintaining the plant materials in a healthy, growing
condition at all times. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 25155; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.107.   RESERVED.
(Ord. 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.108.   GENERAL MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Required plant materials must be maintained in a healthy, growing
condition at all times. The property owner is responsible for regular weeding,
mowing of grass, irrigating, fertilizing, pruning, and other maintenance of all
plantings as needed. Any required plant that dies or is removed must be
replaced with another living plant that complies with this article and the
approved landscape plan, if any, within 90 days after notification by the city.
   (b)   Any damage to utility lines resulting from the negligence of the
property owner or his agents or employees in the installation and maintenance
of required plant materials in a utility easement is the responsibility of the
property owner. If a public utility disturbs a landscaped area in a utility
easement, it shall make every reasonable effort to preserve the plant materials
and return them to their prior locations after the utility work. If,
nonetheless, some plant materials die, it is the obligation of the property
owner to replace the plant materials. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.109.   LANDSCAPE AND TREE MANUAL.
   A landscape and tree manual is provided by the director as a technical guide
for conserving, protecting, maintaining, and establishing the green
infrastructure, landscape, and urban forest of the city in conjunction with
this article. The director shall maintain the landscape and tree manual. (Ord.
Nos. 22053; 22581; 25047; 25155; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.110.   SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   In general and landscaping.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to the requirements of
Division
51A-10.100 and Division
51A-10.120, other than fee and notice requirements, upon making a special
finding from the evidence presented that:
         (A)   strict compliance with the requirements of Division
51A-10.100 or Division
51A-10.120 will unreasonably burden the use of the property;
         (B)   the special exception will not adversely affect neighboring
property; and
         (C)   the requirements are not imposed by a site-specific landscape
plan approved by the city plan commission or city council.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant a special exception under Paragraph
(1), the board shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   The extent to which there is residential adjacency.
         (B)   The topography of the site.
         (C)   The extent to which landscaping exists for which no credit is
given under this article.
         (D)   The extent to which other existing or proposed amenities will
compensate for the reduction of landscaping.
   (b)   In general and urban forest conservation.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to the requirements of
Division
51A-10.130, other than fee and notice requirements, upon making a special
finding from the evidence presented that:
         (A)   strict compliance with the requirements of Division
51A-10.130 will unreasonably burden the use of the property;
         (B)   the special exception will not adversely affect neighboring
property; and
         (C)   the requirements are not imposed by a site-specific landscape
plan or tree mitigation plan approved by the city plan commission or city
council.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant a special exception under Paragraph
(1), the board shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   The extent to which there is residential adjacency.
         (B)   The topography of the site.
         (C)   The extent to which landscaping exists for which no credit is
given under this article.
         (D)   The ability to plant replacement trees safely on the property.
         (E)   The extent to which alternative methods of replacement will
compensate for a reduction of tree mitigation or extended time for tree
replacement. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 25155; 30929)
Division 51A-10.120. Landscaping.
SEC. 51A-10.121.   APPLICATION OF DIVISION.
   (a)   Except as provided in this article, this division does not apply to
the following:
      (1)   Property governed by a landscape plan approved by the city council,
the city plan commission, or the board of adjustment.
      (2)   Property lots in the following districts:
         (A)   The Dallas Arts District (Planned Development District Nos. 145
and 145-H/18).
         (B)   The Deep Ellum/Near East Side District (Planned Development
District No. 269).
         (C)   The Oak Lawn Special Purpose District (Planned Development
District No. 193).
         (D)   Central area districts.
      (3)   Restoration of a building that has been damaged or destroyed by
fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the public enemy, or accident of
any kind. For purposes of this section, "restoration" means the act of putting
back into a former or original state.
      (4)   Property located within or in close proximity to an airport
boundary if the city's director of aviation determines that the required
landscape materials will threaten public health or safety.
   (b)   Only Section
51A-10.125(a) of this division applies to lots containing single family or
duplex uses.
   (c)   This division only becomes applicable to a lot or tract when the
nonpermeable coverage on the lot or tract is increased by more than 2,000
square feet within a 24-month period, not including portions of pedestrian
pathways, that are between three feet in width and 15 feet in width, or when an
application is made for a building permit for construction work that:
      (1)   increases the number of stories and increases the height of a
building on the lot; or
      (2)   increases by more than 35 percent or 10,000 square feet, whichever
is less, the combined floor areas of all buildings on the lot within a 24-month
period. The increase in combined floor area is determined by adding the floor
area of all buildings on the lot within the 24 months prior to application for
a building permit, deducting any floor area that has been demolished in that
time or will be demolished as part of the building permit, and comparing this
figure with the total combined floor area after construction.
   (d)   When this division becomes applicable to an individual lot or tract,
its requirements are binding on all current and subsequent owners of the lot or
tract.
   (e)   The city council shall, as a minimum, impose landscaping requirements
that are reasonably consistent with the standards and purposes of this division
as a part of any ordinance establishing or amending a planned development
district, or granting or amending a specific use permit. (Note: This subsection
does not apply to ordinances that merely renew a specific use permit when no
substantive changes are made other than to extend the time limit of the
permit.) All landscaping requirements imposed by the city council must be
reflected in a landscape plan that complies in form and content with the
requirements of Section
51A-10.123 and complies with Division
51A-10.100.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20496; 22053; 25155; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.122.   ARTIFICIAL LOT DELINEATION.
   (a)   In general. If the building site is over two acres in size, the
applicant may request that the building official create an artificial lot to
satisfy the requirements of this division. The building official shall not
create an artificial lot which would, in his or her opinion, violate the spirit
of the landscape regulations. Any artificial lot created by the building
official must:
      (1)   wholly include the area on which the construction work is to be
done;
      (2)   have an area that does not exceed 50 percent of the area of the
developed or undeveloped building site;
      (3)   include all new exterior paving additions except portions of
pedestrian pathways, that are between three feet in width and 15 feet in width;
      (4)   include the street buffer zone for new construction or additions
that are located wholly, or in part, within 60 feet of the nearest street
frontage; and
      (5)   include the residential buffer zone for new construction or
additions that are located wholly, or in part, within 60 feet of the nearest
residential adjacency.
   (b)   In city parks over five acres. In city parks over five acres in size,
the director of park and recreation may create an artificial lot to satisfy the
requirements of this division.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, any artificial lot created
by the director of park and recreation must wholly include the area on which
the construction work is to be done.
      (2)   Portions of pedestrian pathways that are between three feet and 15
feet in width are excepted from this requirement.
   (c)   Platting not required. An artificial lot need not be platted; however,
it must be delineated on plans approved by the building official prior to the
issuance of a building permit. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20496; 22053; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.123.   LANDSCAPE PLAN SUBMISSION.
   (a)   If this division applies to a lot pursuant to Section
51A-10.121, a landscape plan must be submitted to the building official with
the application for a building permit for work on the lot. For landscape plans
that are not submitted electronically, a landscape plan submission must consist
of two blueline or blackline prints. The plan must have a scale of one inch
equals 50 feet or larger (e.g. one inch equals 40 feet, one inch equals 30
feet, etc.) and be on a standard drawing sheet of a size not to exceed 36
inches by 48 inches. A plan which cannot be drawn in its entirety on a 36 inch
by 48 inch sheet must be drawn with appropriate match lines on two or more
sheets.
   (b)   Except as provided in this article, any person may prepare the
landscape plan required under this division.
   (c)   A landscape plan required under this division must contain the
following information:
      (1)   Date, scale, north point, and the names, addresses, and telephone
numbers of each property owner and the person preparing the plan.
      (2)   Location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the lot, the
zoning classification of the lot, and the zoning classification of adjacent
properties. A vicinity map should also be attached to or made a part of the
plan.
      (3)   Approximate centerlines of existing water courses and the location
of the flood plain, the escarpment zone, and geologically similar areas, as
those terms are defined in Article V, if applicable; the approximate location
of significant drainage features; and the location and size of existing and
proposed streets and alleys, utility easements, driveways, and sidewalks on or
adjacent to the lot.
      (4)   Location of centerlines of overhead and underground utility lines
within and adjacent to the building site, and the location of all utilities,
utility easements, including the location of utility poles, generators, and
equipment, and any items listed in Section
51A-10.104(h).
      (5)   Project name, street address, and lot and block description.
      (6)   Location, height, and material of proposed screening and fencing
(with berms to be delineated by one-foot contours).
      (7)   Locations and dimensions of required landscape areas.
      (8)   Complete description of plant materials shown on the plan,
including names (common and scientific name), locations, quantities, container
or caliper sizes at installation, heights, spread, and spacing. The location
and type of all existing trees on the lot over six inches in diameter must be
specifically indicated to be counted as required landscape trees.
      (9)   Complete description of landscaping and screening to be provided in
or near off-street parking and loading areas, including information as to the
amount (in square feet) of landscape area to be provided internal to parking
areas and the number and location of required off-street parking and loading
spaces.
      (10)   An indication of which protected trees will be removed during
construction and how existing healthy trees proposed to be retained will be
protected from damage during construction.
      (11)   Size, height, location, and material of proposed seating,
lighting, planters, sculptures, and water features.
      (12)   A description of proposed watering methods or an irrigation plan.
      (13)   Location of visibility triangles on the premises (if applicable).
      (14)   Existing and proposed locations of trees transplanted on-site.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 10496; 22053; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.124.   LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW.
   (a)   In general. The building official shall review each landscape plan
submitted to determine whether it complies with the requirements of this
division. All landscape plans must comply with the mandatory provisions in
Section
51A-10.125. In addition, all landscape plans must meet the minimum number of
landscape design option points described in Section
51A-10.126. Except as provided in this article, the same landscape features and
elements may be strategically placed so as to comply with more than one
provision. (For example, the same trees may be located so as to qualify as
required street buffer zone trees and required parking lot trees.)
   (b)   Landscape plan revisions. If requested by the applicant, the building
official may approve revisions to staff-approved landscape plans and related
permits if the revisions further the spirit and intent of this article.
Revisions of elements required by this article are limited to:
      (1)   Substitution of more appropriate plant species.
      (2)   Revisions required by utility conflicts.
      (3)   Locations of plant materials up to a maximum of 10 feet. (Ord. Nos.
19455; 20496; 22053; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.125.   MANDATORY LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Single family and duplex uses.
      (1)   General. Except as provided in Section
51A-10.127, a lot containing a single family or duplex use established after
May 29, 1994, must comply with this subsection before the final inspection of
any building on the lot. The minimum number of trees required on a lot is
determined by the lot size. The trees may be located in the public right-of-way
if all private licensing requirements of the city code and charter are met.
         (A)   Lots 7,500 square feet or greater in area. A minimum of three
large or medium nursery stock trees per lot with a minimum of two nursery stock
trees in the front yard.
         (B)   Lots between 4,000 square feet and 7,499 square feet in area. A
minimum of two large or medium nursery stock trees per lot with a minimum of
one nursery stock tree located in the front yard.
         (C)   Lots 4,000 square feet or less in area. A minimum of one large
or medium nursery stock tree per lot.
         (D)   Additional requirements:
            (i)   Nursery stock trees must be a species listed in the approved
tree list maintained by the director.
            (ii)   Trees must have a minimum caliper of two inches.
            (iii)   Trees must be planted a minimum of 20 feet on center from
the nearest point of an overhead electric line.
            (iv)   An existing, healthy, and protected tree on the lot or
parkway may count as a required tree if it is not a boundary tree abutting
adjacent private property.
      (2)   Shared access development.
         (A)   Shared access developments must comply with the following
requirements:
            (i)   A landscape plan meeting the requirements of Section
51A-10.104 and Section
51A-10.123 must be approved before a building permit for grading is issued or a
private development contract pursuant to Section
51A-8.612 is approved, in conjunction with construction.
            (ii)   The minimum required landscape area for a shared access
development is determined by the number of individual lots. Landscape areas in
individual lots may be included in the total landscape area measurement for
developments with a maximum of 36 individual lots. Permeable pavement does not
count as landscape area.
               (aa)    Shared access developments with a maximum of 10
individual lots must provide a minimum landscape area equal to 10 percent of
the total shared access development area.
               (bb)    Shared access developments with a minimum of 11 and a
maximum 36 individual lots must provide a minimum landscape area equal to 15
percent of the total shared access development area.
            (iii)   One site tree must be provided for every 4,000 square feet
within the shared access development. The trunk of any site tree must be
located at least two-and-one-half feet from any pavement. Site trees must be
species listed in the approved tree list. Large or medium nursery stock trees
may not be planted within 20 feet on center of the nearest point of an overhead
electric line.
            (iv)   One plant group must be provided for every 40 feet of street
frontage. Plant groups may be located within the front yard or parkway if all
private licensing requirements of the city code and charter are met. In this
subparagraph, parkway means the portion of a street right-of-way between the
projected street curb and the front lot line or corner side lot line. If the
director determines that a large or medium tree would interfere with utility
lines, one substitute small tree from a species listed in the approved tree
list may be provided.
         (B)   Plant groups for shared access developments must include the
following:
            (i)   one large tree and two small trees;
            (ii)   one large tree and three large evergreen shrubs; or
            (iii)   one large tree, two small trees, and one large evergreen
shrub.
   (b)   Other uses. Lots containing a use other than single family or duplex
must comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Street buffer zone. Except as provided in this subsection, the
landscape area provided along the entire length of the lot adjacent to a public
right-of-way, excluding paved surfaces at points of vehicular ingress and
egress, must meet the following minimum requirements:
 
Right-of-way                       Average Depth Minimum Depth Maximum Depth
Freeways                           15 feet       5 feet        50 feet
Arterials and community collectors 10 feet       5 feet        30 feet
Local and residential collectors   7.5 feet      5 feet        25 feet
 
         (A)   Urban streetscape. The building official may approve a landscape
plan for an urban streetscape that meets the following requirements:
            (i)   A minimum six foot wide planting area is required that meets
the minimum soil area and volume requirements in Section
51A-10.104.
            (ii)   The planting area may be designed with open soil areas or
covered soil areas.
            (iii)   The planting area is measured from the property line unless
the building official determines that the planting area may be measured from
the back of curb if necessary due to physical restraints of the property,
including conflicts with local utilities.
            (iv)   A minimum of one design option must be provided in the front
yard or right-of-way area.
         (B)   Right-of-way. The right-of-way adjacent to the property line may
be used to satisfy the required street buffer zone subject to:
            (i)   a minimum depth of five foot maintained along the property as
a street buffer zone;
            (ii)   local utility location;
            (iii)   appropriate planting conditions; and
            (iv)   city licensing and permit requirements.
         (C)   Required planting.
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, one large or medium
street buffer tree must be provided for every 40 linear feet of frontage.
            (ii)   For frontages less than 20 linear feet, a large or medium
street buffer tree is not required.
            (iii)   Large or medium trees must have a minimum caliper of three
inches.
            (iv)   When existing conditions prohibit planting large trees or
medium trees, the building official may approve two small trees be substituted
for each large tree or medium tree.
         (D)   Buffer zone reduction. Properties less than 10,000 square feet
may reduce the street buffer zone to the greater of:
            (i)   a minimum depth of five feet; or
            (ii)   an area no less than five percent of the total lot area.
      (2)   Residential buffer zone.
         (A)   A landscape area must be provided along that portion of the
perimeter of a lot where residential adjacency exists. The residential buffer
zone must have an average depth of 10 feet, a minimum depth of five feet, and a
maximum depth of 30 feet. No portion of the residential buffer zone may exceed
10 percent of the lot depth excluding paved surfaces at points of vehicular and
pedestrian ingress or egress.
         (B)   The residential buffer zone must include a minimum of one plant
group every 40 feet. Plant groups must include:
            (i)   Where screening is required, one minimum three-inch caliper
large or medium tree.
            (ii)   Where screening is not required:
               (aa)   one large or medium tree and three small trees;
               (bb)   one large or medium tree and three large evergreen
shrubs;
               (cc)   one large or medium tree, two small trees, and one large
evergreen shrub; or
               (dd)   one large or medium tree, one small tree, and two large
evergreen shrubs.
         (C)   If the building official determines that the location of a local
utility prohibits planting large trees or medium trees, two small trees may be
planted for each large tree or medium tree.
         (D)   Large or medium trees must have a minimum caliper of two inches.
      (3)   Interior zone.   
         (A)   Surface parking lots in industrial districts. The requirements
in Section
51A-10.125 (b)(3)(B)(iv) for surface parking lots with 100 spaces or more, do
not apply to industrial and warehouse uses in IM or IR districts that provide a
minimum of one tree meeting the requirements for trees in the street buffer
zone for each 25 feet of frontage.
         (B)   Surface parking lots.
            (i)   Required large and medium trees.
               (aa)    Minimum caliper is three inches.
               (bb)     Planting must be within a landscape area.
               (cc)   The center of the trunk at grade must be planted a
minimum of four feet from pavement.
            (ii)   Minimum landscape area. Individual landscape areas must be a
minimum of 160 square feet, with a minimum width of eight feet.
            (iii)   Parking lots with 21 to 100 spaces. No parking space may be
located more than 70 feet from the trunk of a large tree or medium tree.
            (iv)   Parking lots with 101 spaces or more. Except as provided in
Paragraph (A):
               (aa)   No parking space may be located more than 70 feet from
the trunk of a large or medium tree.
               (bb)    Except as provided in this item, a landscape area must
be located at each end of a single row of parking spaces and contain a minimum
of one large or medium tree.
                  (I)    The building official may waive this requirement in
order to preserve existing trees and natural features or due to unique natural
site features.
                  (II)    Parking island landscape areas are not required
adjacent to handicapped parking spaces.
               (cc)    Except as provided in this romanette, maximum number of
parking spaces allowed between parking island landscape areas is 12. The
building official may waive this requirement in order to preserve existing
trees and natural features or due to the presence of unique natural site
features.
               (dd)   No maximum number of parking spaces when a parking row:
                  (I)    abuts a median landscape area running the length of
the parking row with a minimum of one tree per 40 linear feet;
                  (II)    abuts a residential buffer zone landscape area; or
                  (III )   abuts a street buffer zone landscape area.
      (4)   Additional provisions.
         (A)   Screening of off-street loading spaces.
            (i)   All off-street loading spaces on a lot with residential
adjacency must be screened from that residential adjacency.
            (ii)   In all districts except CS and industrial districts, all
off-street loading spaces on a lot must be screened from all public streets
adjacent to that lot.
            (iii)   The screening required under Subparagraphs (A) and (B) must
be at least six feet in height measured from the horizontal plane passing
through the nearest point of the off-street loading space and may be provided
by using any of the methods for providing screening described in Section
51A-4.602(b)(3).
         (B)   Site trees.
            (i)   One tree having a caliper of at least two inches must be
provided for each 4,000 square feet of lot area, or fraction thereof, except
for industrial and warehouse uses in IM and IR districts, where one tree having
a caliper of at least two inches must be provided for each 6,000 square feet of
lot area, or fraction thereof.
            (ii)   Existing protected tree species that are determined by the
building official to be healthy may be used to satisfy the site tree
requirement, in accordance with the tree credit chart below:
CALIPER OF RETAINED TREE NUMBER OF SITE TREES CREDIT GIVEN FOR RETAINED TREE
CALIPER OF RETAINED TREE                  NUMBER OF SITE TREES CREDIT GIVEN FOR
                                          RETAINED TREE
Less than 2 inches                        0
2 inches or more but less than 8 inches   1
8 inches or more but less than 14 inches  2
14 inches or more but less than 20 inches 4
20 inches or more but less than 26 inches 8
26 inches or more and less than 32 inches 10
32 inches or more but less than 38 inches 18
38 inches or more                         20
 
         (C)   Minimum sizes. Except as provided in Subsection (b) of this
section, plant materials used to satisfy the requirements of this division must
comply with the following minimum size requirements at the time of
installation:
            (i)   Large and medium trees must have a minimum caliper of two
inches, or a minimum height of six feet, depending on the standard measuring
technique for the species.
            (ii)   Small trees must have a minimum height of six feet.
            (iii)   Large evergreen shrubs must have a minimum height of two
feet.
For purposes of this paragraph, "height" is measured from the top of the root
ball or, if the plant is in a container, from the soil level in the container.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 19786; 20496; 22053; 24731; 25155; 26333; 28424; 28803;
30239; 30654; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.126.   LANDSCAPE DESIGN OPTIONS.
   (a)   Points required for a building site. The minimum number of landscape
design option points required for a building site are:
Lot Size Points Required
Lot Size                      Points Required
0 to 999 sf                   0
1,000 sf to 1,999 sf          1
2,000 sf to 9,999 sf          2-9
(One point for every 1000 sf)
10,000 sf to 19,999 sf        10
20,000 sf to 39,999 sf        15
40,000 sf to 2.99 acres       20
3 acres to 9.99 acres         30
10 acres to 19.99 acres       35
20 acres to 49.99 acres       40
50 acres and greater          50
 
   (b)   Design options. Points are obtained by meeting design option
requirements in order to achieve the total number of points required for the
property. Design options and possible points are listed in this subsection.
Examples of the design options and their application are provided in the
Landscape and Tree Manual.
      (1)   Plant material bonus. Points may be provided for plant materials
added to the landscape design when the required amount of points for a standard
design option is deficient by five points or less. All added plant materials
must be provided in the front yard. The maximum number of points allowed per
building site for the plant material bonus is five.
         (A)   Large or medium tree caliper increase: One point per additional
caliper inch for each required tree (up to a maximum caliper of six inches.)
         (B)   Additional large shrub plant: 0.25 points.
         (C)   Additional small tree: 0.5 points.
         (D)   Additional large or medium tree: one point.
      (2)   Buffer zones enhancements. The maximum number of points allowed per
building site for buffer zone enhancements is 20.
         (A)   Large enhanced buffer zone. Each required buffer zone depth may
be increased by a minimum of five feet. This design option is not available if
the buffer zone is reduced to no more than five percent of the lot area. Five
points.
         (B)   Small enhanced buffer zone. A required buffer zone depth may be
increased by a minimum of two feet. This design option is not available if the
buffer zone is reduced to no more than five percent of the lot area. Two
points.
      (3)   Application of engineered solutions for soil volume. Points may be
obtained when using engineered solutions for soil volume when required trees
are planted in impervious environments and meet the minimum requirement for
soil volume for a maximum total of 10 points. A minimum of 75 percent of
required street buffer trees must meet the soil volume minimum for credits to
apply.
         (A)   Minimum required soil volume: five points.
         (B)   Increase in soil volume 10 percent above minimum requirement:
six points.
         (C)   Increase in soil volume 15 percent above minimum requirement:
seven points.
         (D)   Increase in soil volume 20 percent above minimum requirement:
eight points.
         (E)   Increase in soil volume 25 percent above minimum requirement:
nine points.
         (F)   Increase in soil volume 30 percent or greater above minimum
requirement: 10 points.
      (4)   Screening. An applicant may provide screening from all adjacent
public streets for all surface parking lots on a building site or artificial
lot that meets the following requirements.
         (A)   The screening may not be required screening.
         (B)   The screening must extend along the entire street frontage of
the parking lot, excluding:
            (i)   driveways and accessways at points of ingress and egress to
and from the lot; and
            (ii)   visibility triangles.
         (C)   Underground parking and enclosed garage parking structures are
not considered to be surface parking lots for purposes of this subsection.
         (D)   The screening may be designed with the following options for a
maximum total of 20 points:
            (i)   Option 1. Standard design is provided with screening
materials in accordance with Section
51A-4.602 and shrubs with a minimum height of two feet at time of installation
and a single row of material. Five points for complete frontage.
            (ii)   Option 2. Enhanced design is provided by a landscape
architect and must include a minimum of two plant species in order to provide
the full screening effect. 10 points for complete frontage.
            (iii)   Option 3. Grouped beds may be added to Option 1 or Option 2
to complement the screening row with planting beds placed at intervals of a
minimum of one per 50 feet of frontage. Five points for complete frontage.
            (iv)   Option 4. A minimum three-foot-tall screening wall may be
provided along with the screening plant materials of Option 1 or Option 2. Five
points for complete frontage.
            (v)   Option 5. A minimum three-foot-tall berm with groundcover may
complement standard screening materials or be used to replace Option 1 or
Option 2. Five points for complete frontage.
      (5)   Building facade. Facade planting areas on a building site or
artificial lot adjacent to public streets or private driveways may be designed
with the following options for a maximum total of 15 points:
         (A)   Option 1. Design is provided along the foundation of the
structure. The planting area for the shrubs must be a minimum of three feet in
depth and extend along at least 50 percent of the portion of the foundation
that faces a street. The shrubs must be spaced no more than six feet apart
measured from trunk to trunk. Five points.
         (B)   Option 2. An enhanced design may be provided as designed by a
landscape architect. The design may vary from the standard foundation row to
create depth and layering of landscaping for visual enhancement contiguous to
and extending 15 feet or more from the building facade to complement and soften
the foundation of the building. The planting area must be a minimum of five
feet in depth. A minimum of two perennial plant species and water conservation
irrigation method are required. The landscape area must extend for a minimum of
50 percent of the street-facing facade or a combination of the street-facing
facade and the building facade facing a surface parking lot. 10 points.
         (C)   Option 3. An additional grouping of medium or small trees may be
added to Option 2 to provide an improved pedestrian environment a maximum of 25
feet from the facade of the structure. A minimum of one tree per 50 feet of
front or side yard building facade is required. Five points.
         (D)   Option 4. One small tree or two large shrubs per 30 feet of
front facade located a maximum of 15 feet from the facade. Five points.
      (6)   Pedestrian uses. An applicant may provide private or publicly
accessible pedestrian amenities. These amenities must occupy a minimum of five
percent of the lot area. The amenities may be designed for the following
options for a maximum total of 25 points.
         (A)   Option 1. Urban streetscape. A minimum of two of the following
types of pedestrian amenities must be provided along street frontages. This
option may only be used in an urban streetscape within the street buffer zone.
10 points.
            (i)   Benches located at one per 60 feet of street frontage
(minimum of two).
            (ii)   Pedestrian street lamps (free-standing or wall mounted) at
one per 50 feet of street frontage.
            (iii)   Enhanced sidewalk with stamped concrete or brick pavers for
pedestrian uses for the full width of the sidewalk, along the entire frontage.
Pavement cannot be used to meet the enhanced pavement option in Paragraph (7).
            (iv)   Minimum unobstructed sidewalk width of eight feet.
            (v)   Water feature.
         (B)   Option 2. Special amenities. An applicant may provide private or
publicly accessible special amenities to the building site including plazas,
covered walkways, fountains, lakes and ponds, seating areas, and outdoor
recreation facilities. The credited facilities must occupy at least five
percent of the lot area provided in no more than two locations on the lot. The
special amenities area must be fully identified on a landscape plan. Private or
interior courtyards are excluded. Five points for private amenities and 10
points for publicly accessible amenities.
         (C)   Option 3. Adjacency to habitat restoration areas. Amenities
built contiguous to habitat preservation and restoration areas will be credited
for their location in or around the habitat when constructed according to a
design supporting or enhancing habitat protection. 10 points for private
amenities and 15 points for publicly accessible amenities.
         (D)   Option 4. Athletic fields. Open spaces maintained for athletic
fields that are a minimum of five percent of the lot. 10 points. For athletic
fields on lots greater than 10 acres. 20 points.
      (7)   Pavements. An applicant may provide enhanced pavement. The same
pavement cannot satisfy multiple categories. (Note: All vehicular pavement must
comply with the construction and maintenance provisions for off-street parking
in this chapter.) Maximum total of 15 points.
         (A)   Option 1: Enhanced vehicular pavement. Pavement must be a
minimum of 25 percent of all outdoor vehicular pavement on the lot.
            (i)   Enhanced texture. Stamped concrete, sand-blasted, rock-salt
finished, pavers on concrete base, stone, etc.: Three points.
            (ii)   Enhanced color. Color is integrated into textured pavement:
Three points.
         (B)   Option 2: Permeable vehicular pavement. Pavement must be a
minimum of 25 percent of all outdoor vehicular pavement on the lot. Five
points.
         (C)   Option 3: Enhanced pedestrian walkways. Enhanced pedestrian
walkways must consist of enhanced pavement intended for pedestrian use and
occupy at least five percent of the lot.
            (i)   Enhanced texture. Stamped concrete, sand-blasted, rock-salt
finished, pavers on concrete base, stone, etc.: Three points.
            (ii)   Enhanced color. Color is integrated into textured pavement:
Three points.
      (8)   Conservation. The applicant may create a conservation area on the
property. The conservation area must occupy at least five percent of the lot
area. Maximum of 25 points.
         (A)   Option 1: Tree preservation in the development impact area.
Large or medium trees maintained in the development impact area may be used to
meet design option requirements and to meet the requirements for site tree
credit in Section
51A-10.125. The trees must be protected and maintained in areas required by
this article. Two points for each tree up to a maximum of 10 points.
Significant trees may attain five points.
         (B)   Option 2: Habitat preservation. The applicant must preserve
existing healthy native and mixed species grassland or woodland areas. Five
points.
         (C)   Option 3: Habitat preservation and restoration using an active
management plan. The applicant may create or restore natural habitat conditions
if designed and implemented by a qualified professional. Site maintenance must
be continual for the purpose of sustaining the vegetated area. The option may
be combined with low impact development design for the drainage functions of
the property. 10 points.
         (D)   Option 4: Habitat preservation and restoration - adjacent to
primary natural areas. The applicant may preserve and restore land areas
adjacent to wetlands, creeks, floodplain, and slopes which help protect creeks,
habitat, slopes, and woodland in primary natural areas from the site
construction. This option may be combined with pedestrian amenities. The area
must be at least five percent of building site area. 15 points.
      (9)   Low impact development (LID). The applicant may improve the
property with low impact development design to manage stormwater flow and
provide surface heat abatement. The improvements may be combined for a maximum
of 20 points.
         (A)   Rain garden. Maximum six points.
            (i)   1 to 5,000 square feet: three points; and
            (ii)   each additional 1,000 square feet: one point.
         (B)   Bioswale. Maximum 10 points per bioswale.
            (i)   50 to 100 feet long: three points; and
            (ii)   each additional 50 feet: one point.
         (C)   Water-wise plant materials and planting beds. The applicant may
provide landscaping that uses water conservation techniques including water-
wise plants, mulch, and efficient irrigation. Maximum 10 points.
            (i)   In a minimum of 50 percent of landscape areas: three points.
            (ii)   In a minimum of 80 percent of landscape areas: five points.
            (iii)   Low-water consumption grasses for 80 percent of turf
surfaces: three points.
            (iv)   Low-water consumption grasses for all turf surfaces: five
points.
      (10)   Parking lots. The applicant may improve the surface parking and
vehicle outside display and storage areas in an interior zone on the property
to provide wider landscape areas and an improved shade tree environment. The
improvements may be combined for a maximum of 30 points for development impact
areas 10 acres or larger and 20 points for development impact areas less than
10 acres.
         (A)   Option 1: Pedestrian pathways. Provide a protected pedestrian
pathway, between three feet and 15 feet in width, through a parking lot to a
building from a public or private street in an expanded landscape area median
with trees and a walkway. A minimum of one large or medium tree is required for
each 40 linear feet of pedestrian pathway or landscape area median. Five
points.
         (B)   Option 2: Reduce distance between parking lot landscape islands.
Provide no more than 10 parking spaces between landscape areas. Five points.
         (C)   Option 3: Increase size of parking lot landscape islands.
Increase the landscape area to a minimum of 200 square feet for each large or
medium tree.
            (i)   Increase landscape area of 50 percent of the required parking
lot landscape islands. Five points.
            (ii)   Increase landscape area of 75 percent of the required
parking lot landscape islands. 10 points.
         (D)   Option 4: Increase landscape area of parking lot landscape
islands. Increase the landscape area a minimum of 300 square feet for each
large or medium tree.
            (i)   Increase landscape area of 50 percent of the required parking
lot landscape islands. Seven points.
            (ii)   Increase landscape area of 75 percent of the required
parking lot landscape islands. 12 points.
         (E)   Option 5: Additional parking lot landscape islands. Each
additional parking lot landscape island provided - Three points.
         (F)   Option 6: Landscape medians. Provide a minimum 10-foot-wide
landscape median with large or medium trees extending the length of a minimum
12-space parking row. Five points for each full median for a maximum of 20
points on the Property.
         (G)   Option 7: Landscape medians. Provide a 12-foot-wide landscape
median with large or medium trees extending the length of a minimum 12-space
parking row. Seven points for each full median for a maximum of 28 points on
the Property.
         (H)   Option 8: Landscape medians. Provide a 16-foot-wide landscape
median with large or medium trees extending the length of a minimum 12-space
parking row. 10 points for each full median for a maximum of 30 points on the
Property.
         (I)   Option 9: Large legacy tree. Provide a large legacy tree in a
minimum 500 square foot dedicated open soil area. Two points per tree for a
maximum of 20 points.
         (J)   Option 10: Pocket park. Provide a minimum of 2,500 square feet
of contiguous open soil landscape area. 20 points.
      (11)   General. The applicant may provide documentation and demonstrate
ability to achieve certain conditions.
         (A)   Option 1. Provide Sustainable SITES Initiative documentation and
demonstrate ability to attain SITES certified level or greater. 10 points.
         (B)   Option 2. Provide and implement a landscape maintenance plan for
a minimum three year period. Three points. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20496; 22053;
30929)
SEC. 51A-10.127.   WHEN LANDSCAPING MUST BE COMPLETED.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (b), all landscaping must
be completed before the final inspection of any building on the lot. If there
is an approved landscape plan for the lot, the landscaping must comply with
that plan before the final inspection.
   (b)   If the property owner provides the building official with documented
assurance that the landscaping will be completed within six months, the
building official may permit the property owner to complete his landscaping
during the six-month period. For purposes of this subsection, "documented
assurance" means:
      (1)   a copy of a valid contract to install the landscaping in accordance
with the landscape plan within the six-month period; or
      (2)   a set of deed restrictions containing a covenant to install the
landscaping in accordance with the landscape plan within the six-month period.
The deed restrictions must:
         (A)   expressly provide that they may be enforced by the city of
Dallas;
         (B)   be approved as to form by the city attorney; and
         (C)   be filed in the deed records of the county in which the land is
located.
   (c)   If, at the end of the six-month period, the landscaping has not been
installed in accordance with the landscape plan, the owner of the property is
liable to the city for a civil penalty in the amount of $200 a day for each
calendar day thereafter until the landscaping is properly installed. The
building official shall give written notice to the property owner of the amount
owed to the city in civil penalties, and shall notify the city attorney of any
unpaid civil penalty. The city attorney shall collect unpaid civil penalties in
a suit on the city's behalf.
   (d)   The civil penalty provided for in Subsection (c) is in addition to any
other enforcement remedies the city may have under city ordinances and state
law. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 20496; 22053; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.128.   ENFORCEMENT BY BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this division,
the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on
any person engaged in the work or causing the work to be done. A person issued
this notice shall stop work immediately until authorized by the building
official to proceed with the work. (Ord. Nos. 25155; 30929)
Division 51A-10.130. Urban Forest Conservation.
SEC. 51A-10.131.   APPLICATION OF DIVISION.
   (a)   This division applies to all property in the city except for:
      (1)   except as provided in this section, lots smaller than two acres in
size that contain single-family or duplex uses in residential districts; and
      (2)   lots in an overlay district or a planned development district with
tree preservation regulations that vary appreciably from those in this article,
as determined by the building official.
   (b)   In this section, a tree removal property with an area of two acres or
less in a residential district is considered to be vacant when an application
is made for a demolition permit to demolish a single family or duplex
structure. The tree removal property is considered to be vacant until:
      (1)   the demolition permit is closed (not expired) by the building
inspector (reinstating the single family or duplex use); or
      (2)    a certificate of completion is provided to the tree removal
property owner for a new single family or duplex structure for occupancy on the
property.
   (c)   Historic trees on lots smaller than two acres in size that contain
single-family or duplex uses in residential districts may be recognized in
accordance with Section
51A-10.133. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 25155; 28553; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.131.1.   INTENT.
   The city council intends that this division fully comply with state law to
encourage the active planting of new trees and the replacement of damaged,
injured, or removed trees by providing alternatives and options that will
enhance the urban forest. (Ord. 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.131.2.   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.
   Deviations from this division require a three-quarters vote of the city
council. (Ord. 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.132.   TREE REMOVAL APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   Tree removal application and posting.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, a responsible party must
post either an approved tree removal application in accordance with this
section or a building permit in a conspicuous place at the entrances to the
tree removal property, before removing or seriously injuring a protected tree
on that tree removal property.
      (2)   A tree removal application must be posted in a conspicuous place at
the entrance to the tree removal property in conjunction with a demolition
permit or a grading permit.
      (3)   For trees removed from public right-of-way, posting of the required
tree removal application is not required.
   (b)   Application for review. An application required under this section
must be filed with the building official on a form furnished by the city for
that purpose. The application must include the following:
      (1)   General. The name, address, telephone number, and signature of the
applicant. The applicant may be the owner of the tree removal property or a
contracted agent acting for the owner.
      (2)   Owner information. The name, address, and telephone number of each
tree removal property owner.
      (3)   Tree removal property information. The street address, zoning
district, and any overlay district of the tree removal property.
      (4)   Tree survey or forest stand delineation. One of the following must
be provided.
         (A)   A tree survey that shows the location, diameter, and name (both
common and scientific) of all trees on the tree removal property (trees in
close proximity that all have a diameter of less than eight inches may be
designated as a "group of trees" with only the number noted), or an estimate of
the total diameter inches of protected trees, calculated and documented using a
tree sampling method determined by the building official to be reasonably
accurate. The survey does not have to be prepared by a registered surveyor,
architect, or landscape architect. Trees not proposed for removal or serious
injury, or located further than 20 feet from proposed construction activity
need not be shown on the survey unless the building official determines it
would help evaluation of the application.
         (B)   A forest stand delineation ("FSD") used for the purpose of
calculating the total square footage of forest canopy coverage of building
sites and providing an ecological assessment of a property. An FSD must be
approved by the building official. The building official shall determine the
information required to be provided in an FSD. The FSD is applicable to and may
be used to calculate:
            (i)   Tree canopy cover assessment for old-field tree stands and
undeveloped lots, two acres or larger, in early succession stages when:
               (aa)   a stand, or partial stand, with a minimum of 60 percent
Class 3, eastern red cedar, or unprotected trees is located in a proposed
development impact area;
               (bb)   the forest stand delineation excludes areas within 50
feet of a one-percent chance floodplain, 50 feet of a wetland, 50 feet of an
escarpment zone, or 150 feet of a stream bank;
               (cc)   the trees in the stand, or partial stand, is designated
in an age class of 60 years or less by the building official based on site and
historical data; and
               (dd)   the stand is assessed and surveyed using tree sampling
methods which provide general species quantity and tree size determinations
based on the use of quadrat plots, a transect line sampling method, point-
quarter sampling method, or other method approved by the building official.
            (ii)   Tree canopy cover credit for single family and duplex
construction.
            (iii)   Tree canopy cover assessment of development impact areas in
conjunction with sustainable development incentives.
            (iv)   Tree canopy cover assessment on properties five acres or
larger with institutional and community service uses or recreation uses when
the measured tree canopy coverage is the baseline for determining the number of
trees required for replacement when using the canopy cover replacement
calculation for legacy trees in Section
51A-10.134(c)(7).
            (v)   Forest analysis for baseline documentation to create a
conservation easement.
            (vi)   Tree canopy cover assessment where trees are removed without
authorization.
      (5)   All permits and approvals related to floodplain, wetland, or
escarpment regulations required by city departments or other agencies.
      (6)   Any other reasonable and pertinent information that the building
official determines to be necessary for review.
   (c)   Form of approval of tree removal application. A tree removal
application is not approved until it has been signed by the building official.
   (d)   Separate offense for each tree removed or seriously injured without a
permit. A responsible party commits a separate violation of this section for
each tree removed or seriously injured without authorization by a building
permit or approved tree removal application.
   (e)   Decision of the building official. The building official shall deny a
tree removal application if the removal or serious injury is not in the public
interest. This decision must be based on the following factors:
      (1)   The feasibility of relocating a proposed improvement that would
require the removal or serious injury of the tree.
      (2)   The cost of preserving the tree.
      (3)   Whether the lot or tract would comply with this article after the
removal or serious injury.
      (4)   Whether the removal or serious injury is contrary to the public
health, safety, or welfare.
      (5)   The impact of the removal or serious injury on the urban and
natural environment.
      (6)   Whether an economically viable use of the property will exist if
the application is denied.
      (7)   Whether the tree is worthy of preservation, is a significant tree,
or a historic tree.
      (8)   Whether the tree is diseased or has a short remaining life
expectancy.
      (9)   The effect of the removal or serious injury on erosion, soil
moisture retention, flow of surface waters, and drainage systems.
      (10)   The need for buffering of residential areas from the noise, glare,
and visual effects of nonresidential uses.
      (11)   Whether a landscape plan has been approved by the board of
adjustment, city plan commission, or city council.
      (12)   Whether the tree interferes with a utility service.
      (13)   Whether the tree is near existing or proposed structures.
      (14)   Whether the proposed mitigation for tree removal or serious injury
is sufficient.
   (f)   Development impact area waiver. Except as provided in this section, if
tree removal is authorized by a building permit for construction of a main
structure, a property owner may apply for a waiver of the tree replacement
requirements in Section
51A-10.134. The waiver applies to protected trees in the development impact
area on properties not listed in Sections
51A-10.131 and
51A-10.134(b), all single family and duplex permits, and properties excepted
from Article X landscape requirements in Section
51A-10.121.
      (1)   Qualifications. The owner must demonstrate a good faith effort to
design the building project to preserve the most, the biggest, and the best
trees, by providing the following:
         (A)   a tree survey and a tree protection plan implemented as required
by this division; and
         (B)   proof of consultation with a qualified consulting arborist or
landscape architect for planning and implementing best management practices to
reduce the negative impacts of construction on protected trees before
submitting the building permit for approval.
      (2)   Tree removal property waiver requirements.
         (A)    Tree removal properties two acres and larger. All tree removal
properties two acres and larger must:
            (i)   meet the qualification requirements of Section
51A-10.135(d)(1) for sustainable development incentives;
            (ii)   reduce mitigable inches of protected trees on the tree
removal property by a minimum of 50 percent through application of tree canopy
coverage credit using Sustainable Development Incentives procedures; and
            (iii)   develop and implement the sustainable landscape plan and
tree preservation plan in Section
51A-10.135(d)(4).
         (B)   Tree removal properties less than two acres. The owner must meet
all qualifications in Section
51A-10.132(f)(1).
      (3)   Waivers. The building official shall waive tree replacement
requirements for protected trees within the development impact area if the
building official determines that all requirements in this subsection are met.
         (A)    Limitations. Except as provided in this subsection, the waiver
is limited to protected trees in the development impact area on the tree
removal property growing within the building footprint, minimum required
parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, utility easements, detention areas, areas
of grading, excavation areas, and staging areas necessary for construction.
         (B)   Waiver calculations. Except as provided in this subparagraph,
the number of inches to be waived is determined by providing the total number
of inches of protected trees in the applicable locations in the development
impact area.
            (i)    The building official shall not waive mitigation of
protected trees for non-required off-street parking spaces. The number of
inches waived must be reduced on a pro-rata basis determined by the percentage
of non-required parking spaces provided in the parking area. (Example: If the
number of parking spaces required is 450; and 521 spaces are being provided on
the lot, then the tree mitigation requirements shall not be waived for the 71
excess parking spaces. [71/450=15.78%]).
            (ii)   The building official shall not waive mitigation of
protected trees for an area greater than 70 percent of the tree removal
property. Trees must be mitigated on a pro-rata basis if the develop ment
impact area exceeds 70 percent of the tree removal property. (Example: If the
development impact area is 85 percent of the tree removal property, 15 percent
of the trees removed must be mitigated, [0.85-0.70=0.15].
         (C)   Significant trees. Any significant tree on the tree removal
property removed or seriously injured must be replaced and is not eligible for
this mitigation waiver.
         (D)   Primary natural area. The development impact area waiver may not
include trees within a primary natural area.
         (E)   Special exception. A tree removal property with a waiver must
fully comply with the minimum landscape requirements without a special
exception.
         (F)   Completion. No waiver is complete until the tree removal
property passes a final tree mitigation inspection or landscape inspection and
obtains a permanent certificate of occupancy.
         (G)   Denial. The building official shall deny a development impact
area waiver if the building official determines that the owner is in violation
of any of the applicable requirements of this division during the period
between initial review and final tree mitigation or landscape inspection. If a
waiver is denied, the required tree replacement must be completed in accordance
with Section
51A-10.134. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 25155; 30929; 31314)
SEC. 51A-10.133.   HISTORIC TREES.
   (a)   A property owner must agree, on a form approved by the director, to
have a tree designated as historic before the historic designation can be
approved by city council.
   (b)   Except as provided in this section, historic status lasts for the life
of the tree.
   (c)   A certified copy of the resolution declaring a tree historic must be
filed in the deed records of the county where the historic tree is located.
   (d)   Except as provided in Section
51A-10.140, historic trees may only be removed by authorization of the city
council. (Ord. 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.133.1.   TRANSPLANTED TREES.
   (a)   Procedure. Established and healthy protected trees on a tree removal
property may be transplanted within the city. The transplanting process must
conform to operational and safety standards stated in ANSI A300 (Part 6), as
amended, and with ISA Best Management Practices for Tree Planting, as amended.
      (1)   A protected tree that meets the requirements of this section is not
considered removed, or seriously injured, if the transplanted tree is planted
and maintained in a healthy growing condition.
      (2)   Building official approval is required before beginning the
transplantation for credit as a landscape tree, for tree replacement, or for
acceptance in tree canopy coverage measurements.
      (3)   The following information is required to obtain building official
approval.
         (A)   An initial assessment report describing transplanting practices
from beginning to end of the process, including post-planting care practices.
         (B)   A tree survey or landscape plan identifying the original and
final locations of the protected tree after transplant, as applicable.
         (C)   Names and contact information of the property owners and
contractors.
         (D)   Contractor credentials and a statement of equipment and
procedures to be used for the operation.
         (E)   Other information required by the building official.
   (b)   Credit for transplanted trees.
      (1)   Healthy small trees qualify for one inch of replacement credit for
each inch of the transplanted tree.
      (2)   Healthy large and medium protected trees six inches in diameter or
less qualify for one inch of replacement credit for each inch of the
transplanted tree.
      (3)   Healthy large and medium protected trees between seven inches and
12 inches in diameter qualify for two inches replacement credit for each inch
of the transplanted tree.
      (4)   Healthy large and medium protected trees between 12 inches and 24
inches in diameter qualify for three inches of replacement credit for each inch
of the transplanted tree.
      (5)   Healthy large and medium protected trees 24 inches or more in
diameter qualify for five inches of replacement credit for each inch of the
transplanted tree.
   (c)   Tree canopy coverage. Transplanted trees may be measured as part of
the overall tree canopy coverage of a property in a forest stand delineation as
a preserved tree. (Ord. 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.134.   REPLACEMENT OF REMOVED OR SERIOUSLY INJURED TREES.
   (a)   In general. Except as provided in this section, if a tree removal
application is approved, a building permit is issued, an unauthorized tree
removal occurs, or when a tree is removed from a public right-of-way in
conjunction with a private development, one or more healthy replacement trees
must be planted in accordance with the requirements in this article.
   (b)   Exception. Trees removed with a building permit for construction of a
single family or duplex dwelling on a lot one acre or less in a residential
district are not required to be replaced if the tree was located in the
unrestricted zone on the tree removal property. Trees not in the unrestricted
zone are subject to replacement.
      (1)   For front and rear yards, the unrestricted zone does not include
required setbacks or the area 15 feet from the property line, whichever is
greater.
      (2)   For side yards, the unrestricted zone does not include required
setbacks or the area five feet from the property line, whichever is greater.
   (c)   Requirements.
      (1)   Quantity.
         (A)   Except as provided in this section, the minimum total caliper of
replacement trees must equal or exceed the total classified diameter inches of
the protected trees removed or seriously injured as listed below.
         (B)   Tree classification for mitigation:
            (i)   Historic trees: 3:1    
            (ii)   Significant: 1.5:1
            (iii)   Class 1: 1:1
            (iv)   Class 2: 0.7:1
            (v)   Class 3: 0.4:1
      (2)   Species.
         (A)   A replacement tree must be an approved tree determined by the
director.
         (B)   For a tree removal property two acres in size or more, no one
species of tree may constitute more than 35 percent of the replacement trees
planted on the tree removal property.
      (3)   Location. The replacement trees must be planted on the lot from
which the protected tree was removed or seriously injured, except as otherwise
allowed by Section
51A-10.135. Replacement trees may not be planted within a visibility triangle,
a water course, in an area within 15 feet horizontally to the closest point of
an overhead electric line, or an existing or proposed street or alley unless
the tree is authorized by a license and permit and is required to be in that
location by other ordinance.
      (4)   Minimum size. A replacement tree must have a caliper of at least
two inches.
      (5)   Timing.
         (A)   Except as provided in this section, all replacement trees must
be planted within 30 days of removal.
         (B)   If the property owner provides the building official with an
affidavit stating that all replacement trees will be planted within six months,
the building official may allow the replacement trees to be planted during that
six-month period.
            (i)   If the property owner submits an application for a building
permit for construction on the tree removal property within the six-month
period, the tree replacement requirements may be transferred to the building
permit for final completion of all tree replacement prior to a final
certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion for the property.
            (ii)   If the property owner does not submit an application for a
building permit for construction within the six-month period, all tree
replacement must be completed within 30 days after the expiration of the six-
month period.
         (C)   For residential subdivision developments and multi-phase
commercial developments, tree replacement may be completed in accordance with a
comprehensive tree replacement plan for the development. The building official
may allow the property owner additional time to complete the development
project to plant the replacement trees, with the following restrictions:
            (i)   A proposed landscape plan identifying all conceptual
landscaping for the properties within the subdivision must be provided by a
landscape architect and designed according to the soil and area requirements of
this article. The proposed plan will specify the minimum tree size and general
species distribution for the properties in accordance with this article. The
tree replacement for the development identified on the proposed plan must be
completed prior to the final certificate of occupancy or certificate of
completion for the project.
            (ii)   All required tree replacement that is not scheduled by an
approved design for the property under the comprehensive tree replacement plan
must be completed within six months of issuance of the tree removal application
or building permit for removing trees.
      (6)   Forest stand delineation exceptions for old-field and undeveloped
lots. When an FSD, under Section
51A-10.132(b)(4)(B) is used to assess tree canopy coverage:
         (A)   except as provided in this paragraph, no mitigation is required
for a tree stand when:
            (i)   at least 60 percent of the trees in the stand are Class 3,
eastern red cedar, or unprotected species; and
            (ii)   the average tree diameters in the stand are less than 12
inches DBH.
         (B)   significant trees in a stand located on an old-field or
undeveloped lots must be mitigated.
      (7)   Additional requirements for forest stand delineation for properties
five acres or greater with institutional uses or recreational uses. When an FSD
under Section
51A-10.132(b)(5)(D) is used to assess tree canopy coverage:
         (A)   the tree removal property must maintain or increase the tree
canopy coverage for the property recorded in the most recent FSD; and
         (B)   significant trees that are included in the FSD tree canopy
coverage must be replaced according to the diameter standards for significant
trees in this article.
         (C)   A replacement tree that dies within five years of the date it
was planted must be replaced by another replacement tree that complies with
this section. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 25155; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.135.   ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF COMPLIANCE WITH TREE REPLACEMENT
REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   In general. If the building official determines that, due to
restrictive site conditions, it would be impracticable or imprudent for the
responsible party to plant a replacement tree on the tree removal property, the
responsible party shall comply with one or more of the mitigation methods in
this section.
   (b)   Mitigation by legacy trees.
      (1)   Lots or artificial lots smaller than five acres on properties that
are not using sustainable development incentives may attain replacement credit
for planting legacy trees on the tree removal property.
      (2)   Each tree planted and designated as a legacy tree is given a 12
inch replacement credit.
      (3)   For lots containing a single-family or duplex use, credit will only
be provided for legacy trees planted in the portion of the lot that abuts a
street and extends across the width of the lot between the street and a main
building and lines parallel to and extending outward from the front facade of a
main building.
   (c)   Habitat preservation and restoration areas.
      (1)    Habitat preservation and restoration areas that are established to
provide a dedicated open landscape area for native flora and fauna habitat
preservation or restoration may be credited toward tree mitigation.
      (2)   To receive credit, habitat preservation and restoration areas must
be a minimum of 1,200 square feet of contiguous area, as shown on a landscape
plan.
      (3)   Credit will only be given for a maximum of 2,400 square feet of
habitat and preservation area or 20 percent of the tree canopy cover goal for
the property, as determined by the street typology of the adjacent street in
Section
51A-10.135(d)(2)(A), whichever is greater.
      (4)   Every 1,200 square feet of habitat preserved that is not under a
tree canopy may be counted as 12 diameter inches of tree replacement credit.
      (5)   These areas must be actively monitored and managed to be fully
sustained as a protected habitat area including compliance with a maintenance
plan provided to the building official.
   (d)   Sustainable development incentives. Sustainable development incentives
must be calculated on a form provided by the director.
      (1)   Requirements. For a development to qualify for sustainable
development incentives it must meet the requirements in this subsection.
         (A)   Properties must be a minimum of two acres with no residential
uses except multifamily uses and shared access developments.
          (B)   Properties must contain commercial or multifamily uses or a
shared access development.
         (C)   Before a building permit is issued, a consulting arborist or
landscape architect must provide the following to the building official:
            (i)   A forest stand delineation.
             (ii)   A conceptual landscape plan identifying tree preservation,
areas, natural features, landscape areas, proposed buildings, and any other
site elements or improvements in as much detail as possible.
            (iii)   A soil resource assessment for all landscape areas.
         (D)   All healthy top soils disturbed during construction must be
restored.
         (E)   Development must be fitted to the topography and soils to
minimize cut-and-fill sections.
         (F)   Grading and clearing in or around the development impact area
may not encroach in a primary natural area, except in conjunction with the
construction of drainage facilities, approved through engineering review.
            (i)   Grading near preserved trees and around the edge of the
development impact area must be planned and implemented to insure minimal
impact to natural topography, watercourses, vegetation, and wildlife.
            (ii)   Indigenous vegetation must be retained and protected except
in development impact areas or to control or remove invasive plants.
         (G)   Utility easement planning and locations must be designed to
insure minimal impact to preserved trees and primary natural areas.
         (H)   All tree preservation and legacy tree plantings must fully
comply with the tree protection requirements and soil area and tree spacing
standards of this article.
         (I)   A consulting arborist is required;
            (i)   for design and implementation of a tree protection plan and
soil resource assessment;
            (ii)   to periodically inspect preserved trees;
            (iii)   to insure the standards for legacy tree plantings are
implemented; and
            (iv)   to confirm compliance with these requirements to the
building official before the final landscape inspection.
         (J)   Irrigation standards must be designed for efficient water
conservation management on the property including dedicated irrigation for all
legacy trees.
         (K)   A site maintenance schedule and implementation plan for site
sustainability covering a minimum of five years must be approved by a
consulting arborist or landscape architect and fully implemented. The schedule
and plan must be available at the property.
      (2)   Pre-development assessment.
         (A)   Tree canopy cover goal and credit. The combined tree canopy
cover of existing preserved trees, planted legacy trees, and planted landscape
trees, shown on the final approved landscape plan, determines the tree canopy
cover credit for sustainable development incentives.
            (i)   The combined preserved and planted legacy and landscape tree
canopy cover measured in square feet is compared to the tree canopy cover goal
for the property to determine the percentage of tree replacement reduction to
be provided.
            (ii)   The tree canopy cover goal for the property is determined by
the street typology of the adjacent streets. In this subsection, street
typology is determined using the Complete Streets Manual, unless another
publication is designated by the building official. Where a building site faces
two or more street frontages with differing typologies, the greater canopy
cover goal controls.
 
Street Typology       Canopy Cover Goal
Residential           40 percent
Mixed Use             35 percent
Commercial & Freeways 30 percent
Industrial            25 percent
Parkways              45 percent
 
Canopy cover goal percentages are converted to square feet by multiplying the
percent and the total square footage of the building site.
         (B)   Tree mitigation deductions. Tree mitigation deductions are
subtracted from the total replacement tree requirements for the building site
to calculate the base mitigation requirement in diameter inches. Available tree
mitigation deductions are:
            (i)   Old-field mitigation reduction credit under Section
51A-10.134(c)(6).
            (ii)    Transplanted tree on site credit under Section
51A-10.133.1(c).
      (3)   Sustainable development credits.
         (A)   Tree canopy cover credit.
            (i)   Canopy cover credit square footage is divided by the tree
canopy goal for the building site, measured in square feet, to obtain the
percentage reduction.
            (ii)   The base mitigation requirement is reduced by the percentage
above to determine the number of inches of mitigation remaining due.
         (B)   Preserved tree canopy credit.
            (i)   Preserved tree canopy cover is determined by completing a
forest stand delineation and a conceptual landscape plan showing the protected
trees to be preserved.
            (ii)   Preserved tree canopy cover credit, measured in square feet,
must be confirmed before final inspection. Preserved tree canopy cover in a
primary natural area is calculated at a rate of 0.25:1.
         (C)   Landscape tree canopy credit. Large and medium nursery stock
landscape trees may be counted towards the tree canopy cover total for a
building site at a rate of 300 square feet per tree.
         (D)   Legacy tree canopy credit. Large or medium legacy trees may be
installed in enhanced landscape areas for legacy tree credit. Legacy tree
credit is determined as follows:
            (i)   Large legacy trees are counted towards the tree canopy cover
total at a rate of 1,200 square feet per tree.
            (ii)   Medium legacy trees are counted towards the tree canopy
cover total at a rate of 750 square feet per tree.
      (4)   Green site points.
         (A)   Additional tree mitigation reductions are available through
enhanced site planning and design, landscape, and water conservation
improvements that directly promote urban forest conservation.
         (B)   Required green site points are calculated by determining the
percentage of the tree canopy cover goal or the percentage of existing tree
canopy cover compared to the overall building site area before development. The
percentage is rounded and converted to points at a 1:1 ratio (i.e., 30 percent
= 30 points).
            (i)   For building sites three acres or less, the required number
of points is determined by the tree canopy cover goal or the tree canopy cover
before construction, whichever is greater.
            (ii)    For all other building sites, the required number of points
is determined by the tree canopy cover before construction, but must be a
minimum of 50 points.
         (C)   Green site points from enhanced landscaping are determined as
follows:
            (i)    Green site landscape plan. Five points. A green site
landscape plan must meet the minimum standards of this article, be designed by
a landscape architect, and include the following:
               (aa)   a plan for the design, implementation, and maintenance of
a water-wise program and water-wise planting materials on a minimum of 75
percent of development impact area; and
               (bb)   a soil resource assessment throughout development for all
landscape areas and required trees.
            (ii)   Tree preservation plan. Five points. A tree preservation
plan must include a tree protection plan, soil resource assessment, and a
complete tree survey performed by a consulting arborist. The tree preservation
plan must be implemented and monitored by a consulting arborist. A report of
soil planting conditions and tree protection during construction is required
before a final landscape inspection.
            (iii)   Engineered solutions in an urban streetscape for
replacement trees. 10 points maximum. A building site must have a minimum of
five landscape design option points to qualify. Green site points are awarded
when engineered solutions allow required large or medium trees in the street
buffer zone to be planted in impervious environments. Soil volume must be a
minimum of 480 cubic feet per required tree. A minimum of 75 percent of
required street buffer trees must meet the soil volume minimum for credits to
apply.
               (aa)    Minimum required soil volume: five points
               (bb)    Increase in soil volume 10 percent above minimum
requirement: six points.
               (cc)    Increase in soil volume 15 percent above minimum
requirement: seven points.
               (dd)    Increase in soil volume 20 percent above minimum
requirement: eight points.
               (ee)    Increase in soil volume 25 percent above minimum
requirement: nine points.
               (ff)    Increase in soil volume 30 percent or greater above
minimum requirement: 10 points.
            (iv)   Enhanced buffer zone and increased landscape area. 15 points
maximum. A building site must have a minimum of 10 landscape design option
points in street buffer zone and residential buffer zone enhancements to
qualify. A street buffer zone or residential buffer zone may be enlarged by a
minimum average of five feet deeper than the required average buffer depth.
Five points for each five feet average increase in depth along each buffer zone
on the building site.
            (v)    Conservation through tree preservation or habitat
restoration. 20 points maximum. A building site must have a minimum of 10
landscape design option points to qualify. Conservation or preservation
programs on the tree removal property may qualify for credits where primary
natural areas and secondary natural areas are retained for conservation
purposes. Each individual area must be identified on the landscape plan and
must be a minimum of five percent of the building site.
               (aa)    Habitat preservation. Five points. The applicant must
preserve existing healthy native and mixed species grassland or woodland areas.
               (bb)    Habitat preservation and restoration using an active
management plan. 10 points. The applicant may create or restore natural habitat
conditions if designed and implemented by a qualified professional. Site
maintenance must be continual for the purpose of sustaining the vegetated area.
Five additional points is available for each additional area.
               (cc)    Habitat preservation, restoration, and maintenance of
natural forest edge using an active management plan - adjacent to primary
natural areas. 15 points. The applicant may preserve and restore land areas
adjacent to wetlands, creeks, floodplain, and slopes which help buffer the
protected creeks, slopes, habitat and woodland in primary natural areas from
the development impact area. An additional five points may be allotted if 90
percent of the development impact area boundary adjacent to the primary natural
area is a minimum of 100 feet from the primary natural area.
         (D)   Low impact development. 20 points maximum. A building site must
have a minimum of six landscape design option points to qualify.
            (i)   Rain garden. Maximum 10 points.
               (aa)   One to 5,000 square feet: three points; and
               (bb)   each additional 1,000 square feet: one point.
            (ii)   Bioswale. Maximum 15 points per bioswale.
               (aa)   50 to 100 feet long: three points; and
               (bb)   each additional 50 feet: one point.
            (iii)   Water-wise plant materials and planting beds. Maximum 10
points. The applicant may provide landscaping that uses water conservation
techniques including water-wise plants, mulch, and efficient irrigation.
               (aa)   For providing water conservation techniques in a minimum
of 50 percent of landscape areas: three points; or
               (bb)   in a minimum of 80 percent of landscape areas: five
points.
               (cc)   For providing low-water consumption grasses for 80
percent of turf surfaces: three points; or
               (dd)    low-water consumption grasses for all turf surfaces:
five points.
         (E)   Surface parking lots. The applicant may improve the interior
zone to provide wider landscape areas and an enhanced shade tree environment.
The enhancements may be combined for a maximum of 30 points. An additional five
points are available if the building site achieves a 50 percent or greater
projected tree canopy coverage over the parking lot with combined existing
trees, legacy trees, and landscape trees.
            (i)   Option 1. Provide a protected pedestrian pathway that is
between three feet in width and 15 feet in width, through a parking lot to a
building from a public or private street or the expansion of a wide landscape
median with trees and a walkway through the parking lot. A minimum of one large
or medium tree is required for each 40 linear feet of pedestrian pathway or
landscape median. Five points.
            (ii)   Option 2. Provide a maximum of 10 parking spaces between
parking lot landscape islands. Five points.
            (iii)   Option 3. Increase the parking lot landscape area to a
minimum of 200 square feet for each large or medium tree.
               (aa)    Increase of 50 percent of the required parking lot
landscape islands. Five points.
               (bb)    Increase of 75 percent of the required parking lot
landscape islands. 10 points.
            (iv)   Option 4. Increase the parking lot landscape area to a
minimum of 300 square feet for each large or medium tree.
               (aa)    Increase of 50 percent of the required parking lot
landscape islands. Five points.
               (bb)    Increase of 75 percent of the required parking lot
landscape islands. 10 points.
            (v)   Option 5. Each additional parking lot landscape island
provided. Three points.
            (vi)   Option 6. Provide a minimum 10-foot-wide landscape median
with large or medium trees extending the length of a minimum 12 space parking
row. Five points.
            (vii)   Option 7. Provide a 12-foot-wide landscape median with
large or medium trees extending the length of a minimum 12 space parking row.
10 points for each full median for a maximum of 20 points on the lot.
            (viii)   Option 8. Provide a 16-foot-wide landscape median with
large or medium trees extending the length of a minimum 12 space parking row.
15 points for each full median for a maximum of 30 points on the lot.
            (ix)   Option 9. Provide a minimum of 2,500 square feet of
contiguous open soil surface area to serve as a pocket park. 20 points.
         (F)   Conservation easement. 10 points. The applicant may protect the
primary and secondary natural areas on the building site adjacent to the
development indefinitely through a conservation easement.
         (G)   Public deed restriction. Five points. The applicant may protect
the primary and secondary natural areas on a building site with a public deed
restriction for a minimum time-period of 25 years with 25 year automatic
renewal provisions.
   (e)   Tree canopy cover credit for single family and duplex uses. To reduce
tree replacement requirements, a portion of existing tree canopy coverage over
a single family or duplex construction building site must be preserved.
      (1)   The tree canopy cover goal is 40 percent of the building site.
      (2)   Healthy large and medium trees preserved on the building site,
including boundary trees, may be included in tree canopy cover calculations.
Invasive trees and trees located within 20 feet on center of the nearest
overhead public electric line are not included in the calculation.
      (3)   Each large and medium nursery stock tree planted as landscaping may
also qualify as 300 square feet of tree canopy cover. If the tree canopy cover
goal is met, additional landscape trees are not required, except that one tree
must be provided in the front yard.
      (4)   Healthy large and medium trees preserved in the required front yard
setback may qualify for double the total square footage of preserved tree
canopy coverage.
      (5)   Boundary trees located on adjacent private property must be
protected to the drip line according to the tree protection plan.
      (6)   The tree canopy cover must be measured by a forest stand
delineation, verified and approved by the building official. The forest stand
delineation must be provided by a consulting arborist.
   (f)   Conservation easement. Tree mitigation requirements may be reduced by
granting a conservation easement to the city in accordance with this
subsection.
      (1)   The conservation easement area must contain protected trees with a
combined diameter equal to or exceeding the classified diameter inches for
which replacement tree credit is being requested.
      (2)   The conservation easement area must be a minimum of 20 percent of
the size of the development impact area on the tree removal property and must
be:
         (A)   configured primarily for urban forest conservation and
preservation by protecting natural topography, waterways, forest vegetation,
and wildlife habitation; and
         (B)   a suitable size, dimension, topography, and general character
for its intended purpose.
      (3)   No portion of the conservation easement may be narrower than 50
feet in width.
      (4)   A conservation easement must have frontage on an improved public
street or have public access through private property to a public street.
      (5)   The city manager is authorized to accept and approve on behalf of
the city a conservation easement to conserve trees and other natural features,
upon:
         (A)   approval as to form by the city attorney;
         (B)   submission by the applicant of a metes and bounds property
description prepared by a licensed surveyor; and
         (C)   a determination by the building official that the easement area
is suitable for conservation purposes, based on:
            (i)   the submission of baseline documents prepared by a qualified
professional describing the property's physical and biological conditions, the
general age of any tree stands, locations of easements and construction, and
the conservation values protected by the easement;
            (ii)   the likelihood that the proposed conservation easement area
would preserve vegetation on a parcel otherwise attractive for development;
            (iii)   the overall health and condition of the trees on the
conservation easement property, and the extent of invasive and exotic plants on
the property and a strategy to manage the population;
            (iv)   the suitability of the area as a wildlife habitat;
            (v)   other unique features worthy of preservation, e.g. water
channels, rock formations, topography, or rare herbaceous or woody plant
species; and
            (vi)   the preservation of undeveloped areas located in a flood
plain on a building site before and after construction, except as authorized by
the director for engineering infrastructure.
      (6)   The conservation easement may be structured to be monitored and
managed by a nonprofit association dedicated to the conservation of land, with
the city as a joint grantee having the right, but not the duty, to monitor the
management of the conservation area.
      (7)   The city manager may not accept a sole or joint conservation
easement on behalf of the city, unless and until the owner provides the
building official with:
         (A)   a tree survey as set forth in Section
51A-10.132, or an estimate of the caliper and type of protected trees
documented in a manner determined to be reasonably accurate by the building
official, or a forest stand delineation verified and approved by the building
official; and
         (B)   a preservation strategy for the conservation easement area.
      (8)   No person may place playground equipment or park amenities in a
conservation easement area unless the building official has made a written
determination that the amenities indicated on a site plan are unlikely to be
detrimental to the conservation easement area.
      (9)   Conservation easement areas must be located wholly within the
Dallas city limit.
   (g)   Use of other property for tree replacement. Replacement trees that
cannot be planted on the tree removal property, and for which credit is not
given through a conservation easement, may be replaced by the methods in this
subsection. The applicant may:
      (1)   provide a replacement tree to a city department for planting on
city property, with the approval of the director of the city department.
      (2)   plant a replacement tree on property in the city that is within
five miles of the tree removal property as long as the responsible party
obtains the written approval of the building official and provides:
         (A)   a site plan indicating the location of the tree to be removed or
seriously injured, the address of the property where the replacement tree will
be planted, and a site plan indicating the location of the replacement tree;
and
         (B)   a written agreement between the owner of the property where the
replacement tree will be planted and the responsible party, to transfer
responsibility for the replacement tree under this article to the receiving
party.
            (i)   The agreement may be structured to allow a non-profit
association dedicated to tree advocacy or the conservation of land to monitor
and manage the replacement trees.
            (ii)   The agreement must include a written affidavit by the owner
of the property where the replacement tree will be planted agreeing to maintain
the tree for five years and to be the responsible party for the replacement
tree.
         (C)   A responsible party who obtains permission to plant the
replacement tree on other tree replacement property in the city shall ensure
that the planting and maintenance of the tree on the other tree replacement
property complies with the requirements of this article.
   (h)   Park land dedication. Preserved protected trees on dedicated park land
and private park land may be used to meet tree mitigation requirements in
accordance with Subsection (f).
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, to be eligible for tree
mitigation credits, dedicated park land and private park land must meet the
conservation easement standards in Sections
51A-10.135(f)(1),
51A-10.135(f)(3), and
51A-10.135(f)(5).
      (2)   Park land dedication requirements may be met on an acre for acre
basis for any land dedicated as a conservation easement under this section that
meets the conservation easement standards in this section and the requirements
for publicly accessible private park land in Section
51A-4.1007(b)(2)(A)(i) and is accepted by the director of the park and
recreation department.
   (i)   Reforestation fund.
      (1)   General.
         (A)   Mitigation requirements may be met by making a payment into a
special city account, to be known as the Reforestation Fund in accordance with
this subsection.
         (B)   The amount of the payment required is calculated by using the
formula for appraising the value of a tree, as derived from the most recent
edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal published by the Council of Tree &
Landscape Appraisers, unless another publication is designated by the building
official. If more than one tree is being removed or seriously injured or not
planted, the values of the trees are added when calculating the payment
required.
         (C)   All property purchased through this fund must be located within
the city of Dallas.
      (2)   Administration.
         (A)   In general. Except as provided in this paragraph, the director
shall administer the reforestation fund to purchase trees to plant on public
property, to create an urban forest master plan and to update it periodically,
to fund a staff position for managing and directing the fund for planting and
urban forest education, or to acquire conservation easements or wooded
property. A minimum of 50 percent of all funds provided for each fiscal year
must be available for planting trees on public property or to acquire
conservation casements or wooded property.
         (B)   Exception for natural deforestation events. In response to
natural deforestation events, the director may administer the reforestation
fund to purchase trees to plant on private property.
            (i)   Definition. In this paragraph NATURAL DEFORESTATION EVENT
means a recorded weather event or a period of infestation of an invasive
species damaging threatened tree species which causes localized catastrophic
tree failure and irreparable structural tree damage resulting in a loss of the
urban forest canopy.
            (ii)   Applicabili ty. This paragraph only applies to lots with an
existing single-family or duplex use in a residential district.
            (iii)   Qualificati on. Private properties affected by a natural
deforestation event may qualify for reforestation if they are:
               (aa)    Located within a declared federal, state, or local
disaster area;
               (bb)    Declared eligible for reforestation by the city council;
or
               (cc)    Confirmed by the director to have contained a vulnerable
or threatened tree species on the property, as specified by the Texas
Department of Agriculture, and was in imminent threat of infestation.
            (iv)   Additional requirements. A minimum of one of the following
must be provided in determining whether an area has been affected by a natural
deforestation event.
               (aa)   A tree survey or forest stand delineation must be
provided that meets minimum requirements established by the director.
               (bb)    Physical evidence must be presented by the owners of
individual lots documenting individual tree loss.
            (v)   Reforestation.
               (aa)    Except as provided in Item (dd), parkway trees and trees
located in alleys adjacent to residential lots may be replaced at the
discretion of the director.
               (bb)   All reforestation tree planting projects on private
property must be conducted between October and March.
               (cc)   The owner of a reforestation property is responsible for
providing any necessary proof of the loss of a large or medium established tree
to a natural deforestation event on the owner's property. Photo documentation,
Google Street View, and aerial imagery may qualify as confirmation.
               (dd)    Property owners are not required to participate in a
neighborhood reforestation project to replace damaged or destroyed trees. The
city will not replace a parkway tree if the adjacent property owner chooses not
to receive a tree for a location the property owner must maintain.
               (ee)    Replacement trees provided through a reforestation tree
planting project must be planted on the same property that sustained the tree
loss.
               (ff)   The caliper size of replacement trees provided through a
reforestation tree planting project must be between one and three inches.
               (gg)    Boundary tree replacements must be placed on a single
property. Two adjoining properties may each qualify for a tree.
               (hh)   All replacement trees provided through a reforestation
tree planting project must be planted in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
               (ii)   An approved planting plan may be required by the
director.
            (vi)   Prohibition on reforestation funds being used to install or
maintain trees on private property.
               (aa)    Reforestation fund expenditures are limited to the
purchase and provision of trees. Reforestation funds may not be expended on
installation or maintenance.
               (bb)    Reforestation fund replacement trees may not be used as
required landscaping on lots permitted for new construction. (Ord. Nos. 25155;
28073; 28553; 30929; 30934; 31616; 32340)
SEC. 51A-10.136.   CONSERVATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PROTECTED TREES DURING
CONSTRUCTION OR OTHER DISTURBANCE.
   (a)   City property. Except as provided in this section, trees on city
property:
      (1)   must be established and maintained in accordance with ANSI A300
standards for tree care operations and the ISA Best Management Practices; or
      (2)   the American Standard for Nursery Stock Z60.
   (b)   In general. Where a property owner plans to retain protected trees on
a site to be developed or otherwise disturbed in a manner that may affect
protected trees, the following requirements must be met:
      (1)   Tree protection plan in general. A tree protection plan submitted
to the building official must meet the specifications found in ANSI A300
Standards for Tree Care Operations, as amended, and ISA Best Management
Practices.
      (2)   Tree protection plan additional requirements. A tree protection
plan must include the following:
         (A)   A site plan drawn to scale, indicating the location of land
disturbance, clearing, grading, trenching, tree protection zones, general
projection of the tree canopy area over the property, proposed underground
utilities, staging areas for parking, material storage, concrete washout, and
debris burn and burial holes where these areas might affect tree protection,
and areas where soil compaction is likely to occur in a tree protection zone
due to traffic or materials storage.
         (B)   A complete tree survey in accordance with the requirements set
forth in Section
51A-10.132, or a forest stand delineation approved by the building official.
Significant and historic trees must be specifically designated on the survey.
         (C)   Detailed drawings and descriptions of any of the following tree
protection measures that will be used during development.
            (i)   Tree protection fencing. Tree protection fences must be
constructed within the development impact area unless an alternative is
approved by the building official on the tree protection plan.
               (aa)    Except as provided in this subparagraph, tree protection
fences must be a minimum of four feet high, constructed with adequate, durable
material (e.g. orange plastic construction fencing) approved by the building
official, and located at the drip line or the edge of the critical root zone,
whichever is farthest from the trunk, unless the building official determines
that a fence line closer to the trunk will not be likely to result in damage to
the tree. The building official may require an expansion of the critical root
zone or approved encroachment. Once established, the fence line must remain in
place as approved.
               (bb)   Tree protection fences located in the development impact
area within 15 feet of construction activity must be a minimum of six-feet-high
and constructed of chain-link, wire-mesh, or wood fence materials, and be
solidly anchored to the ground if:
                  (I)    a required tree protection fence located within the
critical root zone of a protected tree on the property is determined by the
building official to be in violation of this subsection;
                  (II)    a significant or historic tree is located within a
development impact area;
                  (III)    a tree preservation plan for sustainable development
incentives is designed for the preservation of protected trees within the area
of construction activity; or
                  (IV)    tree canopy cover credit for single family or duplex
uses is applied to protected trees in the construction activity area.
            (ii)   Erosion control fencing or screening. All protected trees or
stands of trees, and tree protection zones must be protected from the
sedimentation of erosion material. Silt screening must be placed along the
outer uphill edge of tree protection zones.
            (iii)   Tree protection signs.
            (iv)    Transplanting specifications. Trees to be transplanted on
property, or relocated from a remote property, must conform to the
specifications found in ANSI A300 Standard for Tree Care Operations, as
amended.
            (v)   Tree wells, islands, retaining walls, and aeration systems.
            (vi)   Staking specifications.
            (vii)   Soil and root protection.
            (viii)   Trunk protection.
            (ix)   Tree and site watering plan.
   (c)   Clearing. For clearing invasive, exotic, or unprotected vegetation on
a building site, a forest stand delineation is required. The building official
may require a tree protection plan to be provided on all or a portion of the
building site.
   (d)   Implementation of tree protection plan.
      (1)   The responsible party must install and maintain all tree protection
measures indicated in the approved plan prior to and throughout the land
disturbance process and the construction phase.
      (2)   No person may disturb the land or perform construction activity
until the required tree protection measures have been inspected by the building
official.
      (3)   The responsible party must mulch areas where soil compaction is
likely to occur as indicated on the plan with a minimum four-inch layer of wood
chip mulch, or by other options listed in ISA Best Management Practices, or
methods and materials recommended by a consulting arborist and approved by the
building official.
      (4)   If a cut is made to the root of a tree that is not intended to be
removed or seriously injured as indicated on the plan, the cut must be made at
a 90 degree angle.
      (5)   The responsible party must tunnel utilities if utilities are to run
through a tree protection zone, rather than being placed along corridors
between tree protection zones.
      (6)   The responsible party must provide water to the tree protection
zone as needed due to weather or site conditions, with penetration between six
and 18 inches of soil.
   (e)   Damage to protected trees. Where the building official has determined
that irreparable damage has occurred to trees within tree protection zones, the
responsible party must remove and replace those trees. The building official
may determine that irreparable damage to a tree has occurred based on, but not
limited to, the following factors:
      (1)   site evaluation;
      (2)   visible extensive damage to a tree root system;
      (3)   extensive soil compaction around the tree protection zone;
      (4)   visual evidence that required tree protection has been removed or
is in disrepair; or
      (5)   a tree risk assessment by a consulting arborist that includes the
current condition and proposed remedial measures.
   (f)   Topping. Topping is not an acceptable practice. (Ord. Nos. 22053;
25155; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.137.   VIOLATION OF THIS DIVISION.
   (a)   Stop work order. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this division, the building official may order the work stopped
by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the work or causing the
work to be done. A person issued this notice shall stop work immediately until
authorized by the building official to proceed with the work.
   (b)   Mitigation. The building official may require mitigation for the
removal, or serious injury, of protected trees without a tree removal
application or a building permit upon written notice of a violation of this
division.
      (1)   Mitigation may include:
         (A)   replacement of nursery stock trees on the property based on a
tree mitigation plan provided by the responsible party, if it is determined by
the building official that it is practicable to plant trees on the tree removal
property;
         (B)   other alternative methods of compliance in this article when
approved by the building official; or
         (C)   a fee to be applied to the Reforestation Fund, with the amount
determined in Section
51A-10.135.
      (2)   The responsible party must provide a tree survey or a forest stand
delineation identifying all tree sizes and species, or tree canopy coverage, on
the property.
         (A)   If the responsible party fails to provide the required
information within 30 days of the notice of violation the building official may
conduct a forest stand delineation using aerial imagery, field analysis, or
other reasonable and pertinent information to review and identify the square
footage of tree canopy coverage on the property.
         (B)   Required mitigation is calculated as follows:
            (i)   When tree size and species are identified in a verifiable
survey provided by a consulting arborist and approved by the building official.
Mitigation is required in accordance with Section
51A-10.134.
            (ii)   When protected trees have been removed with no measurable
remaining evidence. Mitigation is required in accordance with Section
51A-10.134 as determined using the following calculation.
               (aa)   The tree canopy coverage area is estimated by measuring
the tree canopy coverage area shown in an aerial image no older than three
years before notice of violation.
               (bb)   The estimated tree canopy coverage area, in square feet,
on the tree removal property is divided by 1,200 square feet to determine an
estimated number of trees for the area.
               (cc)   The number of trees is multiplied by eight inches as the
estimated average of trees to determine the inches of the trees to be replaced.
            (iii)    Reforestation fund.
               (aa)   The number of inches to be replaced for trees not located
in a primary natural area is multiplied by the Class 2 base rate (0.7:1) to
calculate reforestation fund value.
               (bb)   The number of inches to be replaced for trees located in
a primary natural area is multiplied by the Class 1 base rate (1:1) to
calculate reforestation fund value.
      (3)   Upon a finding by the building official that tree canopy coverage
removal has occurred, the building official shall give written notification to
the responsible party. Tree replacement or mitigation must be completed within
90 days of the date of the notification. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 25155; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.138.   APPEALS.
   In considering an appeal from a decision of the building official made in
the enforcement of this division, the sole issue before the board of adjustment
shall be whether or not the building official erred in his or her decision. The
board shall consider the same standards that the building official was required
to consider in making the decision. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 25155; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.139.   FINES.
   A person convicted of violating this division shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $2,000.00 per protected tree removed or seriously injured without
authorization, and not less than $2,000.00 per day for any other violation of
this division. (Ord. Nos. 22053; 25155; 30929)
SEC. 51A-10.140.   CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION.
   (a)   A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this division if
the person:
      (1)   removes or seriously injures, or assists in the removal or serious
injury of, a protected tree without complying with the requirements of this
division; or
      (2)   owns part or all of the land where the violation occurs.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the act is
included in one of the enumerated categories listed in this section. A tree
removal application or tree replacement is not required if the tree:
      (1)   was dead and the death was not caused by an intentional or
negligent act of the owner or an agent of the owner;
      (2)   had a disease or injury that threatened the life of the tree and
was not caused by an intentional act of the owner or an agent of the owner;
      (3)   was in danger of falling or had partially fallen and the danger or
the fall was not due to an intentional act of the owner or an agent of the
owner;
      (4)   was in a visibility triangle (unless the owner was legally required
to maintain the tree there) or obstructed a traffic sign;
      (5)   interfered with service provided by a public utility within a
public right-of-way;
      (6)   threatened public health or safety, as determined by one of the
following city officials:
         (A)   the chief of the police department;
         (B)   the chief of the fire-rescue department;
         (C)   the director of transportation and public works;
         (D)   the director of sanitation services;
         (E)   the director of code compliance;
         (F)   the director of park and recreation;
         (G)   the director of development services; or
         (H)   the director of aviation.
      (7)   was designated for removal without replacement in a landscape plan
approved by the city council, city plan commission, or board of adjustment;
      (8)   interfered with construction or maintenance of a public utility or
public right-of-way;
       (9)   was removed or seriously injured to allow construction, including
the operation of construction equipment in a normal manner, in accordance with
infrastructure engineering plans approved under Article V of Chapter 49 or
street paving and grading in a public right-of-way, storm drainage easement,
detention or retention pond designation, or bridge construction, for private
development; or
      (10)   was specifically listed as a vulnerable or threatened tree
species. or species subject to quarantine, as determined by the Texas
Department of Agriculture, and was in imminent threat of infestation. (Ord.
Nos. 22053; 23694; 25047; 25155; 28073; 28424; 30239; 30654; 30929; 32002;
32340; 32864)
ARTICLE XI.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION TAX EXEMPTIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES FOR
HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
Division 51A-11.100. Purpose and Definitions.
SEC. 51A-11.101.   PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (a)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this article is to encourage economic development
through the revitalization and preservation of the city’s historic properties,
including residential properties, and to assist in accomplishing the following
goals:
         (A)   Revitalize older neighborhoods to build and capture a stable tax
base.
         (B)   Support private sector investment in historic properties.
         (C)   Encourage home ownership.
         (D)   Promote pedestrian oriented, ground floor retail in the urban
historic districts.
         (E)   Support new uses for vacant and deteriorated historic buildings.
         (F)   Encourage low and moderate income families to invest in historic
districts.
      (2)   In order to further the purpose of this division, the director
shall:
         (A)   provide education and assistance to owners of historic
properties;
         (B)   coordinate activities with other departments to publicize the
incentives in this article;
         (C)   coordinate with existing programs in other departments; and
         (D)   seek funding from outside sources to assist low and moderate
income home-owners in rehabilitating and maintaining owner-occupied historic
properties.
   (b)   Authority for tax exemptions. The tax exemptions in this article are
adopted pursuant to the authority provided in Article 8, Section 1-f of the
Texas Constitution and Section 11.24 of the Texas Tax Code.
      (1)   These tax exemptions apply only to city property taxes and not to
taxes owing to other taxing units.
      (2)   Nothing in this article relieves a person from the responsibility
to apply each year to the appraisal district for a tax exemption pursuant to
the requirements of the Texas Tax Code.
   (c)   Authority for conservation easements. The historic conservation
easement program in this article is adopted pursuant to the authority provided
in Chapter 183 of the Texas Natural Resources Code. (Ord. Nos. 21874; 22026;
22392; 23506; 24584; 25509; 27016)
SEC. 51A-11.102.   DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions apply to this article:
      (1)   APPRAISAL DISTRICT means the Dallas Central Appraisal District or
its successor.
      (2)   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS means a certificate of
appropriateness required by Section
51A-4.501 or by a historic overlay district ordinance.
      (3)   COMMITMENT TO REPAY means a legal instrument requiring the owner
granted a tax exemption or historic conservation easement to repay to the city
all tax forgone upon a finding that the historic property has been totally or
partially destroyed or significantly altered by the willful act or negligence
of the owner or his agent in violation of the historic district ordinance. See
Section
51A-11.203.
      (4)   CONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE means a structure that retains its essential
architectural integrity of design and whose architectural style is typical of
or integral to a historic district.
      (4.1)   ENDANGERED HISTORIC DISTRICT means a historic district that is in
danger of being irreplaceably lost from severe deterioration or damage or
impending demolition of structures, where additional resources beyond the scope
of this article are needed, and includes the following historic districts:
         (A)   Tenth Street, and
         (B)   Wheatley Place.
      (5)   HISTORIC DISTRICT means a historic overlay district created
pursuant to the Dallas Development Code.
      (6)   HISTORIC PROPERTY means a contributing structure and the land
necessary for access to and use of the structure within a historic district.
      (7)   MINIMUM EXPENDITURE means the amount that must be spent on
rehabilitation to make a property owner eligible for a tax exemption in this
article.
      (8)   PREDESIGNATION CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS means a
predesignation certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to Section
51A-4.501 of this chapter.
      (9)   PRE-REHABILITATION VALUE means:
         (A)   for a historic property that was previously exempt from taxation
because of ownership by a tax exempt entity, but that has been purchased by a
new owner who is subject to taxation within three years before the new owner
submits an application for a tax exemption, the appraised value of the property
on the city's certified appraisal roll prepared by the appraisal district as of
December 31 of the year before the purchase by the new owner; or
         (B)   for all other historic properties, the appraised value of the
property on the city's certified appraisal roll prepared by the appraisal
district as of December 31 of the year before an application is submitted for a
tax exemption.
         (C)   If, while a property is eligible for a tax exemption, the
appraisal district reappraises the historic property and the value is reduced,
the pre-rehabilitation value equals the value after reappraisal for the
remaining duration of the tax exemption.
      (10)   PROPERTY PENDING DESIGNATION means property for which the
procedure has been initiated to establish a historic overlay district pursuant
to Section
51A-4.501.
      (11)   REHABILITATION means labor and materials for interior or exterior
repair or replacement of features that help preserve a historic property and
become a permanent part of the building or site, such as cabinetry, cable and
electrical wiring, carpentry, facilities for required parking, fixtures,
flooring, foundation, paint, paving connecting the building to right-of-way,
plumbing, roofing, and walls.
      (12)   REHABILITATION PROJECT means specific rehabilitation that meets
the minimum expenditure for a tax exemption pursuant to this article.
      (13)   REVITALIZING HISTORIC DISTRICTS means the following historic
districts:
         (A)   Lake Cliff,
         (B)   Winnetka Heights,
         (C)   South Boulevard/Park Row,
         (D)   Peak's Suburban Addition,
         (E)   Junius Heights, and
         (F)   any other historic district designated as a revitalizing
historic district in an ordinance creating or amending the historic district.
      (14)   TAX FORGONE means the total amount of taxes that the city did not
collect as a result of:
         (A)   all tax exemptions granted under this article; or
         (B)   a decrease in appraised value due to a historic conservation
easement.
      (15)   URBAN HISTORIC DISTRICTS means historic districts in the area
bounded by Carroll Avenue, Columbia Avenue, Munger Boulevard, Barry Avenue,
Haskell Avenue, Hatcher Street, Lamar Street, S.F. Railroad, Clarendon Drive,
Rosemont Avenue, Rainier Street, N. Edgefield Avenue, Colorado Boulevard,
Beckley Avenue, Continental Viaduct, Woodall Rodgers Freeway, and Ross Avenue,
including lots fronting on these streets, but excluding the endangered and
revitalizing historic districts.
      (16)   VERIFICATION means issuance of a letter of verification by the
director pursuant to this article. (Ord. Nos. 21874; 22026; 22392; 23506;
24163; 24584; 25509; 26335; 27016; 29953)
Division 51A-11.200. Tax Exemptions for Historic Properties.
SEC. 51A-11.201.   INITIAL APPLICATION, COMPLETION OF REHABILITATION, AND FINAL
APPLICATION ARE ALL REQUIRED FOR TAX EXEMPTION.
   (a)   Initial application for a tax exemption. An initial application for a
tax exemption must be filed with the director. Application may be made for a
tax exemption for historic property or property pending designation. Each
application must be signed by the owner, be acknowledged before a notary
public, and include the following information:
      (1)   The legal description of the property.
      (2)   Photographs and drawings of the property before rehabilitation,
including all protected facades and any other area where rehabilitation will be
performed.
      (3)   Estimates of the costs for the rehabilitation project, and any
other rehabilitation anticipated during the term of the tax exemption as
necessary to calculate the projected tax foregone.
      (4)   Details about the property including: total square footage of the
building and a breakdown of square footage for residential, office, and retail
uses; number of residential units created; and an estimate of the number of
temporary and permanent jobs that will be created as a result of the tax
exemption. This information is required for tax exemptions in the urban
historic districts only.
      (5)   A projection of the construction time and completion date of the
rehabilitation project.
      (6)   A complete application for any necessary certificate of
appropriateness or predesignation certificate of appropriateness for the
rehabilitation project.
      (7)   The proposed use of the property.
      (8)   An authorization for the members of the landmark commission and
city officials to visit and inspect the property as necessary to certify
eligibility and verification for a tax exemption.
      (9)   Documentation showing that the building is a contributing
structure.
      (10)   The duration and amount of tax foregone of any previous property
tax relief granted to any portion of the property pursuant to this article or
any other ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 11.24 of the Texas Tax Code.
      (11)   Any other information that is necessary to the city in determining
eligibility, including but not limited to information showing compliance with
all applicable city health and safety regulations.
   (b)   Determination of eligibility.
      (1)   If the historic property is in a reinvestment zone (also known as a
TIF) designated under Chapter 311 of the Texas Tax Code, the director shall
determine whether a tax exemption authorized under Section 11.24 of the Texas
Tax Code is prohibited, either under state law or under the terms of any bonds
issued for the reinvestment zone. If the tax exemption is prohibited, the
director shall notify the applicant and the city shall not process the
application.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a complete application for a tax exemption, the
director shall schedule a hearing before the landmark commission to determine
whether the property is eligible for a tax exemption.
      (3)   No task force review is required for determination of eligibility.
   (c)   Criteria for eligibility. If a property is determined to be eligible,
the property is deemed to be a historically or archeologically significant site
in need of tax relief to encourage its preservation. The landmark commission
shall determine that the property is eligible only if the application satisfies
the following requirements:
      (1)   The building must be a contributing or potentially contributing
structure within a historic district or proposed as a contributing structure
for properties pending historic designation.
      (2)   The proposed cost of the rehabilitation project must exceed the
percentage of pre-rehabilitation value of the contributing structure specified
in the applicable section of this article, if rehabilitation is required for
the exemption. Only rehabilitation done after a determination of eligibility
may be counted in determining whether the proposed rehabilitation project
exceeds the specified percentage of pre-rehabilitation value, except that the
landmark commission may, after a public hearing, make a specific finding
approving rehabilitation done prior to the determination of eligibility if the
rehabilitation was done within the last three years and will further the
purpose of this article. Only rehabilitation may be counted in determining
whether the proposed rehabilitation project exceeds the specified percentage of
pre-rehabilitation value; other work will not be counted.
   (d)   Notice and appeal of decision.
      (1)   Notice of decision. The director shall notify the applicant in
writing of the landmark commission’s decision on eligibility. If the landmark
commission determines that the applicant is not eligible for a tax exemption,
the director shall notify the applicant of the reason for that determination.
Notice is given by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage paid in
the United States mail. The notice must be sent to the address shown on the
application.
      (2)   Appeal of decision on eligibility. A determination that the
applicant is not eligible for a tax exemption may be appealed to the city plan
commission. An appeal is made by filing a written request with the director.
The request must be filed within 30 days after the date written notice is given
to the applicant of the landmark commission’s decision. In considering the
appeal, the sole question shall be whether the landmark commission erred in
determining that the applicant is not eligible, and, in this connection, the
city plan commission shall consider the same standards that were required to be
considered by the landmark commission.
   (e)   City council review. Within 90 days after the landmark commission
determines an applicant is eligible for a tax exemption, the director shall
schedule applications for properties with past and projected tax foregone
exceeding $50,000 for review by the city council. The city council may, by
resolution, approve any portion of the application over $50,000 if it finds
that the property is a historically or architecturally significant site in need
of more than $50,000 in tax relief to encourage its preservation. If the city
council denies all or part of the amount over $50,000, the applicant will still
be eligible for a tax exemption up to a maximum of $50,000 subject to
compliance with the requirements in this article.
   (f)   Completion of rehabilitation project.
      (1)   The applicant must obtain approval of any necessary certificates of
appropriateness or predesignation certificates of appropriateness.
      (2)   A rehabilitation project must be completed by the date specified by
the landmark commission when it made its determination of eligibility. If the
landmark commission fails to set a completion deadline, it will be deemed to be
three years from the date the landmark commission made its determination of
eligibility. The landmark commission may also set a deadline for the owner to
obtain a certificate of occupancy if it is necessary to further the purpose of
this article. The landmark commission may, after a public hearing, extend the
deadline for completion of the rehabilitation project and receipt of a
certificate of occupancy for additional periods up to three years each if there
has been reasonable progress towards completion and the extension will further
the purpose of this article. An application for an extension may be made after
the original completion deadline or the extended completion deadline.
   (g)   Letter of verification.
      (1)   Application. At any time after completion of the minimum
expenditure on rehabilitation but no later than the completion deadline, and in
order to receive a tax exemption, an owner must apply to the director for a
letter of verification and submit the following information:
         (A)   A signed statement, acknowledged before a notary public,
certifying that the minimum expenditure on the rehabilitation project has been
made in compliance with any certificates of appropriateness or predesignation
certificates of appropriateness along with receipts or other documentation such
as pay affidavits or schedules of value provided by a licensed architect or
engineer proving that the minimum expenditure on the rehabilitation project has
actually been made.
         (B)   An executed commitment to repay that complies with Paragraph
(3).
         (C)   A copy of the city council resolution if the previous and
projected tax foregone combined exceeds $50,000.
         (D)   For applications based upon residential conversion, the
applicant must provide records showing that the requisite percentage of floor
area has been changed to residential uses.
         (E)   Proof, such as a tax certificate, that property taxes and any
city fees, fines, or penalties are not delinquent on the property.
         (F)   Proof that there are no pending city code violations on the
property.
      (2)   Properties in reinvestment zones. If the historic property is in a
reinvestment zone (also known as a TIF) designated under Chapter 311 of the
Texas Tax Code, any additional requirements or limitations of state law or
bonds issued in connection with the TIF must be met before issuance of the
letter of verification.
      (3)   Commitment to repay.
         (A)   The owner must commit to repay any taxes foregone in the event
of unauthorized alteration or demolition of the historic property.
         (B)   The commitment to repay must be approved as to form by the city
attorney.
         (C)   The commitment to repay must run with the land and bind the
owner and his successors, heirs, and assigns.
         (D)   The commitment to repay must provide that any unpaid repayment
is a lien against the historic property.
         (E)   The commitment to repay must indemnify the city against all
claims arising out of the granting of a tax exemption.
         (F)   The commitment to repay must be filed in the deed records of the
appropriate county and with the appraisal district as the instrument governing
the terms of the tax exemption.
         (G)   The commitment to repay must contain:
            (i)   the address of the property;
            (ii)   whether the exemption is 100 percent of the value of, or the
added value of, the land and structure;
            (iii)   if there is more than one structure on a tax account or a
lot and only one structure is a contributing exempt structure, a description of
the structure sufficient to notify the appraisal district which structure is
exempt;
            (iv)   if the exemption is on the added value of the land and
structure, the dollar amount of the pre-rehabilitation value, with an
indication that if the appraised value is reduced during the term of the tax
exemption, the pre-rehabilitation value equals the value after reappraisal for
the remaining duration of the tax exemption;
            (v)   required completion date of rehabilitation;
            (vi)   date by which a certificate of occupancy must be granted, if
applicable;
            (vii)   a statement that property taxes and any city fees, fines,
or penalties are not delinquent on the property or on any other real property
owned in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by the owner, and must not
be delinquent for the term of the tax exemption in order to qualify for the
exemption on an annual basis. For the purpose of this statement, an interest in
real property does not include any interest in real property held indirectly
through a mutual or common investment fund such as a real estate investment
trust that holds real estate assets unless the person in question participates
in the management of the fund;
            (viii)   a statement that the appraisal district shall not provide
a tax exemption until the city provides the appraisal district an annual letter
of verification;
            (ix)   a statement that the appraisal district shall not provide a
tax exemption unless the owner applies annually to the appraisal district for
the exemption within the time set forth under the Texas Tax Code;
            (x)   if city council approval of the tax exemption is required, a
statement that the tax exemption is subject to the terms of the city council
resolution;
            (xi)   an authorization for the members of the landmark commission
and city officials to visit and inspect the property as necessary to certify
eligibility and verification for a tax exemption;
            (xii)   a statement that a failure to complete the rehabilitation
project or get a certificate of occupancy by any completion date stated in the
determination of eligibility, as extended if applicable, may result in
penalties pursuant to this article.
      (4)   Review by director. The director shall inspect the historic
property to verify compliance with the requirements of this division.
      (5)   Director’s decision.
         (A)   Issuance of letter of verification. If the director determines
that the applicant has met all applicable requirements and qualifies for a tax
exemption, the director shall send a letter of verification to the appraisal
district and the applicant on an annual basis for the duration of the tax
exemption, indicating the applicable tax exemption and the duration of the tax
exemption. The first letter of verification for a tax exemption on a property,
or for a new tax exemption on the same property, must include a copy of the
commitment to repay and, if applicable, the city council resolution.
         (B)   Notice of denial. If the director denies the letter of
verification, the director shall notify the applicant of this fact in writing,
stating the deficiencies that must be corrected or the specific reasons for
denial. Notice is given by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage
paid in the United States mail. The notice must be sent to the address shown on
the application. If the applicant remedies the deficiencies in time for the
appraisal district to provide that year’s tax exemption, the director shall
send a letter of verification to the appraisal district and the applicant,
otherwise, the tax exemption must be sent to the appraisal district for the
next year’s tax exemption.
      (6)   Appeal. The decision of the director to deny the letter of
verification may be appealed to the city plan commission. An appeal is made by
filing a written request with the director. The request must be filed within 30
days after the date of written notice is given to the applicant of the
director’s decision. In considering the appeal, the sole question shall be
whether the director erred in determining that the applicant does not qualify,
and, in this connection, the city plan commission shall consider the same
standards that were required to be considered by the director.
      (7)   Annual application to appraisal district. The director shall
provide letters of verification to the appraisal district on an annual basis
for the duration of the tax exemption, but in order to receive the tax
exemption, the owner must make an annual application to the appraisal district
in addition to the letter of verification provided by the director. (Ord. Nos.
21874; 22026; 22392; 23506; 24584; 24843; 25271; 25509; 27016)
SEC. 51A-11.202.   PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO COMPLETE A PROJECT OR FAILURE TO
OBTAIN A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   Criminal prosecution. After receipt of a letter of verification, an
owner who knowingly fails to complete rehabilitation or obtain a certificate of
occupancy as required by Section
51A-11.201(f)(2) is criminally responsible for a violation of this article
under the terms of Section
51A-1.103.
   (b)   Defenses to prosecution. It is a defense to prosecution that
circumstances beyond the control of the owner prevented the owner from
completing the rehabilitation or from obtaining the certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 27016)
SEC. 51A-11.203.   HISTORIC PROPERTY DESTRUCTION OR ALTERATION.
   (a)   If it is suspected that a historic property has been totally or
partially destroyed or significantly altered by the willful act or negligence
of the owner or his representative in violation of the preservation criteria in
the historic district ordinance, the city council, landmark commission, or city
manager shall immediately cause the matter to be scheduled for consideration by
the city council. The director shall give written notice of the hearing before
the city council to the owner at least 10 days before the hearing date. If,
after the hearing, the city council determines that the historic property has
been totally or partially destroyed or significantly altered by the willful act
or negligence of the owner or his representative in violation of the
preservation criteria in the historic district ordinance, the tax exemption
will terminate, the director shall notify the appraisal district that the
property does not qualify for a tax exemption, and the owner shall immediately
repay to the city all of the tax foregone.
   (b)   Where a historic property is totally or partially destroyed or
significantly altered in violation of the preservation criteria in the historic
district ordinance other than by the willful act or negligence of the owner or
his representative, the owner shall, within 30 days, request a certificate for
demolition when rehabilitation is not feasible, or request a certificate of
appropriateness to rehabilitate the historic property. The landmark commission
shall determine whether rehabilitation is feasible during its consideration of
the certificate for demolition or certificate of appropriateness. In cases in
which a historic property is demolished pursuant to a certificate for
demolition or rehabilitated in compliance with a certificate of
appropriateness, repayment of the tax foregone is not required. (Ord. Nos.
21874; 22026; 22392; 23506; 24584; 25509; 27016)
SEC. 51A-11.204.   TAX EXEMPTIONS IN THE URBAN HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (a)   General. The tax exemptions based on conversion under Subsection (b)
may not be granted more than one time for the same historic property.
Otherwise, the different tax exemptions under this section may be combined
sequentially or simultaneously. Additional tax exemptions based on
rehabilitation under Subsection (c) are permitted at any time (including during
the term of a previous tax exemption) if the owner provides additional
rehabilitation, limited to repair, reconstruction, or maintenance of the
exterior facade, meeting the minimum expenditure based on the pre-
rehabilitation value applicable to the subsequent application, and otherwise
meets all requirements of this article.
   (b)   Tax exemption based upon residential conversion or ground floor retail
conversion.
      (1)   Eligibility for tax exemption. To be eligible for this tax
exemption:
         (A)   the historic property must be in an urban historic district; and
         (B)   the portion of the historic property’s ground-level floor facing
the street may not be used for parking; and
         (C)   at least 45 percent of the historic property’s floor area must
be occupied after the conversion; and either
         (D)   more than 50 percent of the historic property’s floor area must
be converted from nonresidential use to residential use; or
         (E)   more than 65 percent of the historic property’s street frontage
must be converted for a ground-floor retail use, and the property must be in a
zoning district that permits the retail use. Tax exemptions are not available
for retail conversions that require a zoning change in order to permit the
retail use upon conversion unless the historic property was historically used
for retail purposes as determined by the landmark commission.
      (2)   Value and duration.
         (A)   One hundred percent of the historic property’s value will be
exempt from city property tax.
         (B)   The tax exemption will begin as soon as possible after
verification and have a duration of five years.
   (c)   Tax exemption based upon rehabilitation.
      (1)   Eligibility for tax exemption. To be eligible for this tax
exemption:
         (A)   the historic property must be in an urban historic district; and
         (B)   the cost of the rehabilitation that is completed must exceed 75
percent of the pre-rehabilitation value of the contributing structure
(excluding value of the land) or must exceed 50 percent of the pre-
rehabilitation value of the contributing structure (excluding value of the
land).
      (2)   Value and duration.
         (A)   One hundred percent of the historic property’s value will be
exempt from city property tax if the cost of rehabilitation completed exceeds
75 percent of the pre-rehabilitation value of the contributing structure
(excluding value of the land).
         (B)   The added value of the historic property over the pre-
rehabilitation value will be exempt from city property tax if the cost of
rehabilitation completed exceeds 50 percent of the pre-rehabilitation value of
the contributing structure (excluding value of the land).
         (C)   The tax exemption will begin as soon as possible after
verification and have a duration of 10 years. (Ord. Nos. 21874; 22026; 22392;
23506; 24584; 25509; 27016)
SEC. 51A-11.205.   TAX EXEMPTIONS IN ENDANGERED AND REVITALIZING HISTORIC
DISTRICTS.
   (a)   General. Additional tax exemptions based on rehabilitation under
Subsection (b) are permitted at any time (including during the term of a
previous tax exemption) if the owner provides additional maintenance or
rehabilitation, limited to repair, reconstruction, or maintenance of the
exterior facade, meeting the minimum expenditure based on the pre-
rehabilitation value applicable to the subsequent application, and otherwise
meets all requirements of this article.
   (b)   Tax exemption based upon rehabilitation.
      (1)   Eligibility for tax exemption. To be eligible for this tax
exemption:
         (A)   the historic property must be in an endangered or revitalizing
historic district; and
         (B)   the cost of rehabilitation that is completed must exceed 25
percent of the pre-rehabilitation value of the contributing structure
(excluding value of the land).
      (2)   Value and duration.
         (A)   One hundred percent of the historic property's value will be
exempt from city property tax if the cost of rehabilitation completed exceeds
25 percent of the pre-rehabilitation value of the contributing structure
(excluding value of the land).
         (B)   The tax exemption will begin as soon as possible after
verification and have a duration of 10 years. (Ord. Nos. 21874; 22026; 22392;
23506; 24584; 25509; 27016; 29953)
SEC. 51A-11.206.   TAX EXEMPTIONS IN HISTORIC DISTRICTS OTHER THAN URBAN
HISTORIC DISTRICTS, ENDANGERED HISTORIC DISTRICTS, AND REVITALIZING HISTORIC
DISTRICTS.
   (a)   General. The different tax exemptions under this section may be
combined sequentially or simultaneously. Additional tax exemptions based on
rehabilitation under Subsection (b) or rehabilitation of an endangered historic
property under Subsection (c) are permitted at any time (including during the
term of a previous tax exemption) if the owner provides additional
rehabilitation, limited to repair, reconstruction, or maintenance of the
exterior facade, meeting the minimum expenditure based on the pre-
rehabilitation value applicable to the subsequent application, and otherwise
meets all requirements of this article.
   (b)   Tax exemption based upon rehabilitation.
      (1)   Eligibility for tax exemption. To be eligible for this tax
exemption:
         (A)   the historic property must not be in an urban historic district,
endangered historic district, or a revitalizing historic district; and
         (B)   the cost of rehabilitation that is completed must exceed 50
percent of the pre-rehabilitation value of the contributing structure
(excluding value of land).
      (2)   Value and duration.
         (A)   The added value of the historic property over the pre-
rehabilitation value will be exempt from city property tax.
         (B)   The tax exemption will begin as soon as possible after
verification and have a duration of 10 years.
   (c)   Tax exemption based upon rehabilitation of an endangered historic
property.
      (1)   Eligibility for tax exemption. To be eligible for this tax
exemption:
         (A)   the historic property must not be in an urban historic district,
an endangered historic district, or a revitalizing historic district;
         (B)   the cost of rehabilitation that is completed must exceed 25
percent of the pre-rehabilitation value of the contributing structure
(excluding value of the land); and
         (C)   the landmark commission must find that the historic property is
in danger of being irreplaceably lost due to severe deterioration, severe
damage, or impending demolition.
      (2)   Value and duration.
         (A)   One hundred percent of the historic property’s value will be
exempt from city property tax.
         (B)   The tax exemption will begin as soon as possible after
verification and have a duration of 10 years. (Ord. Nos. 27016; 29953)
SEC. 51A-11.207.   TAX EXEMPTION FOR HISTORIC PROPERTIES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC AND
OWNED BY NON- PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   General. The purpose of this tax exemption is to enable non-profit
organizations to maintain historic structures that are open to the public. An
application for a determination of eligibility and an application for a letter
of verification are required. City council review under Subsection
51A-11.201(e) and rehabilitation of the property are not required.
   (b)   Tax exemption based upon non-profit status.
      (1)   Eligibility for tax exemption. To be eligible for this tax
exemption:
         (A)   the property must be a contributing structure within a historic
district;
         (B)   the property must be designated as a recorded Texas historic
landmark or a state archeological landmark;
         (C)   the property must be operated by a non-profit organization that
qualifies for tax exemption under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code;
         (D)   the property must be open and available to the general public
for tours or use at least 20 hours per month; and
         (E)   any income generated by public use of the historic property is
reinvested into maintenance of the historic property or into philanthropic
efforts in Dallas.
      (2)   Value and duration.
         (A)   One hundred percent of the historic property’s value is exempt
from city property tax.
         (B)   The tax exemption will begin as soon as possible after
verification and continue for as long as the property meets the requirements of
this section.
         (C)   The tax exemption will cease if the property is no longer
operated by a non-profit organization that qualifies for tax exemption under
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or if the property is no longer
open to the public. (Ord. 27016)
SEC. 51A-11.208.   CITYWIDE TAX EXEMPTION.
   (a)   General. The tax exemption under this section may be combined
sequentially or simultaneously with other tax exemptions in this article. Tax
exemptions based on maintenance are permitted at any time (including during the
term of a previous tax exemption) if the owner provides additional maintenance
limited to repair, reconstruction, or maintenance of the exterior facade,
meeting the minimum expenditure based on the pre-rehabilitation value
applicable to the subsequent application, and otherwise meets all requirements
of this article.
   (b)   Tax exemption based upon maintenance of a contributing structure.
      (1)   Eligibility for tax exemption. To be eligible for this tax
exemption:
         (A)   the historic property must be in a historic district; and
         (B)   the maintenance expenditures for the contributing structure must
equal or exceed three percent of the pre-rehabilitation value of the
contributing structure (excluding value of the land).
      (2)   Eligible expenditures. Maintenance expenditures may include the
following items if done in compliance with all city regulations, building
codes, and ordinances:
         (A)   Foundation repair, upgrade, or replacement.
         (B)   Exterior wall repair, weather proofing, and insulation.
         (C)   Exterior painting.
         (D)   Window repair, weather proofing, and insulation.
         (E)   Roof repair or replacement, including roofing materials, and
structural, venting, and drainage systems.
         (F)   Electrical repair or replacement.
         (G)   Heating, venting, and air conditioning repair, installation, or
replacement.
         (H)   Plumbing repair or replacement.
         (I)   Fireplace repair or replacement.
         (J)   Porch repair.
      (3)   Proof of expenditure. Proof of maintenance expenditures must be
provided within 12 months after the landmark commission's determination of
eligibility.
      (4)   Value and duration.
         (A)   The added value of the historic property over the pre-
rehabilitation value will be exempt from city property tax.
         (B)   This tax exemption will begin as soon as possible after
verification and have a duration of three years. (Ord. 29953)
Division 51A-11.300. Other Incentives for Historic Preservation in Urban
Historic Districts.
SEC. 51A-11.301.   HISTORIC CONSERVATION EASEMENT PROGRAM.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the historic conservation easement program is
to encourage the preservation of historic property by making the owner eligible
for a federal income tax deduction and a reduction in city property taxes.
   (b)   Applications. An application for the offer to grant the city a
historic conservation easement must be filed with the director. The director
shall make recommendations regarding the merits and ramifications of each
application to the landmark commission, and the landmark commission shall make
a recommendation to the city council. The city council may in its sole
discretion accept or reject the offer of any historic conservation easement.
   (c)   Eligibility. Historic conservation easements may not be accepted by
the city unless:
      (1)   The historic conservation easement is on all or a part of a
historic property in an urban historic district, and
      (2)   The portion subject to the historic conservation easement is a
contributing element of the historic property’s historic character.
   (d)   Commitment to repay. After acceptance of the historic conservation
easement by the city, the owner must execute a commitment to repay and file it
in the deed records of the appropriate county. The commitment to repay must be
approved as to form by the city attorney. The commitment to repay must run with
the land and bind the owner and his successors, heirs, and assigns. The
commitment to repay must provide that any unpaid repayment is a lien against
the historic property. The commitment to repay must indemnify the city against
all claims arising out of the acceptance by the city of a historic conservation
easement.
   (e)   Reappraisal. Historic conservation easements that are accepted will be
forwarded by the director to the appraisal district for reappraisal of the
historic property. If the historic property is reappraised, the reappraisal
will not affect the ability of the owner to apply for the other incentives
contained in this article.
   (f)   Maintenance. Maintenance of the portion of the historic property
covered by the historic conservation easement in compliance with all city
ordinances and regulations remains the responsibility of the owner. If the
portion of the historic property covered by the historic conservation easement
is damaged, the owner must immediately rehabilitate the portion of the historic
property covered by the historic conservation easement in conformance with the
preservation criteria of the historic district.
   (g)   Historic property destruction or alteration.
      (1)   If it is suspected that the portion of the historic property
covered by the historic conservation easement has been totally or partially
destroyed or significantly altered by the willful act or negligence of the
owner or his representative in violation of the preservation criteria in the
historic district ordinance, the city council, landmark commission, or city
manager shall immediately cause the matter to be scheduled for consideration by
the city council. The director shall give written notice of the hearing before
the city council to the owner at least 10 days before the hearing date. If,
after the hearing, the city council determines that the portion of the historic
property covered by the historic conservation easement has been totally or
partially destroyed or significantly altered by the willful act or negligence
of the owner or his representative in violation of the preservation criteria in
the historic district ordinance, the director shall notify the appraisal
district and the owner shall immediately repay to the city all of the tax
foregone.
      (2)   Where the portion of the historic property covered by the historic
conservation easement is totally or partially destroyed or significantly
altered other than by the willful act or negligence of the owner or his
representative, the owner shall, within 30 days, request a certificate for
demolition when rehabilitation is not feasible, or request a certificate of
appropriateness to rehabilitate the portion of the historic property covered by
the historic conservation easement. The landmark commission shall determine
whether rehabilitation is feasible during its consideration of the certificate
for demolition or certificate of appropriateness. In cases in which the portion
of the historic property covered by the historic conservation easement is
demolished pursuant to a certificate for demolition or rehabilitated in
compliance with a certificate of appropriateness, repayment of the tax revenues
that were not paid because of the historic conservation easement is not
required. (Ord. Nos. 23506; 24584; 25509; 27016)
SEC. 51A-11.302.   TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS.
   (a)   In general. Development rights of a historic property may be
transferred in accordance with this section. For purposes of this section,
“development rights” means the difference between the actual floor area on a
building site and the maximum permissible floor area as determined by the floor
area ratio of the building site. The maximum floor area permitted in the West
End Historic District is eight times the lot area. The minimum amount of
development rights which may be transferred under this section is 20,000 square
feet.
   (b)   Eligibility. Development rights for a historic property may not be
transferred unless:
      (1)   the historic property is within an urban historic district;
      (2)   the historic property is a contributing structure listed in the
National Register of Historic Places, if it is located in the West End Historic
District; and
      (3)   the historic property has been rehabilitated within the past five
years, and the total value of the rehabilitation exceeds 50 percent of the pre-
rehabilitation value. Only rehabilitation may be counted in determining whether
the proposed work exceeds 50 percent of the pre-rehabilitation value.
   (c)   Location. Development rights may only be transferred to building sites
in the CA-1(A) and CA- 2(A) districts.
   (d)   Maximum floor area. The maximum floor area ratio may be increased by
no more than 4.0 through the transfer of development rights.
   (e)   Transfer process.
      (1)   An owner who wishes to transfer development rights must submit to
the director the following information in a form approved by the director and
suitable for filing in the deed records of the appropriate county:
         (A)   Names and addresses of the owners of the development rights.
         (B)   Street address, lot and block number, and legal description of
the historic property.
         (C)   Street address, lot and block number, and legal description of
the property to which the development rights are to be transferred.
         (D)   The floor area of the historic property and the lot area of the
historic property.
         (E)   The amount of development rights to be transferred.
      (2)   The director shall check the information supplied on the form and
sign the form if the applicant has complied with the requirements of this
section.
      (3)   When the director has signed the form, the applicant shall file the
form in the deed records of the appropriate county, and shall supply the
director and the building official with a copy of the filed document.
      (4)   When a person applies for a building permit to use the transferred
development rights, the building official shall forward the building permit
application and the form transferring the development rights to the director.
The director shall review the application and verify that the development
rights have been properly transferred and may be used.
      (5)   The recipient of the transferred development rights may further
transfer all of the development rights received by following the same process
described in this section. (Ord. Nos. 23506; 24584; 25509; 27016)
Division 51A-11.400. Sunset Provision and Coordination with Pending Tax
Exemptions.
SEC. 51A-11.401.   SUNSET PROVISION.
   No certificates of eligibility may be granted, and no applications for
extension of the deadline for rehabilitation or deadline for a certificate of
occupancy may be considered, by the landmark commission under this article
after December 31, 2025. (Ord. Nos. 23506; 24584; 25509; 27016; 29953; 31694)
SEC. 51A-11.402.   COORDINATION WITH PENDING TAX EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   After issuance of the first letter of verification for that tax
exemption (the initial verification), the tax exemption application process is
completed, and the tax exemption is subject to the code provisions in place at
the time of the initial verification.
   (b)   An application that has been determined to be eligible, but that has
not yet received initial verification, is subject to the procedures for
completion and verification in place at the time of the application for initial
verification. If no completion date was specified in the determination of
eligibility, the completion date is deemed to be three years from the date the
landmark commission made its determination of eligibility.
   (c)   An applicant who has received a determination of eligibility for a tax
exemption under previous provisions of this article may submit a revised
application for consideration of eligibility under the current provisions of
this article at any time prior to initial verification. The application may be
made without resubmitting documentation except as necessary to meet current
requirements. If the revised application is denied, the previously approved
application remains in effect. If the revised application is approved, it
replaces the previously approved application. (Ord. 27016)
ARTICLE XII.
GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION.
Division 51A-12.100. In General.
SEC. 51A-12.101.   PURPOSE.
   These regulations are intended to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare; minimize the impact of gas drilling and production on surrounding
property owners and mineral-rights owners; protect the environment; and
encourage the safe and orderly production of mineral resources. (Ord. Nos.
26920; 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.102.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In this article, technical terms that are not defined have the meaning
customarily attributed to them in the gas drilling and production industry by
prudent and reasonable operators.
   (b)   In this article:
      (1)   ABANDONMENT means the discontinuation of a well or an operation
site as approved by the Texas Railroad Commission and in compliance with this
article.
      (2)   AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL means the all-encompassing noise level
associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all
sources at the location, constituting the normal or existing level of
environmental noise at a given location.
      (3)   BASE FLOOD means the flood having a one percent chance of being
equalled or exceeded in any given year. See
Article V.
      (4)   BLOWOUT PREVENTER means a mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, or
other device or combination of devices secured to the top of a well casing,
including valves, fittings, and control mechanisms, that can be used to
completely close the top of the casing and prevent the uncontrolled flow of gas
or other fluids from the well.
      (5)   COMPLETION means the date that drilling or reworking of the well
has ended and gas is flowing to a sales or distribution point.
      (6)   CLOSED-LOOP SYSTEM means a system that uses sealed tanks, instead
of reserve pits, to collect the drilling waste.
      (7)   DAYTIME HOURS means 7:00 am to 7:00 pm, Monday through Friday, and
8:00 am to 6:00 pm, Saturdays. Sundays and city holidays are not considered
daytime hours.
      (8)   DRILLING means digging or boring a new well to explore for or
produce gas.
      (9)   EQUIPMENT means any apparatus, machinery, or parts thereof used,
erected, or maintained in connection with gas drilling or production.
      (10)   FRACTURING means the injecting of water into a well to cause
pressure that will open up fractures already present in the formation.
      (11)   FLOWBACK means the process of flowing a fractured or completed
well to recover water and residual sand from the gas stream before sending gas
down a sales line.
      (12)   GAS means (1) any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible,
that is produced in a natural state from the earth and that maintains a gaseous
or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions or (2) any
gaseous vapors derived from petroleum or natural gas.
      (13)   GAS INSPECTOR means the person designated by the city to enforce
the provisions of this article, or the gas inspector’s representative.
      (14)   LANDFARMING means the depositing, spreading, or mixing of drill
cuttings, drilling fluids, drilling mud, salt water, produced water, or other
waste generated by the gas drilling and production process onto the ground.
      (15)   OPERATION SITE means the area identified in the SUP to be used for
drilling, production, and all associated operational activities after gas
drilling is complete.
      (16)   OPERATOR means the person listed on the Texas Railroad Commission
drilling permit application (currently called Form W-1 or Form P-4).
      (17)   PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION means the initiation of any excavation or
other disturbance of property to install, construct, maintain, repair, replace,
modify, or remove a pipeline.
      (18)   PIPELINE EMERGENCY means an incident relating to or directly
attributable to the operation of a regulated pipeline in which any of the
following has or is occurring:
         (A)   Fire or explosion not intentionally initiated by the pipeline
operator as part of its normal and customary operations and in accordance with
accepted safety practices.
         (B)   Release of a gas, hazardous liquid, or chemical that could
adversely impact the environment or health of individuals, livestock, domestic
animals, or wildlife in the city.
         (C)   Death of any person or individual.
         (D)   Bodily harm to any person that results in loss of consciousness,
the need to assist a person from the scene of the incident, or the necessity of
medical treatment in excess of first aid.
         (E)   Damage to private or public property not owned by the pipeline
operator in excess of $5,000 in combined values, as determined by the gas
inspector.
         (F)   The rerouting of traffic or the evacuation of buildings.
      (19)   PIPELINE OPERATOR means any person owning, operating, or
responsible for operating a pipeline.
      (20)   PRODUCTION means the period between completion and abandonment of
a well.
      (21)   REGULATED PIPELINE means all parts of those physical facilities
for the transportation of gas, oil, or hydrocarbons, including pipes, valves,
and other appurtenances attached to pipe, whether laid in public or private
easements, public rights-of-way, or private streets within the city, including
gathering lines, production lines, and transmission lines. Pipelines associated
with franchised utilities are not regulated pipelines.
      (22)   REWORKING means the re-entry of an existing well after completion
to access the existing bore hold, conduct deepening or sidetrack operations, or
replace well liners or casings. Reworking is also known in the gas drilling and
production industry as a work-over.
      (23)   TANK means a container used for holding or storing fluids from gas
drilling and production.
      (24)   WELL means a hole or bore to any horizon, formation, or strata for
the intended or actual production of gas. (Ord. Nos. 26920; 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.103.   ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Gas inspector.
      (1)    The gas inspector is responsible for enforcing this article, other
city codes applicable to gas drilling and production, and any SUP for gas
drilling and production.
      (2)    The gas inspector shall:
         (A)    review and approve or deny all seismic survey, gas well, and
regulated pipeline permit applications;
         (B)    conduct inspections of all wells and operation sites at least
yearly for compliance with this article, the gas well permit, and the SUP for
gas drilling and production;
         (C)    request, receive, review, and inspect any records, including
records the operator sends to the Texas Railroad Commission, logs, and reports
relating to the status or condition of any permitted well;
         (D)   issue orders or citations to obtain compliance with this
article, a seismic survey, gas well, or regulated pipeline permit, and the SUP
for gas drilling and production; and
         (E)   revoke or suspend seismic survey, gas well, or regulated
pipeline permits for violations of this article, the seismic survey, gas well,
or regulated pipeline permit, or SUP for gas drilling and production.
      (3)   The gas inspector, at each inspection, shall call the emergency
contact numbers listed on the operator’s informational signs to verify that the
phone numbers are current and the emergency contact persons can be reached.
      (4)   The gas inspector shall contact the appropriate city department to
inspect the operation site if the gas inspector believes the operator is
violating a city code provision not addressed in this article. The gas
inspector shall determine whether the other city department completed the
inspection and shall document what actions, if any, were taken against the
operator.
      (5)   The gas inspector shall contact the appropriate state agency to
inspect the operation site if the gas inspector believes the operator is
violating state law. The gas inspector shall determine whether the state agency
completed the inspection and shall document what actions, if any, were taken
against the operator.
   (b)   Technical or legal advisors. The city may hire technical or legal
advisors to advise the city on gas drilling and production matters. If the city
hires advisors to address an operator’s unique circumstances, the city shall
notify the operator of the estimated cost of services. The city shall invoice
the operator, who shall pay the city within 30 days of receipt of an invoice
from the city. (Ord. Nos. 26920; 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.104.   SUP REQUIREMENT AND USE REGULATIONS.  
   See Sections 51-4.213(19) or
51A-4.203(b)(3.2). (Ord. Nos. 26920; 29228)
Division II. Gas Drilling.
SEC. 51A-12.201.   SEISMIC SURVEY PERMIT.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   No person shall participate in site preparation or any other
seismic survey activities without first obtaining a seismic survey permit
issued by the city in accordance with this division.
      (2)   Seismic surveys may only be conducted with low-impact vibrator
systems designed for urban operations. Explosive charges, including dynamite,
may not be used in preparing for or conducting a seismic survey.
      (3)   Seismic surveying is limited to the hours of 8:00 am to 5:00 pm,
Monday through Friday, excluding city holidays.
      (4)   Seismic survey activities must be conducted in accordance with all
applicable federal and state laws and regulations, and with all ordinances,
rules, and regulations of the city.
      (5)   Seismic survey activities within public rights-of-way must be
conducted in accordance with a traffic control plan approved by the director of
the department of transportation and public works.
   (b)   Seismic survey permit. A seismic survey permit application must be in
writing, signed by the operator or applicant, and submitted to the gas
inspector. The operator or applicant shall provide the following information on
a form furnished by the city:
      (1)   the date the operator or applicant submitted the application;
      (2)   the operator or applicant’s name, address, telephone number, and
email address;
      (3)   the location of the seismic survey;
      (4)   the date and time the seismic survey will be conducted;
      (5)   a detailed explanation of the seismic survey methods to be used;
      (6)   a detailed map of the area being surveyed and the location of all
vibration and geophone points;
      (7)   the date and time the seismic survey will be completed; and
      (8)   for city property and public rights-of-ways:
         (A)   an executed access agreement for the use of the specific public
rights-of-way or city property; and
         (B)   a current certificate of insurance for the coverage specified in
the access agreement.
   (c)   Review of permit applications.
      (1)   The gas inspector shall return incomplete applications to the
operator or applicant with a written explanation of the deficiencies.
      (2)   The gas inspector shall determine whether the seismic survey permit
should be issued, issued with conditions, or denied within 45 days after
receiving a complete seismic survey permit application. If the gas inspector
fails to make this determination within this specified time, the seismic survey
permit is deemed denied.
      (3)   The gas inspector shall issue a seismic survey permit if the
application meets the requirements of this division. If the application does
not meet the requirements of this division, the gas inspector shall either deny
the application or issue the seismic survey permit subject to written
conditions if compliance with the conditions eliminates the reasons for denial.
If the gas inspector denies a seismic survey permit, the gas inspector shall
provide the applicant with a written explanation of the reasons for denial
within 30 days.
   (d)   Appeal.
      (1)   If the gas inspector denies a seismic survey permit, the gas
inspector shall send the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, written notice of the decision and the right to appeal.
      (2)   The applicant has the right to appeal to the permit and license
appeal board in accordance with
Article IX of
Chapter 2 of the Dallas City Code.
   (e)   Notice. At least 72 hours before commencing geophysical operations
(laying out of geophones), the operator or applicant shall provide written
notice via United States mail, or other methods of delivery to each tenant,
property owner, and resident within the area to be seismically surveyed. The
written notice must include:
      (1)   general information about the seismic operations to be conducted;
      (2)   an overview of the seismographic survey process; and
      (3)   a hotline number to call with questions or complaints related to
the seismic survey activities. The hotline number must be adequately staffed
with trained personnel during normal working hours. (Ord. Nos. 29228; 32864)
SEC. 51A-12.202.   GAS WELL PERMIT.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)    No person shall participate in site preparation, drilling,
reworking, fracturing, operation, production, or any other related activity
without first obtaining a gas well permit issued by the city in accordance with
this article. Each well on an operation site must obtain a separate gas well
permit.
      (2)   A gas well permit is required, in addition to any permit, license,
or agreement required under this article, other city ordinances, or state or
federal law.
      (3)   A gas well permit application may not be approved until an SUP is
approved. Denial of an SUP is grounds for automatic denial of all related gas
well permit applications.
      (4)   A gas well permit automatically terminates if the operator does not
begin drilling within 180 days after the gas inspector issues the gas well
permit. The gas inspector may extend the time for an additional 180 day period
upon request by the operator and proof that the conditions on the operation
site have not substantially changed. Only one extension is permitted.
      (5)   An existing gas well permit does not authorize reworking of an
abandoned well. A new gas well permit is required to rework an abandoned well.
      (6)   A gas well permit automatically terminates after the well
authorized by the gas well permit is abandoned pursuant to this article.
      (7)   The operator shall complete all drilling activities on the
operation site within five years from the date the first gas well permit was
issued.
         (A)   The operator may apply for a one-time, two-year extension from
the gas inspector. The request for an extension must be made to the gas
inspector in writing at least six months before the fifth year from the date
the first gas well permit was issued.
         (B)   The gas inspector must approve or deny the extension within 45
days after receiving the extension request. The gas inspector must approve the
extension if the drilling activities will not adversely impact the neighboring
properties or if additional measures required eliminate the reasons for denial.
         (C)   If the gas inspector denies the request for a one-time, two-year
extension, he must provide the operator with a written explanation of the
reasons for denial within 30 days.
         (D)   As a condition of approval of the extension, the gas inspector
may require additional measures, as necessary, to minimize the impact of the
additional drilling activities upon neighboring properties.
         (E)   The operator has the right to appeal to the permit and license
appeal board in accordance with
Article IX of
Chapter 2 of the Dallas City Code.
   (b)   Permit applications. A gas well permit application must be in writing,
signed by the operator and filed with the gas inspector. The operator shall
provide the following information on a form furnished by the city:
      (1)   the date the operator submitted the application;
      (2)   the proposed number of wells on the operation site;
      (3)   the field name as used by the Texas Railroad Commission;
      (4)   the proposed well name;
      (5)   the operator’s name and address;
      (6)    all surface owners’ names and addresses;
      (7)   all mineral rights owners’ names and addresses;
      (8)   the name of a representative with supervisory authority over all
gas drilling and production operations and a phone number where they can be
reached 24 hours a day;
      (9)   the name, address, and phone number of a person who is a resident
of the State of Texas and is designated to receive notices from the city;
      (10)   the names of two designated emergency contact persons, their
addresses, and phone numbers where they may be reached 24 hours a day;
      (11)   the names and addresses of tenants, property owners, and residents
within 1,500 feet of the boundary of the operation site in accordance with the
plans required as part of the gas well permit application;
      (12)   the address and legal description of the operation site;
      (13)    the location and a description of all structures and improvements
within 1,500 feet of the boundary of operation site;
      (14)   a description of all fuel sources and public utilities required
during drilling and production operations;
      (15)   a site plan of the operation site that matches the site plan
attached to the SUP, was prepared by a licensed surveyor or registered
engineer, is drawn to scale, complies with the site requirements in this
article, and provides the following information:
         (A)   the date, scale, north point, name of owner, and name of person
preparing the site plan;
         (B)   the location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the
operation site;
         (C)   the location of all improvements and equipment, including
proposed wells, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators, and storage sheds;
         (D)   the zoning of the operation site;
         (E)   the location of flood plains, and the existing and base flood
elevations at the location of any proposed improvement including the well head;
         (F)    the existing watercourses and drainage features;
         (G)   off-street parking and loading areas and the surface material
used;
         (H)   ingress and egress points;
         (I)    existing and proposed streets and alleys;
         (J)    location, height, and materials of existing and proposed
fences;
         (K)   existing and proposed landscaping;
         (L)   location and description of signs, lighting, and outdoor
speakers;
         (M)   location and description of all easements, along with the volume
and page number where the easement is recorded;
         (N)   a map of the surrounding area, showing the zoning on all
property within 1,500 feet of the boundary of the operation site, and the
distance from wells, structures, or equipment to any use, structures, or
features that have spacing requirements under Sections 51-4.213(19) or
51A-4.203(b)(3.2);
         (O)   a tree survey that complies with
Article X;
         (P)   a copy of the SUP ordinance;
         (Q)   a copy of the Texas Railroad Commission drilling permit and its
attached documents, as well as any other permits, disclosures, or reports
required by the Texas Railroad Commission;
         (R)   a copy of the storm water pollution prevention plan and the
notice of intent required by the Environmental Protection Agency;
         (S)   a copy the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality’s
determination of the depth of useable-quality ground water;
      (16)   documentation of the insurance and security instruments required
by this article;
      (17)   an indemnification agreement, approved as to form by the city
attorney, stating that the operator agrees to defend the city and its officers
and employees against all claims of injury or damage to persons or property
arising out of the drilling and production operation;
      (18)   a notarized statement signed by the operator that the information
submitted with the application is true and correct, to the best of the
operator’s knowledge and belief;
      (19)   an air quality management and monitoring plan that includes:
         (A)   measures and equipment the operator will use to ensure that all
site activities and equipment on the operation site comply with applicable
emissions limits, applicable laws relating to emissions, and best management
practices of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality regarding air quality;
         (B)   monitoring techniques the operator will use to measure for and
ensure compliance with applicable emissions limits and all applicable laws
relating to emissions; and
         (C)   a categorization of Environmental Protection Agency Tier (Tier 0
to 4) of all diesel equipment that will be used on the operation site during
each phase of the drilling and production use;
      (20)   a communications plan developed to keep tenants, property owners,
and residents of protected uses within 2,000 feet of the boundary of the
operation site informed that:
         (A)   documents how the operator will notify, solicit feedback, and
respond to concerns about the gas drilling and production use;
         (B)   identifies how the operator will employ early and continuous
engagement, including posted notice in public locations;
         (C)   establishes how the operator will develop and use advance or
near-real-time notice of all significant activities occurring during the well’s
life, including drilling, fracturing, flowback, redrilling and refracturing,
completion, abandonment, as well as non-routine occurrences including flaring,
spills, or emissions events;
      (21)   a dust mitigation plan detailing measures the operator will
implement to mitigate and suppress dust generated at the operation site,
including a mud shaker for vehicles exiting the site;
      (22)   an electricity usage plan showing:
         (A)   the equipment powered by electricity;
         (B)   the amount of electricity needed;
         (C)   the sources of the electric power;
         (D)   whether electricity is generated on site or purchased from a
retail electric provider; and
         (E)   the approximate location of lines, poles, generators, generator
fuel tanks, transformers, fuse boxes, and other apparatus necessary to use
electric power;
      (23)   an emergency action response plan approved by the fire marshal
that:
         (A)   establishes written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting
from drilling, completion, production, or abandonment of wells, including
prompt and effective response to emergencies from:
            (i)   leaks or releases that may impact public health, safety, or
welfare;
            (ii)   fire, explosions, loss of well control, or blowout at or
near the well; and
            (iii)   natural disasters;
         (B)   complies with the existing guidelines established by the Texas
Railroad Commission, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, the
Department of Transportation, and the Environmental Protection Agency;
         (C)   includes maps showing the public rights-of-way to the operation
site, and turn-arounds and staging areas for emergency equipment;
         (D)   includes an effective means of notifying and communicating with
local fire, police, and public officials during an emergency, including a
detailed plan of how the operator will notify and communicate with city
officials responsible for notification and evacuation of residents within one-
half mile of the operation site, measured from the boundary of the operation
site;
         (E)   includes the availability of personnel, equipment, tools, and
materials at the operation site as necessary in case of an emergency;
         (F)   outlines measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to
injury and the probability of accidental death or dismemberment;
         (G)   documents emergency shut-down procedures for a gas well and the
operation site, if necessary;
         (H)   establishes a plan for the safe restoration of service and
operations following an emergency or incident; and
         (I)   establishes a follow-up procedure for incident investigation to
determine the cause of the incident and the implementation of corrective
measures;
      (24)   an erosion control plan that complies with all city regulations;
      (25)   a fresh-water fracture pond design plan that includes an
engineering design and a landscape and fencing design that includes:
         (A)   a detailed grading plan prepared by a civil engineer licensed by
the state of Texas;
         (B)   measures that will be taken, such as shallow safety ledges, to
prevent drowning;
         (C)   the fresh-water fracture pond size and how it is designed to
minimize its footprint based on water supply;
         (D)   an open-design black or dark green chain link fence, a minimum
of six feet in height, that encloses the fresh-water fracture pond; and
         (E)   restorative vegetation that complies with
Article X;
      (26)   a hazardous materials management plan that:
         (A)   complies with the Dallas Fire Code;
         (B)   includes the formula identifying the non-radioactive tracing or
tagging additives that the operator will use in all fracturing fluids on the
operation site; and
         (C)   has been filed with the fire department;
      (27)   a hazardous materials inventory statement that:
         (A)   complies with the Dallas Fire Code;
         (B)   includes material safety data sheets or an equivalent detailing
all hazardous materials that are or will be located, stored, transported, or
temporarily used on the operation site, including site preparation, boring,
fracturing, completing, reworking, redrilling, refracturing, and production.
The material safety data sheets must indicate all types, quantities, volumes,
and concentrations of all hazardous chemicals and additives used in these
processes; and
         (C)   has been filed with the fire department;
      (28)   a landscape irrigation plan designed by a State of Texas licensed
irrigator that includes:
         (A)   the appropriate type of irrigation for the operation site; and
         (B)   measures to be taken to adequately irrigate all landscaping,
indicating the water source for irrigation;
      (29)   a noise management plan detailing how the equipment used in the
drilling, completion, transportation, or production of a well complies with the
maximum permissible noise levels in Section
51A-6.102 and this article, and that:
         (A)   identifies the noise impacts of gas drilling and production;
         (B)   provides documentation establishing the ambient noise level in
accordance with this article; and
         (C)   details how the gas drilling and production noise impacts will
be mitigated, considering the operation site characteristics, including:
            (i)   nature and proximity of adjacent development, location, and
type;
            (ii)   seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind
directions;
            (iii)   vegetative cover on and adjacent to the operation site; and
            (iv)   topography on and adjacent to the operation site;
      (30)   a pipeline map indicating the location of the nearest gathering
station, the alignment of the pipelines connecting the operation site to the
gathering station, and a description of how the operator intends to get the gas
to market;
      (31)   a screening and landscape plan that complies with all city
screening and landscape requirements and includes:
         (A)   a schedule detailing the timing of all landscaping and screening
installation or, if a SUP has already been approved with a screening and
landscape plan, a copy of the approved screening and landscape plan;
         (B)   the proposed efforts to replace dead or dying screening
vegetation; and
         (C)   a fully-executed third-party landscape maintenance agreement
detailing the frequency and scope of the services to be provided;
      (32)   a security plan that includes details about how the security alarm
system requirements in this article will be complied with and provides the
location of all security cameras provided on the operation site;
      (33)   a signage plan that complies with the Texas Railroad Commission
regulations, this article, and all other city ordinances, rules, and
regulations for the operation site and pipelines;
      (34)   a spill prevention plan that complies with state and federal
regulations, this article, and all other city ordinances, rules, and
regulations and includes a plan for effective containment of all materials on
site, including containment and mitigation strategies for any failures of
temporary or permanent pipes, tanks, secondary containment systems, and water
recycling systems;
      (35)   a surface reclamation plan that includes how the operator, using
industry best practices, will:
         (A)   restore the operation site to allow its use under the city’s
comprehensive plan;
         (B)   control surface water drainage, water accumulation, and measures
that will be taken during the reclamation process to protect the quantity and
quality of surface and groundwater systems;
         (C)   clean up any polluted surface or ground water;
         (D)   backfill, grade, and re-vegetate the operation site;
         (E)   reconstruct, replace, and stabilize the soil;
         (F)   reshape the topography; and
         (G)   employ other methods or practices necessary to ensure that all
disturbed areas will be reclaimed;
      (36)   a site lighting plan that complies with city code, is designed to
promote the safety of all gas drilling and production operations, and includes
a photometric plan, indicating the type and color of lights to be used and
demonstrates how it complies with all Federal Aviation Administration
requirements;
      (37)   a transportation plan that includes a:
         (A)   traffic impact analysis, including the proposed truck routes,
types and weights of trucks and vehicles accessing the operation site; hours of
the day that truck and vehicle traffic will be entering and leaving the
operation site; days of the week that truck and vehicle traffic will be
entering and leaving the operation site; turning movements associated with
truck and vehicle traffic; proposed access points; and proposed traffic control
devices;
         (B)   map consistent with any SUP requirements showing the truck
routes approved by the gas inspector and identifying all public rights-of-way,
private streets, and routes intended for use within the city;
         (C)   videotape of the approved truck routes, showing in adequate
detail the physical conditions of the rights-of-way; and
         (D)   road repair agreement approved as to form by the city attorney
and signed by the operator;
      (38)   a vector control plan detailing all measures:
         (A)   that will be taken to ensure that a fresh-water fracture pond
will not become a site for mosquito harbourage; and
         (B)   for mosquito abatement activities, including any biological or
chemical control applications or water level control measures;
      (39)   a waste management plan that includes:
         (A)   recycling, treatment, and disposal methods for all drilling muds
and cuttings, flowback water, fracturing fluids, salt water, produced water,
solid waste, and any other materials generated from pad site operations;
         (B)   a copy of the Texas Railroad Commission underground injection
control permit if the waste management plan includes an injection method; and
         (C)   the location of the landfill and a copy of the permit if the
waste management plan includes disposal at a landfill;
      (40)   a water management plan that includes a description of the water
source to be used, the volumes, and the recycling, reuse, or disposal methods
that will be used during drilling and production operations; and
      (41)   any other information the gas inspector deems necessary.
   (c)   Review of permit applications.
      (1)   The gas inspector shall return incomplete applications to the
operator with a written explanation of the deficiencies.
      (2)   The gas inspector shall determine whether the gas well permit
should be issued, issued with conditions, or denied within 45 days after
receiving a complete gas well permit application. If the gas inspector fails to
make this determination within this specified time, the gas well permit is
deemed denied.
      (3)   The gas inspector shall issue a gas well permit if the application
meets the requirements of this article and the conditions of the SUP. If the
application does not meet the requirements of this article or the conditions of
the SUP, the gas inspector shall either deny the application or issue the gas
well permit subject to written conditions if compliance with the conditions
eliminates the reasons for denial. If the gas inspector denies a gas well
permit, the gas inspector shall provide the operator with a written explanation
of the reasons for denial within 30 days.
   (d)   Content of gas well permit. A gas well permit must:
      (1)   identify the name of the well and its operator;
      (2)   identify the name, address, and telephone number of the person
designated to receive notices from the city;
      (3)   identify the names, addresses, and phone numbers of the two
emergency contact persons;
      (4)   state the date the permit is issued;
      (5)   state that the gas well permit will automatically terminate if the
operator does not begin drilling within 180 days after the date of issuance
unless the gas inspector grants an extension;
      (6)   state that all drilling activities must cease within five years
from the issuance of the first gas well permit issued on the operation site
unless a one-time two-year extension is approved;
      (7)   state that the gas well permit shall automatically terminate after
the well is abandoned;
      (8)   state that the operator shall apply for a new gas well permit
before reworking an abandoned well;
      (9)   incorporate the full text of the indemnity provision from the
operator’s submitted indemnity agreement;
      (10)   incorporate, by reference:
         (A)   the insurance and security requirements of this article;
         (B)   the conditions of the applicable SUP;
         (C)   the information contained in the permit application;
         (D)   the rules and regulations of the Texas Railroad Commission,
including the field rules;
         (E)   all other required permits and fees; and
         (F)   the requirement for annual inspections, periodic reports,
emergency reporting, and notice before reworking a well; and
      (11)   state that the operator shall comply with the most recently
submitted and approved site plan, tree survey, hazardous materials management
plan, and emergency action response plan. The SUP and the full-sized site plan
must be attached to the gas well permit.
   (e)   Acceptance of permit. By accepting a gas well permit, the operator
expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions
of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated
in any gas well permit as if they were set forth verbatim in the gas well
permit.
   (f)   Amendment of permit. If the operator wants to change the original site
plan attached to the gas well permit and the SUP, the operator shall first seek
a zoning amendment or minor amendment and then apply in writing for a gas well
permit amendment. If the operator pays the fee to amend their gas well permit,
and the new site plan complies with the requirements of the SUP and this
article, the gas inspector shall issue an amended gas well permit.
   (g)   Transfer of permit.
      (1)   The gas inspector shall transfer a gas well permit to a new
operator if:
         (A)   the transfer is in writing, approved as to form by the city
attorney, signed by both operators, and the new operator agrees to be bound by
the terms and conditions of the transferred gas well permit, the SUP, and this
article;
         (B)   all information previously provided to the city as part of the
application for the original gas well permit is updated to reflect the new
operator;
         (C)   the new operator provides proof of the insurance and security
required by this article; and
         (D)   the operator-transfer fee is paid in full.
      (2)   The gas inspector shall release the insurance and security provided
by the old operator if the requirements of this subsection are met. The
transfer does not relieve the old operator from any liability arising out of
events occurring before the transfer.
   (h)   Revocation or suspension of permit.
      (1)   If the operator violates this article, the gas well permit, or the
SUP, the gas inspector shall give written notice to the operator describing the
violation and giving the operator a reasonable time to cure. The time to cure
must take into account the nature and extent of the violation, the efforts
required to cure, and the potential impact on public health, safety, and
welfare. The time to cure must not be less than 30 days unless the violation:
         (A)   could cause imminent destruction of property or injury to
persons; or
         (B)   involves the operator’s failure to take a required immediate
action as required by this article.
      (2)    If the operator fails to correct the violation within the
specified time, the gas inspector shall suspend or revoke the gas well permit.
The gas inspector shall also report any violations to the Texas Railroad
Commission and request that the Texas Railroad Commission take appropriate
action.
      (3)   If a gas well permit is suspended, no person may engage in any
activities that were permitted under that gas well permit except for those
activities necessary to remedy the violation. If the violation is remedied, the
gas inspector shall reinstate the gas well permit, and the operator may resume
gas drilling and production.
      (4)   If a gas well permit is revoked, the operator shall obtain a new
gas well permit before resuming gas drilling or production.
   (i)   Appeal.
      (1)    If the gas inspector denies, suspends, or revokes a gas well
permit, the gas inspector shall send the operator, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, written notice of the decision and the right to appeal.
      (2)    The operator has the right to appeal to the permit and license
appeal board in accordance with
Article IX of
Chapter 2 of the Dallas City Code. (Ord. Nos. 26920; 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.203.   INSURANCE AND SECURITY INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)    The operator shall provide the insurance required in this section
at its own expense.
      (2)    The operator shall keep the insurance in effect until the gas
inspector approves the abandonment and restoration of the operation site.
      (3)    Companies approved by the State of Texas with an AM Best Rating of
A or better and acceptable to the city must issue the insurance.
      (4)    The operator shall provide the gas inspector with a copy of the
certificates of insurance.
      (5)    Upon the gas inspector’s request, the operator shall provide
copies of the insurance policies and all endorsements at no cost to the city.
      (6)    Failure of the city to request required insurance documentation
does not constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement.
      (7)   Depleting, wasting, or defense within limits provisions are not
permitted in any of the insurance required in this section.
   (b)   Modification of insurance.
      (1)   The office of risk management may modify the insurance requirements
of this section when necessary based upon economic conditions, recommendation
of professional insurance advisors, changes in law, court decisions, or other
relevant factors.
      (2)   The operator shall modify the insurance as requested and shall pay
the cost of any modifications.
   (c)   Subcontractor insurance.
      (1)   The operator shall require each subcontractor performing work on
the operation site to obtain insurance that is appropriate for the services the
subcontractor is performing.
      (2)   The subcontractor shall provide the subcontractor’s insurance at
its own expense to the operator and gas inspector.
      (3)   The subcontractor’s insurance must name the operator as an
additional insured.
      (4)   The subcontractor shall keep the subcontractor’s insurance in
effect until the gas inspector approves the abandonment and restoration of the
operation site.
      (5)   Companies approved by the State of Texas with an AM Best Rating of
A or better and acceptable to the city must issue the subcontractor’s
insurance.
      (6)   The operator shall provide the gas inspector with a copy of the
certificates of insurance for each subcontractor at least 30 days before the
subcontractor begins work.
      (7)   Upon request, the operator shall provide the gas inspector with
copies of the subcontractor’s insurance policies and all endorsements at no
cost to the city.
   (d)   Required provisions. All insurance contracts and certificates of
insurance must have an endorsement:
      (1)   stating that the city is an additional insured to all applicable
policies;
      (2)   stating that coverage may not be cancelled, non-renewed, or
materially changed in policy terms or coverage without 30-days advance written
notice by mail to the:
         (A)   gas inspector; and
         (B)   City of Dallas, Director, Office of Risk Management, 1500
Marilla, 6A-South, Dallas, TX 75201;
      (3)   waiving subrogation against the city, its officers, employees, and
elected representatives for bodily injury (including death), property damage,
or any other loss to all applicable coverages;
      (4)   stating that the operator’s insurance is the primary insurance;
      (5)   stating that liability, duty, standard of care obligations, and the
indemnification provision are underwritten by contractual liability coverage
that includes these obligations;
      (6)   identifying the operation site by address; and
      (7)   identifying the gas inspector as the certificate holder.
   (e)   Required coverage. Subject to the operator’s right to maintain
reasonable deductibles, and subject to a maximum deductible or self-insured
retention of $250,000, the operator shall obtain insurance coverage in the
following types and amounts:
      (1)   Workers’ compensation insurance with statutory limits.
      (2)   Employer’s liability insurance with the following minimum limits
for bodily injury by:
         (A)   accident, $1,000,000 per each accident; and
         (B)   disease, $1,000,000 per employee with a per-policy aggregate of
$1,000,000.
      (3)   Business automobile liability insurance covering owned, hired, and
non-owned vehicles, with a minimum combined bodily injury (including death) and
property damage limit of $2,000,000 per occurrence. If the operator is subject
to the Motor Carrier Act, endorsement form MCS 90 is required and a copy must
be attached to the certificate of insurance.
      (4)   Commercial general liability insurance covering explosion,
collapse, underground blowout, cratering, premises/operations, personal and
advertising injury, products/completed operations, independent contractors, and
contractual liability with the following minimum combined bodily injury
(including death) and property damage limits of:
         (A)   $2,000,000 per occurrence;
         (B)   $2,000,000 products/completed operations aggregate; and
         (C)   $2,000,000 general aggregate.
      (5)   Environmental impairment or pollution legal liability insurance
covering handling, removal, seepage, storage, testing, transportation, and
disposal of materials.
         (A)   Coverage must include loss of use of property; cleanup cost; and
defense, including costs and expenses incurred in the investigation, defense,
or settlement of claims in connection with any loss arising from the operation
site.
         (B)   Coverage must apply to sudden and accidental pollution resulting
from the escape or release of smoke; vapors; fumes; acids; alkalis; toxic
chemicals; liquids or gases; waste material; or other irritants, contaminants,
or pollutants.
         (C)   Coverage must include gradual pollution or pollution legal
liability with time element pollution for a minimum combined bodily injury
(including death) and property damage limit of $10,000,000 per occurrence.
          (D)   Coverage must be maintained with a minimum combined bodily
injury (including death) and property damage limit of $10,000,000 per
occurrence.
      (6)    Umbrella liability insurance following the form of the primary
liability coverage described in Paragraphs (1) through (4) and providing
coverage with minimum combined bodily injury (including death) and property
damage limit of $25,000,000 per occurrence and $25,000,000 annual aggregate.
Increased primary liability limits equivalent to the umbrella liability
insurance limits specified will satisfy the umbrella liability insurance
requirements.
         (A)   A copy of the declaration page of the policy must be attached to
the certificate of insurance.
         (B)    Coverage must include explosion, collapse, underground blowout,
cratering, sudden and accidental pollution, handling, removal, seepage,
storage, testing, transportation, and disposal of materials. A copy of the
endorsements providing this coverage must be attached to the certificate of
insurance.
      (7)   Control-of-well insurance to provide coverage for the cost of
regaining control of an out-of-control (wild) well including the cost of re-
drilling and clean up of an incident with minimum limit of $10,000,000.
Coverage must include seepage, pollution, stuck drill stem, evacuation expense
of residents, loss of equipment, experts, and damage to property that the
operator has in the operator’s care, custody, or control.
      (8)    If the insurance required in Section
51A-12.203(e)(4)-(6) is written on a claims-made form, coverage must be
continuous (by renewal or extended reporting period) for at least 60 months
after the gas inspector approves the abandonment and restoration of the
operation site. Coverage, including renewals, must contain the same retroactive
date as the original policy.
   (f)   Miscellaneous provisions.
      (1)   The city’s approval, disapproval, or failure to act regarding any
insurance supplied by the operator or a subcontractor does not relieve the
operator or subcontractor of full responsibility or liability for damages and
accidents. Bankruptcy, insolvency, or the insurance company’s denial of
liability does not exonerate the operator or the subcontractor from liability.
      (2)   If an insurance policy is cancelled or non-renewed, the gas
inspector shall suspend the gas well permit on the date of cancellation or non-
renewal and the operator shall immediately cease operations until the operator
provides the gas inspector proof of replacement insurance coverage.
   (g)   Performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit. Before issuance of a
gas well permit, the operator shall give the gas inspector a performance bond
or an irrevocable letter of credit approved as to form by the city attorney.
      (1)   A bonding or insurance company authorized to do business in Texas
and acceptable to the city must issue the performance bond. A bank authorized
to do business in Texas and acceptable to the city must issue the irrevocable
letter of credit.
      (2)   The performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit must list the
operator as principal and be payable to the city.
      (3)   The performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit must remain in
effect for at least six months after the gas inspector approves the abandonment
of the well.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided, the amount of the performance bond or
irrevocable letter of credit must be at least $50,000 per well.
         (A)   After a well is completed, the operator may request that the gas
inspector reduce the existing performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit
to $10,000 per well for the remainder of the time the well produces without
reworking. The gas inspector shall reduce the existing performance bond or
irrevocable letter of credit if the operator has fully complied with the
provisions of this article and the conditions of the SUP, and the gas inspector
determines that a $10,000 performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit is
sufficient.
         (B)   If the gas inspector determines the operator’s performance bond
or irrevocable letter of credit is insufficient, the gas inspector may require
the operator to increase the amount of the performance bond or irrevocable
letter of credit to a maximum of $250,000 per well.
      (5)   Cancellation of the performance bond or irrevocable letter of
credit does not release the operator from the obligation to meet all
requirements of this article, the gas well permit, and the SUP. If the
performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit is cancelled, the gas well
permit shall be suspended on the date of cancellation and the operator shall
immediately cease operations until the operator provides the gas inspector with
a replacement performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit that meets the
requirements of this article.
      (6)   The city may draw against the performance bond or irrevocable
letter of credit or pursue any other available remedy to recover damages, fees,
fines, or penalties due from the operator for violation of any provision of
this article, the SUP, or the gas well permit. The performance bond or
irrevocable letter of credit may also be used to mitigate public losses (i.e.
damage to infrastructure, loss of sales tax, etc.) related to the loss of
control of a well.
   (h)   Road repair security instrument. Before issuance of a gas well permit,
the operator shall give the gas inspector a road repair performance bond or an
irrevocable letter of credit approved as to form by the city attorney. The road
repair security instrument is in addition to the performance bond or
irrevocable letter of credit required by Section
51A-12.203(g).
      (1)   A bonding or insurance company authorized to do business in Texas
and acceptable to the city must issue the performance bond. A bank authorized
to do business in Texas and acceptable to the city must issue the irrevocable
letter of credit.
      (2)   The performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit must list the
operator as principal and be payable to the city.
      (3)   The performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit must remain in
effect for at least six months after the department of transportation and
public works completes the final inspection of the right-of-way.
      (4)   The department of transportation and public works shall determine
the amount of the performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit based upon,
among other factors, the estimated cost to the city of restoring the right-of-
way.
      (5)   Cancellation of the performance bond or irrevocable letter of
credit does not release the operator from the obligation to meet all
requirements of this article, the gas well permit, and the SUP. If the
performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit is cancelled, the gas well
permit shall be suspended on the date of cancellation and the operator shall
immediately cease operations until the operator provides the gas inspector with
a replacement performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit that meets the
requirements of this article.
      (6)   The city may draw against the performance bond or irrevocable
letter of credit or pursue any other available remedy to recover damages, fees,
fines, or penalties related to the damage of the right-of-way covered by
Section
51A-12.204(p).
   (i)   Well plugging bond. Before issuance of a gas well permit, the operator
shall give the gas inspector a well plugging bond.
      (1)   A bonding or insurance company authorized to do business in Texas
and acceptable to the city must issue the well plugging bond.
      (2)   The well plugging bond must list the operator as principal and be
payable to the city.
      (3)   The well plugging bond must remain in effect for at least six
months after the gas inspector approves the abandonment of the well.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the amount of the
well plugging bond must be at least $50,000 per well.
      (5)   Cancellation of the well plugging bond does not release the
operator from the obligation to meet all requirements of this article, the gas
well permit, and the SUP. If the well plugging bond is cancelled, the gas well
permit shall be suspended on the date of cancellation and the operator shall
immediately cease operations until the operator provides the gas inspector with
a replacement well plugging bond that meets the requirements of this
subsection.
      (6)   The city may draw against the well plugging bond or pursue any
other available remedy to recover damages, fees, fines, or penalties due from
the operator for violation of any provision of this article, the SUP, or the
gas well permit. The well plugging bond may also be used to mitigate public
losses (i.e. damage to infrastructure, loss of sales tax, etc.) related to the
loss of control of a well. (Ord. Nos. 26920; 28424; 29228; 30239; 30654; 32864)
SEC. 51A-12.204.   OPERATIONS.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Operations must be conducted in accordance with the practices of a
reasonable and prudent gas drilling operation in the State of Texas.
      (2)   The layout of an operation site must comply with the site plan
attached to the gas well permit and the SUP.
      (3)    No refining, except for gas dehydrating and physical phase
separation, may occur on the operation site.
      (4)   Only freshwater-based mud systems are permitted.
      (5)   No person may add any type of metal additive into drilling fluids.
      (6)   Salt-water or produced-water disposal wells, also known as
injection wells, are prohibited.
      (7)   Unless otherwise directed by the Texas Railroad Commission, the
operator shall remove waste materials from the operation site and transport
them to an off-site disposal or recycling facility at least once every 30 days.
      (8)   No air, gas, or pneumatic drilling is permitted.
      (9)   Salt water, produced water, or other wastewater collection or
transportation pipelines must be approved by city council as part of a required
SUP for a gas drilling and production use.
      (10)   Landfarming is prohibited.
      (11)   Lift and line compressors are permitted as part of the gas
drilling and production use.
      (12)   The operation site must be kept clear of dilapidated structures,
debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, brush, high grass,
weeds, and trash or other waste material.
      (13)   See Sections 51-4.213(19)(E) or
51A-4.203(b)(3.2)(E) for additional spacing, fencing, and slope requirements.
   (b)   Dust, vibrations, and odors.
      (1)   To prevent injury or nuisances to persons living and working in the
area surrounding the operation site, the operator shall conduct all drilling
and production in a manner that minimizes dust, vibrations, or odors, and in
accordance with industry best practices for drilling and production of gas and
other hydrocarbons.
      (2)   The operator shall adopt proven technological improvements in
industry standards for drilling and production if capable of reducing dust,
vibration, and odor.
      (3)   If the gas inspector determines that the dust, vibrations, or odors
related to the gas drilling and production use present a risk of injury or have
become a nuisance to persons living and working in the area, the gas inspector
shall require the operator to adopt reasonable methods for reducing the dust,
vibrations, and odors.
      (4)   Brine water, sulphur water, or water mixed any type of hydrocarbon
may not be used for dust suppression.
   (c)    Electric lines. Electric lines to the operation site must be located
in a manner compatible with those already installed in the surrounding area.
   (d)    Equipment, structures, and operations.
      (1)    In general.
         (A)   American Petroleum Institute. All equipment and permanent
structures must conform to the standards of the American Petroleum Institute
unless other specifications are approved by the fire marshal.
         (B)   Maintenance. All equipment and structures must be maintained in
good repair and neat appearance.
         (C)   Painting. Unless a specific color is required by federal or
state regulations, all equipment and structures must be painted with a neutral
color approved by the gas inspector.
         (D)   Removal of rig and equipment. The drilling rig and associated
drilling equipment must be removed from the operation site within 30 days after
completion of each well unless other wells on the operation site are in the
drilling phase.
      (2)   Drip pans and other containment devices. Drip pans or other
containment devices must be placed underneath all tanks, containers, pumps,
lubricating oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage tanks, system
valves, and connections, and any other area or structures that could
potentially leak, discharge, or spill hazardous liquids, semi-liquids, or solid
waste materials.
      (3)   Engines.
         (A)   Electric motors must be used during drilling unless the operator
submits a report to the gas inspector and the gas inspector determines that
electric motors cannot be used.
         (B)   Only electric motors may be used during production.
         (C)   Electric power may be generated on the operation site but may
not be sold for off-site use. All electrical installations and equipment must
comply with city, state, and federal rules and regulations.
      (4)    Fire prevention equipment.
         (A)   The operator, at the operator’s expense, shall provide fire-
fighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire department and required
by city, state, and federal rules and regulations on the operation site at all
times during drilling and production. The operator shall be responsible for the
maintenance and upkeep of the fire-fighting apparatus and supplies.
         (B)   If the chief of the fire department makes a written request to
the operator, the operator shall provide training and instruction to the fire
department and other emergency responders about well safety, emergency
management protocol, and all information specific to the well operations or
emergency management activities at the operation site. The training must occur
within 30 days after the written request is made.
      (5)    Mud pits.
         (A)   Only closed-loop drilling fluid systems are permitted.
         (B)   Low toxicity glycols, synthetic hydrocarbons, polymers, and
esters must be substituted for conventional oil-based drilling fluids.
      (6)   Tanks.
         (A)   Gas well operations must use tanks for storing liquid
hydrocarbons. Tanks must be portable, closed, and made of steel or fiberglass.
If the gas inspector discovers condensate or liquid hydrocarbons, the gas
inspector may require that tanks have a remote foam line.
         (B)   All tanks must have a vent line, flame and lightning arrestor,
pressure-relief valve, and level-control device. The level-control device must
automatically activate a valve to close the well to prevent the tank from
overflowing.
         (C)   Tanks must have a secondary containment system that is lined
with an impervious material. The secondary containment system must be high
enough to contain one-and-one-half times the contents of the largest tank in
accordance with the Dallas Fire Code.
         (D)   Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons, and other waste
materials must be discharged into tanks in accordance with the Texas Railroad
Commission rules and other city, state, or federal rules and regulations.
         (E)   Temporary flowback tanks must be removed from the operation site
within 90 days after completion of a gas well unless:
            (i)   the gas inspector extends the time period for no more than 30
additional days; or
            (ii)   other wells on the operation site are in the drilling phase.
         (F)   The top of any tank may not exceed the required fence height.
      (7)    Wells.
         (A)   Each well must have an automated valve that closes the well if
an abnormal change in operating pressure occurs. All wellheads must also have
an emergency shut-off valve to the well distribution line.
         (B)   Surface casing must be run and set in full compliance with the
Texas Railroad Commission and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
         (C)   A blowout preventer must be used when wells are being drilled,
reworked, or at anytime when tubing is being changed.
   (e)   Emergencies.
      (1)    In general.
         (A)   The emergency action response plan that complies with the Dallas
Fire Code must be kept current.
         (B)   A copy of the current emergency response plan must be kept on
the operation site at all times.
         (C)   Updates to the emergency action response plan must be submitted
to the gas inspector, the fire chief, and the fire marshal within two business
days after any additions, modifications, or amendments are made.
         (D)   The operator shall also conduct an annual review and provide
updates of the emergency action response plan that must be approved by the fire
marshal.
      (2)   Compliance with emergency action response plan. In emergencies, the
operator shall comply with the current emergency action response plan submitted
to the gas inspector.
      (3)    Loss of control.
         (A)   If the operator loses control of a well, the operator shall
immediately take all necessary steps to regain control regardless of other
provisions of this article.
         (B)   If the gas inspector believes that the loss of control of a well
creates a danger to persons and property and the operator is not taking the
necessary steps to regain control, the gas inspector is authorized to:
            (i)   take the necessary steps to regain control; and
            (ii)   incur expenses for labor and materials necessary to regain
control.
         (C)   The operator shall reimburse the city for any expenses incurred
in regaining control of a well.
   (f)   Environmental requirements.
      (1)   In general.
         (A)   All federal, state, and local rules regarding protection of
natural resources must be strictly followed.
         (B)   The operator shall ensure that ground and fresh-water wells are
not contaminated by gas drilling and production operations or any related
activities.
         (C)   The operator shall comply with all local, state, and federal
storm water quality regulations.
         (D)   The operator shall use industry best practices in recycling and
reusing hydraulic fracturing fluids and flowback water.
      (2)    Air quality.
         (A)   Gasses vented or burned.
            (i)   Except as permitted by the Texas Railroad Commission and the
fire marshal, the operator shall not vent gases into the atmosphere or burn
gases by open flame.
            (ii)   At no time may a well flow or vent directly into the
atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or
into a portable tank.
            (iii)   If venting or burning of gases is permitted, the vent or
open flame must be located at least 300 feet from any structure that is
necessary to the everyday operation of wells.
         (B)   Reduced emissions.
            (i)   Internal combustion engines and compressors, whether
stationary or mounted on wheels, must be equipped with an exhaust muffler or
comparable device that suppresses noise and disruptive vibrations and prevents
the escape of gases, fumes, ignited carbon, or soot.
            (ii)   After fracturing or re-fracturing is completed, the operator
must employ appropriate equipment and processes as soon as practicable to
minimize natural gas and associated vapor releases into the environment.
            (iii)   All salable gas must be directed to a sales line as soon as
practicable or shut in and conserved.
            (iv)   All wells that have a sales line must employ reduced-
emission completion techniques unless the gas inspector determines that
reduced-emission completion techniques are not feasible or would endanger the
safety of personnel or the public.
            (v)   Vapor recovery equipment is required in accordance with state
and federal rules and regulations.
         (C)   Emissions compliance.
            (i)   If an operation site receives two or more notices of
violation for emissions or air quality violations during any 12 month period,
as determined by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or the
Environmental Protection Agency, within 30 days after receiving the second
notice, the operator shall submit to the gas inspector an emissions compliance
plan.
            (ii)   The emissions compliance plan must include:
               (aa)   24-hour monitoring techniques the operator will use to
demonstrate that the operation site complies with applicable emissions limits
and all applicable laws relating to emissions;
               (bb)   activities and equipment the operator will immediately
employ to ensure that the operation site complies with applicable emissions
limits and all applicable laws related to emissions; and
               (cc)   quarterly reporting to the gas inspector for a period of
12 months of documented compliance.
      (3)   Baseline assessments.
         (A)   Air.
            (i)   Before gas drilling activities begin on an operation site,
the operator shall perform a baseline test of air quality on the operation
site.
            (ii)   The baseline air quality test must be collected and analyzed
by a qualified third party using proper sampling and laboratory protocol from
an Environmental Protection Agency or a Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality approved laboratory.
            (iii)   The minimum baseline air quality results must include
benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes, ozone, hydrocarbons (e.g. methanes,
ethanes, propanes), nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds, sulfer
dioxides, naphthalenes, acroleins, and formaldehyde.
            (iv)   The baseline air quality test results must be provided to
the gas inspector within 30 days after the baseline testing is conducted.
            (v)   The operator is responsible for the cost and fees associated
with baseline testing of air quality.
         (B)   Natural gas.
            (i)   Within 30 days after the first well enters production on an
operation site, the operator must provide to the gas inspector a written
extended natural gas analysis.
            (ii)   The extended natural gas analysis must be performed by a
qualified third party laboratory and must include findings for benzene and
hydrocarbons.
            (iii)   The operator is responsible for the cost and fees
associated with an extended natural gas analysis.
         (C)   Water.
            (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, before gas
drilling activities begin, the operator shall perform a baseline test of all
water wells within 2,000 feet of a well bore and all surface water within 750
feet of a well bore.
            (ii)   Water samples must be collected by a third party consultant
and analyzed using proper sampling and laboratory protocol from an
Environmental Protection Agency or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
approved laboratory.
            (iii)   The minimum baseline water test results must include TDS,
Chlorides, VOCs and TPH, dissolved gases (methane, ethane), TPH fractioned,
SVOC’s, and HAP.
            (iv)   The baseline water test results must be provided to the gas
inspector within 30 days after the baseline testing is conducted.
            (v)   If the operator documents to the satisfaction of the gas
inspector that permission to access private property to conduct the required
baseline testing is not granted, water baseline testing is not required for
that water well or surface water.
            (vi)   The operator is responsible for the cost and fees associated
with baseline testing of all water wells and surface water.
      (4)    Chemical and hazardous materials storage.
         (A)   The purpose of this paragraph, the hazardous materials
management plan, and the hazardous materials inventory statement, including the
materials safety data sheets, is to minimize the:
            (i)   risk of unwanted releases, fires, or explosions involving
hazardous materials; and
            (ii)   consequences of an unsafe condition involving hazardous
materials during normal operations or in the event of an abnormal condition.
         (B)   The operator shall comply at all times with the hazardous
materials management plan, the hazardous materials inventory statement, and the
material safety data sheets.
         (C)   The hazardous materials management plan, the hazardous materials
inventory statement, and all material safety data sheets must be kept current.
         (D)   A copy of the current hazardous materials management plan, the
hazardous materials inventory statement, and all material safety data sheets
must be kept on the operation site at all times.
         (E)   Updates to the hazardous materials management plan and the
hazardous materials inventory statement must be submitted to the gas inspector,
the fire chief, and the fire marshal within two business days after any
additions, modifications, or amendments are made.
         (F)   If a hazardous material that is not identified on a material
safety data sheet filed with the fire department is being introduced to the
operation site, a new or updated material safety data sheet must be provided to
the fire department and the gas inspector at least seven days in advance of the
hazardous materials being introduced onto the operation site.
         (G)   If hazardous materials are removed from the operation site or
quantities have changed from a previously submitted material safety data sheet,
updated copies of the material safety data sheets must be provided to the fire
department and gas inspector within two business days.
         (H)   All chemicals and hazardous materials must be stored in
accordance with the hazardous materials management plan and in such a manner as
to prevent release, contain, and facilitate rapid remediation and cleanup of
any accidental spill, leak, or discharge of a hazardous material.
         (I)   Containers must be properly labeled in accordance with federal,
state, and local regulations.
         (J)   The operator shall take all appropriate pollution prevention
actions, including raising chemicals and other materials above grade (for
example, placing chemicals and other materials on wood pallets); installing and
maintaining secondary containment systems; and providing adequate protection
from storm water and other weather events.
      (5)   Cleanup after spills, leaks, and malfunctions.
         (A)   After any spill, leak, or malfunction, the operator shall
remove, to the satisfaction of the fire marshal, the gas inspector, and the
office of environmental quality all waste materials from any public or private
property affected by the spill, leak, or malfunction. Cleanup operations must
begin immediately.
         (B)   If the operator fails to begin cleanup operations immediately,
the city may:
            (i)   contact the Texas Railroad Commission to facilitate the
removal of all waste materials from the property affected by the spill, leak,
or malfunction; or
            (ii)   employ any cleanup experts, other contractors, suppliers of
special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material that
the gas inspector deems necessary to clean up the spill, leak, or malfunction.
         (C)   The operator shall reimburse the city for any expenses incurred
in cleanup operations.
      (6)   Depositing materials. The operator shall not deposit any substance
(oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, brine, refuse, wastewater, etc.) into or
upon a right-of-way, storm drain, ditch, sewer, sanitary drain, body of water,
or public or private property.
      (7)    Erosion control practices. Berms that are at least one-foot high
and two-feet wide, or equivalent erosion devices, must be installed to prevent
lot-to-lot drainage. Any damages to adjacent properties from sedimentation or
erosion must be repaired immediately.
      (8)    Flood plain. All gas drilling and production operations must
comply with the flood plain regulations in
Article V.
      (9)   Water.
         (A)   The operator shall set surface casing in accordance with state
and local rules and regulations to ensure groundwater protection.
         (B)   The operator shall:
            (i)   give the gas inspector 72- hour’s notice before setting the
well casing;
            (ii)   allow access to the operation site during surface casing
installation; and
            (iii)   allow access to all relevant reports associated with the
setting of the surface casing.
   (g)   Fresh-water fracture ponds.
      (1)   In general.
         (A)   Fresh-water fracture ponds are permitted on an operation site.
         (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this subparagraph, additives,
oil and gas waste by-products, and salt water are not permitted in a fresh-
water fracture pond. Vector control additives are permitted in a fresh-water
fracture pond.
         (C)   The fresh-water fracture pond must permanently hold sufficient
water to prevent a nuisance or vector control problem.
         (D)   The fresh-water fracture pond must comply with the Drainage
Design Manual of the city of Dallas and all other city, state, and federal
rules and regulations.
         (E)   Artificial liners are not permitted.
         (F)   Fresh-water fracture ponds must be maintained in a manner using
best management practices to ensure the integrity of the fresh-water fracture
pond. For purposes of this subparagraph, “best management practices” means
structural, nonstructural, and managerial techniques that are recognized to be
the most effective and practical means to control water storage in open pits in
an urban or suburban setting.
      (2)   Removal and restoration.
         (A)   Removal.
            (i)   The operator shall remove the fresh-water fracture pond from
the operation site within five years after the date the first gas well permit
is issued. The operator may apply for a one-time, two-year extension from the
gas inspector.
            (ii)   The request for an extension must be made to the gas
inspector in writing at least six months before the fifth year from the date
the first gas well permit was issued.
            (iii)   The gas inspector must approve or deny the extension within
45 days after receiving the extension request.
            (iv)   As a condition of approval of the extension, the gas
inspector may require additional measures, as necessary, to minimize the impact
of continued use of the fresh-water fracture pond, associated with the drilling
activities, upon neighboring properties.
            (v)   The gas inspector must approve the extension if the fresh-
water fracture pond will not adversely impact the neighboring properties or if
additional measures required eliminate the reasons for denial.
            (vi)   If the gas inspector denies the request for a one-time two-
year extension, the gas inspector must provide the operator with a written
explanation of the reasons for denial within 30 days.
            (vii)   The operator has the right to appeal to the permit and
license appeal board in accordance with
Article IX of
Chapter 2 of the Dallas City Code.
         (B)   Restoration. The operator is responsible for:
            (i)   removing the fresh-water fracture pond;
            (ii)   grading, leveling, and restoring the area to the same
surface condition, as nearly as practicable, that existed before the fresh-
water fracture pond was constructed; and
            (iii)   restoring the vegetation in accordance with the landscape
design provided in the fresh-water fracture pond design plan.
   (h)   Fracturing.
      (1)   Notice.
         (A)    The operator shall send written notice to the gas inspector of
the operator’s intent to begin fracturing. The notice must identify the well
and estimate the duration of fracturing. The written notice to the gas
inspector must be provided at least 15 days before fracturing begins.
         (B)   If the operation site is located within 1,500 feet of a
protected use, measured from the boundary of the operation site in a straight
line without regard to intervening structures or objects to the nearest
protected use, the operator shall post a sign adjacent to the main gate of the
operation site informing the public when fracturing will begin and the
estimated duration of fracturing. This sign must be posted at least 10 days
before fracturing begins.
         (C)   The operator, at his own expense, shall provide written
notification of the date that fracturing will begin and the estimated duration
of fracturing to each property owner and registered neighborhood association
within 1,500 feet of the boundary of the operation site, measured from the
boundary of the operation site in a straight line without regard to intervening
structures or objects to the nearest protected use, as shown by the current tax
roll. The written notification must be sent by United States mail at least 10
days before fracturing begins.
      (2)   Tracing or tagging additives.
         (A)   The operator shall add non-radioactive tracing or tagging
additives into all fracturing fluids used on an operation site.
         (B)   The operator shall provide the formula identifying the non-
radioactive tracing or tagging additives in writing as part of the hazardous
materials management plan.
         (C)   The fracturing fluid non-radioactive tracing or tagging
additives must be unique for each operation site.
         (D)   If the operator changes or amends the non-radioactive tracing or
tagging additives, the hazardous materials management plan must be amended and
submitted to the fire marshal and the gas inspector at least seven days before
introducing the changed additives onto the operation site.
   (i)    Glare. The operator shall comply with the glare regulations in
Section
51A-6.104.
   (j)   Hours of operation.
      (1)   Construction activities. Except as otherwise provided in this
paragraph, construction activities involving excavation of or alteration to the
operation site or repair work on any access road may only occur during daytime
hours. City council may expand the hours of operations for these construction
activities as part of the required SUP for a gas drilling and production use if
the city council finds that the expanded hours of operation will not adversely
affect nearby properties.
      (2)   Drill stem testing. All open hole formation or drill stem testing
may only occur during daytime hours. Drill stem tests may be conducted only if
the well effluent produced during the test is produced through an adequate gas
separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe is
flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up
the drill pipe before the tool is closed.
      (3)   Fracturing.
         (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subparagraph, fracturing
activities may only occur during daytime hours. In an emergency situation, the
gas inspector may expand the hours of operation for fracturing activities until
the emergency is resolved.
         (B)   Flowback operations may occur 24 hours per day.
      (4)   Loudspeakers. Unless required by state or federal laws or
regulations, loudspeakers are permitted during daytime hours only.
      (5)   Reworking. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph,
reworking or work-over operations may only occur during daytime hours. In an
emergency situation, the gas inspector may expand the hours of operation for
the reworking or work-over operations until the emergency is resolved.
      (6)   Truck traffic. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph,
truck deliveries and removal of equipment and materials associated with
drilling, fracturing, or production, well servicing, site preparation, or other
related work conducted on the operation site may only occur during daytime
hours. In cases of fires, blowouts, explosions, other emergencies, or where the
delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the cessation of drilling or
production, truck deliveries and removal of equipment may occur 24 hours a day.
 
   (k)   Hydrogen sulfide. If a gas or oil field is identified as a hydrogen
sulfide field in accordance with the Texas Railroad Commission, Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality, or the Environmental Protection Agency
rules and regulations, or if a well is producing hydrogen sulphide gas in
excess of applicable Texas Railroad Commission, Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality, or the Environmental Protection Agency rules and
regulations, the operator shall stabilize and immediately cease operation of
that well or facility.
   (l)    Incident reports.
      (1)    Reporting. The operator shall immediately notify the gas inspector
and fire marshal of incidents occurring on the operation site, including
blowouts, fires, spills, leaks, or explosions; incidents resulting in injury,
death, or property damage; or incidents resulting in product loss from a
storage tank or pipeline.
      (2)    Written summary of incident. The operator shall give a written
summary of the incident to the gas inspector and fire marshal by 5:00 p.m. on
the first business day after the incident.
      (3)    Follow-up report. The operator shall give a follow-up report to
the gas inspector and fire marshal within 30 days after the incident. The
follow-up report must be signed and dated by the operator or the operator’s
representative and must include:
         (A)   the operator’s name and location of the operation site;
         (B)   the phone number, address, and e-mail address of the person with
supervisory authority over the operation site;
         (C)   a description of the incident, including the time, date,
location, and cause of the event;
         (D)   the duration of the incident (an incident ends when it no longer
poses a danger to persons or property);
         (E)   an explanation of how the incident was brought under control and
remedied; and
         (F)    a full description of any internal or external investigations
or inquiries related to the incident, the findings of those investigations or
inquiries, and the actions taken as a result of those findings.
   (m)    Noise.
      (1)    Conflicts. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the
noise regulations in Section
51A-6.102 apply.
      (2)   Pre-drilling noise levels.
         (A)   Before the gas well permit may be issued, the operator shall
establish and report to the gas inspector the continuous 72-hour pre-drilling
ambient noise levels.
         (B)   The 72-hour time span must include at least one, 24-hour reading
during either a Saturday or Sunday. The timeframe for this noise study must be
designed to avoid the influence of wind interference on the noise study.
         (C)   The operator shall submit a proposed ambient noise level study
plan to the gas inspector for approval before conducting the noise study. The
proposed noise level study plan must contain a proposed testing schedule and
other details as required by the gas inspector.
         (D)   The gas inspector shall determine if subsequent noise studies
are needed to reevaluate ambient noise conditions.
         (E)   The operator is responsible for all costs and fees associated
with establishing and reporting the continuous 72-hour pre-drilling ambient
noise levels.
      (3)    Noise levels. An operator may not drill, re-drill, or operate any
equipment in such a manner so as to create any noise that causes the exterior
noise level, when measured at the nearest property line of the tract upon which
the nearest protected use or habitable structure is located, or at a point that
is 100 feet from the nearest protected use or habitable structure, whichever is
closer to the well, to:
         (A)   exceed the ambient noise level by more than:
            (i)    10 dB during fracturing operations;
            (ii)   five dB during daytime hours that do not include fracturing
operations; and
            (iii)   three dB during all other hours;
         (B)   create pure tones where one-third octave band sound-pressure
level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound-
pressure levels of two contiguous one-third octave bands by:
            (i)   five dB for center frequencies of 500 hertz and above;
            (ii)   eight dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 hertz;
and
            (iii)   15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125
hertz; or
         (C)   create low-frequency outdoor noise levels that exceed the
following dB levels:
            (i)   16 hertz octave band: 65 dB;
            (ii)   32 hertz octave band: 65 dB; and
            (iii)   64 hertz octave band: 65 dB.
      (4)   Adjustments.
         (A)   Adjustments to the noise regulations in this subsection are
permitted intermittently as follows:
 
Permitted increases (dBA) Duration of increase in minutes (cumulative during
                          any 1 hour period)
5                         15
10                        5
15                        1
20                        Less than 1
 
         (B)   The time period of monitoring will be continuous over a minimum
of one hour and will use the A-weighting network reported in decibel units.
Data must be recorded and reported as Leq, which means an average measure of
continuous noise that has the equivalent acoustic energy of the fluctuating
signal over the same period.
      (5)   Continuous monitoring.
         (A)   If a proposed gas well is within 1,500 feet of a protected use,
measured from the gas well in a straight line, without regard for intervening
structures or objects, to the closest protected use, the operator shall comply
with the following additional noise abatement measures:
            (i)   Exterior noise levels, including pure tone and low frequency
data, must be continuously monitored to ensure compliance. The continuous noise
level monitoring data must also include an audio recording to help identify the
source of sound level spikes throughout the logging period.
            (ii)   The continuous noise monitoring equipment must be capable of
wireless transmission of real-time noise and audio data. Access to this real-
time data must be made available to the gas inspector.
            (iii)   The noise readings must also be submitted to the gas
inspector on a weekly basis in an electronic format or other format specified
by the gas inspector. The weekly report must contain all noise data, including
pure tone and low frequency readings. The report must state whether the
operation site is in compliance with the noise requirements in this subsection
and Section
51A-6.102.
         (B)   If the report indicates that the operation site is not in
compliance with the noise regulations in this subsection or Section
51A-6.102, the report must state the measures that are being taken to bring the
operation site into compliance and the timeframe for implementing these
remedial measures.
         (C)   The operator is responsible for all costs and fees associated
with all continuous noise monitoring.
         (D)   Continuous monitoring must occur at:
            (i)   the protected use property line or 100 feet from the nearest
protected use, whichever is closer to the noise source; or
            (ii)   a location approved by the gas inspector.
      (6)   Blankets and other noise reduction methods.
         (A)   When required. If a gas well is within 2,000 feet of a protected
use, measured from the gas well in a straight line, without regard for
intervening structures or objects, to the closest point of the protected use,
the operator shall provide noise reduction blankets along the perimeter of the
operation site that faces the protected uses.
         (B)   Height. Minimum height for a noise reduction blanket is 30 feet,
except that the city council may reduce the minimum noise reduction blanket
height as part of the SUP for a gas drilling and production use if the city
council determines that the proposed noise mitigation at the perimeter of the
operation site is adequate.
         (C)   Materials.
            (i)   Noise reduction blankets must be constructed of a fire-
retardant material approved by the fire marshal.
            (ii)   The gas inspector may require the operator to use noise
reduction blankets that meet a standard of sound transmission class (STC) 30 or
greater when necessary.
         (D)   Timeframe.
            (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, if drilling,
fracturing, or well completion operations cease for a period longer than 90
days, the operator shall immediately remove all perimeter noise blankets and
all supporting structures. The gas inspector may grant a one-time, 30-day
extension per well.
            (ii)   The gas inspector may waive the 90-day removal requirement
for an operation site that has sufficient natural, vegetative, or topographical
screening that prevents the view of the perimeter noise reduction blankets from
city streets or protected uses.
            (iii)   To ensure compliance with the noise reduction blanket
removal requirements, the operator shall provide written notice to the gas
inspector within 48 hours after ceasing drilling, fracturing, or well
completion operations.
         (E)   Other noise reduction methods.
            (i)   Acoustic blankets, sound walls, mufflers, or other methods of
noise mitigation may be used to ensure compliance with this subsection and
Section
51A-6.102.
            (ii)   Additional methods of noise mitigation must be approved by
the gas inspector.
            (iii)   All soundproofing must comply with accepted industry
standards and is subject to approval by the fire marshal.
   (n)    Periodic updates and reports.
      (1)    Required updates.
         (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, other city
ordinances, or an SUP, the operator shall notify the gas inspector in writing
of any changes to the following information within seven days after the changes
are made:
            (i)    the name, address, or phone number of the operator; and
            (ii)    the name, address, or phone number of the person designated
to receive notices from the city.
         (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, other city
ordinances, or an SUP, the operator shall notify the gas inspector in writing
within one business day of any changes to the name, address, or 24-hour phone
number of the person with supervisory authority over the gas drilling or
production operation site.
         (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, other city
ordinances, or an SUP, if the conditions on the operator site or the operations
of the gas drilling and product use change or any other updates or changes are
made that are not reflected on a required plan, the operator shall provide an
update to each affected plan to the gas inspector within 30 days of the change.
         (D)   The operator shall submit a yearly written report to the gas
inspector identifying any other changes to the information provided in the gas
well permit application not previously reported to the city.
         (E)   The operator shall notify the gas inspector in writing that a
well has been completed within 72 hours after completion.
      (2)   Reports.
         (A)   The operator shall give the gas inspector a copy of any
complaint submitted to the Texas Railroad Commission within 30 days after the
operator receives notice of the complaint.
         (B)   On a monthly basis, the operator shall give the gas inspector a
copy of any new or amended permits, disclosures, and reports required by the
Texas Railroad Commission and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
   (o)    Reworking.
      (1)    At least 10 days before reworking begins, the operator shall send
written notice to the gas inspector of the operator’s intent to rework a well.
The notice must identify the well, describe the activities involved in the
reworking, and estimate the duration of the activities.
      (2)    The operator shall pay the reworking fee before the operator
begins reworking the well.
      (3)    If a well is already abandoned, a new gas well permit is required
to rework.
   (p)   Rights-of-way. For purposes of this subsection, rights-of-way means
those rights-of-way located along the truck routes shown on the operator's
approved transportation plan and incorporated by reference into the gas well
permit.
      (1)   Periodic inspections. The operator shall periodically inspect the
rights-of-way to determine if damage has occurred.
      (2)   City notifying operator. If the department of transportation and
public works determines that the rights-of-way have been damaged, the gas
inspector shall notify the operator in writing of the damage.
      (3)   Repairs. The operator shall repair the damage to the rights-of-way
within 10 days after discovering or receiving notice of the damage. Repairs
must be made in accordance with the current standards of the department of
transportation and public works. At least two days before making the repairs,
the operator shall notify the department of transportation and public works of
the operator's intent to begin repairs. The operator shall have all necessary
permits before repairing the rights-of-way.
      (4)   City making repairs and invoicing operator.
         (A)   If the operator fails to make repairs within 10 days after
discovering or receiving notice of the damage, the director of transportation
and public works may make the necessary repairs and invoice the operator. The
operator shall pay the amount due within 30 days after the invoice date.
         (B)   If the director of transportation and public works determines
that the damages to the rights- of-way affect the immediate health and safety
of the public, the director of transportation and public works may make the
repairs without first requesting that the operator make the repairs. The
director of transportation and public works shall invoice and the operator
shall pay the amount due within 30 days after the invoice date.
         (C)   If required by state law, the director of transportation and
public works shall employ a competitive bidding process before making the
repairs to the rights-of-way.
      (5)   Final inspection. After the gas inspector approves the abandonment
and restoration of the operation site, the operator shall notify the director
of transportation and public works and request an inspection of the rights-of-
way. After inspection, the director of transportation and public works shall
notify the operator of any needed repairs. Repairs must be made in accordance
with this article.
   (q)   Security.
      (1)   Personnel.
         (A)   During drilling, fracturing, or reworking of a well, at least
one person designated by the operator must be on the operation site at all
times to oversee the activities and monitor safety.
         (B)   An operator shall provide an off-duty certified peace officer to
direct traffic at the entrance to the operation site when high truck traffic is
accessing the site, including during the construction of the operation site and
fresh-water fracture pond, drilling, fracturing, flowback, and any reworking
activities that requires a rig. The off-duty certified peace officer must
ensure that all traffic entering and exiting the operation site is using the
approved transportation route. A written record must be maintained of any
violators and must be available on-site for inspection by the gas inspector.
      (2)   Security system. Within 10 days of completion of the temporary
perimeter fencing, the operator shall install a fully operational security
system that complies with the Dallas Fire Code and meets the following
requirements.
         (A)   Remotely monitored control access system. The operator shall
install and maintain at all vehicular gates a permitted, remotely monitored
control access system. The control access system must meet the following
requirements:
            (i)   Monitoring. The control access system must be monitored by a
facility capable of monitoring security-related alarm systems and meeting all
required state and federal guidelines. The monitoring facility must be staffed
and operational at all times.
            (ii)   Access control. Gate access must be secured by an access
control system with an unlocking and re-locking mechanism that requires a card,
numeric code, or other identification device for gate operation. The system
must record the identity of the entering party and the date and time of such
entry.
            (iii)   Intrusion detection system. The control access system must
include a gate closure contact sensor that activates when the gate closure
sensor is violated by non-identified access. The control access system must be
equipped to signal a control panel that activates an on-site audible signal and
registers at the monitoring facility when an access breach is detected.
            (iv)   Open gate detection. The control access system must include
an open gate detection alarm that notifies the monitoring facility if the gate
closure sensors, once accessed, are not closed and is reactivated within five
minutes after being opened.
            (v)   Exit sensor. The operator shall equip all gates with a motion
sensor, weight sensor, or other device to unarm the gate for vehicles exiting
the site.
         (B)   Personnel exit gate. An exit-only gate must be installed for
personnel near the vehicular gate entrance.
         (C)   Response to alarms.
            (i)   The operator shall obtain an alarm permit for the alarm
system from the police department in accordance with the city’s alarm
ordinance.
            (ii)   The monitoring facility must notify the operator and the
police department in case of a security breach at the operation site.
            (iii)   The operator shall respond on-site with an authorized
representative within 45 minutes after notification of an alarm.
            (iv)   The gas inspector may suspend the gas well permit if more
than 20 false alarms occur at an operation site in any calendar year.
         (D)   Automated audible alarm system. The operator shall install and
maintain an audible alarm system at each operation site to provide warnings in
case of a substantial drop in pressure, fire, or the release of any gas or oil.
      (3)   Security cameras.
         (A)   The operator shall at all times after the temporary perimeter
fence is installed have:
            (i)   an adequate number of 24-hour operating security cameras to
ensure coverage of the operation site, inside the perimeter fence; and
            (ii)   post signs on the perimeter fence indicating that any
activity on the operation site may be recorded by video surveillance.
         (B)   Cameras must be maintained in proper operating condition and
must:
            (i)   capture clear video images of all traffic entering and
exiting the gates;
            (ii)   capture clear video images of all production equipment
located on the operation site;
            (iii)   be equipped with motion detection technology;
            (iv)   be equipped with panning technology to pan immediately to
any motion detected on the operation site;
            (v)   show the date and time of all activity on the video footage;
and
            (vi)   be capable of being viewed at a monitoring facility.
         (C)   The operator shall maintain continuous video data for at least
672 hours. Upon request, the operator shall provide to the gas inspector any
recorded views of the fenced area.
         (D)   Data from videos may only be requested by the gas inspector or
law enforcement officials.
   (r)    Signs. All signs must be printed on durable, reflective, waterproof
material. Signs must remain legible until the operation site is abandoned and
restored pursuant to this article.
      (1)    Informational sign. The operator shall prominently display a sign
on the fence adjacent to the main gate that lists the following:
         (A)   well names and numbers;
         (B)   name of the operator;
         (C)   the address of the operation site;
         (D)   the emergency 911 number;
         (E)   the telephone numbers of the two people who may be contacted 24
hours a day in case of an emergency; and
         (F)   the contact number for the office of the gas inspector.
      (2)    No smoking signs. The operator shall prominently display signs
reading, “Danger, No Smoking Allowed,” in both English and Spanish adjacent to
all gates and any other locations required by the fire marshal. Sign lettering
must be a minimum of four inches in height and be red on a white background or
white on a red background.
   (s)   Spacing.
      (1)   Gas wells. Gas wells must be spaced at least:
         (A)   1,500 feet from any existing fresh-water well;
         (B)   25 feet from any property line;
         (C)   25 feet from any storage tank or source of ignition;
         (D)   75 feet from all rights-of-way; and
         (E)   100 feet from any structure that is not used for the everyday
operation of the well.
      (2)    Tanks and tank batteries.
         (A)   Tanks and tank batteries must be spaced at least:
            (i)   100 feet from any combustible structure; and
            (ii)   25 feet from all rights-of-way and property lines.
         (B)   The Dallas Fire Code may require additional spacing depending on
the size of the tank.
      (3)   Measurement. Spacing is measured from the center of the well bore
at the surface of the ground in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the closest point of the use, structure, or feature
creating the spacing requirement.
   (t)   Soil.
      (1)   In general.
         (A)   It is an offense to contaminate any soil above regulatory
thresholds and fail to expeditiously remediate the contaminated soil.
         (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, before any
drilling activities may occur on an operation site, soil sampling must be
conducted by a licensed third-party contractor retained by the city to
establish a baseline study of soil conditions on the operation site and
property within 2,000 feet of the boundary of the operation site.
         (C)   Soil samples must be collected and analyzed using proper
sampling and laboratory protocol set forth by the Environmental Protection
Agency or the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. The results of the
analyses must be given to the gas inspector with a copy of the report provided
to the operator and other property owners whose soil was sampled.
         (D)   The operator is responsible for the cost and fees associated
with pre-drilling and post-drilling soil sampling collection and analysis.
      (2)   Baseline.
         (A)   The licensed third-party contractor retained by the city must
collect and analyze a minimum of five soil samples at locations across the
operation site with at least two samples at or adjacent to any proposed
equipment to be used on the operation site and analyzed in accordance with this
subsection.
         (B)   If permission to access private property and conduct the
baseline study is granted, a minimum of five soil samples must be collected at
locations across each property located within 2,000 feet of the boundary of the
operation site and analyzed in accordance with this subsection. If permission
to access private property and conduct the baseline study is not granted, a
baseline study of soil conditions is not required for that property.
         (C)   The soil sample baseline study analyses must include:
            (i)   a description of the point samples and GPS coordinates of
each location;
            (ii)   planned equipment above the sampled area, if applicable;
            (iii)   methodology of sample collection;
            (iv)   description of field condition;
            (v)   summary of laboratory data results compared to the minimum
acceptable soil sampling criteria;
            (vi)    copies of all laboratory data sheets;
            (vii)   drawings of sample points; and
            (viii)   analysis of the following: TPH, VOCs, SVOCs, chloride,
barium, chromium, and ethylene glycol.
      (3)   Post-drilling.
         (A)   After the drilling of each well, the licensed third-party
contractor retained by the city must collect and analyze soil samples across
the operation site and analyzed in accordance with this subsection.
         (B)   Additionally, the city, using its licensed third-party
contractor, may conduct soil sampling during inspections to document soil
quality at the operation site.
      (4)   Abandonment. When the operation site is abandoned in accordance
with the Texas Railroad Commission requirements and Section
51A-12.205 and after the equipment for that well is removed from the operation
site, the operator shall collect soil samples of the abandoned operation site
to document that the final conditions are within regulatory requirements.
      (5)   Remediation. If prohibited amounts of a hazardous substance are
found at the operation site, the operator shall remediate the location within
30 days. After the operator remediates the operation site, the city, using its
licensed third-party contractor, must collect and analyze soil samples at
locations on the operation site as are necessary to determine compliance.
   (u)   Storage and vehicle parking. The only items that may be stored and
vehicles that may be parked on the operation site are those that are necessary
to the everyday operation of the well and do not constitute a fire hazard. The
fire department shall determine what constitutes a fire hazard.
   (v)   Vector control. The operator must comply with the vector control plan
approved as part of the gas well permit and all city ordinances, rules, and
regulations regarding mosquito larvae within a fresh-water fracturing pond or
elsewhere on the operation site. (Ord. Nos. 26920; 28424; 29228; 29557; 30239;
30654; 31314; 32864)
SEC. 51A-12.205.   ABANDONMENT AND RESTORATION.
   (a)    Abandonment of a well. The operator shall abandon each well after
production has ceased on that well. A well is considered abandoned if the Texas
Railroad Commission approves the abandonment, and the operator provides the gas
inspector with a copy of the Texas Railroad Commission’s approval.
   (b)    Abandonment and restoration of the operation site. The operator shall
abandon and restore the operation site within 60 days after production has
ceased on all wells located on the operation site. An operation site is not
considered abandoned until the gas inspector conducts an inspection of the
operation site and approves the abandonment and restoration. The gas inspector
shall approve the abandonment and restoration of the operation site if:
      (1)   the operation site is restored to its original condition, as nearly
as practicable, in accordance with the surface reclamation plan;
      (2)    all wells located on the operation site are plugged and all well
casings are cut and removed to a depth of at least three feet below surface;
      (3)    all equipment is removed from the operation site;
      (4)   the operator provides the gas inspector with a copy of the Texas
Railroad Commission’s approval of the abandonment for each well located on the
operation site;
      (5)    the abandonment complies with the Dallas Fire Code; and
      (6)   soil sampling has been conducted in accordance with this division
and all required remediation is completed in accordance with state and federal
regulations, this article, and all other city ordinances.
   (c)    Development after abandonment.
      (1)    No building permit may be issued for any construction on or
redevelopment of the operation site until the gas inspector approves the
abandonment and restoration of the operation site.
      (2)    No structure may be built over a vertical shaft of an abandoned
well. (Ord. Nos. 26920; 29228)
Division III. Regulated Pipelines.
SEC. 51A-12.301.   PIPELINE PERMIT.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   No person may participate or assist in site preparation,
installing, constructing, reconstructing, reworking, modifying, or replacing a
regulated pipeline or any section of a regulated pipeline, without first
obtaining a regulated pipeline permit issued by the city in accordance with
this division.
      (2)   A regulated pipeline permit is required in addition to any permit,
license, or agreement required under this article, other city ordinances, or
state or federal laws.
   (b)   Permit application. A regulated pipeline permit application must be in
writing, signed by the pipeline operator or the pipeline operator’s
representative, and filed with the gas inspector. The pipeline operator shall
provide the following information on a form furnished by the city:
      (1)   the name, business addresses, and telephone numbers of the pipeline
operator;
      (2)   the names, titles, and telephone numbers of the person:
         (A)   signing the application on behalf of the pipeline operator; and
         (B)   designated as the principal contact for the submittal;
      (3)   the person designated as the 24-hour emergency contact;
      (4)   the names, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of at least two
primary persons, officers, or contacts available on a 24-hour basis and at
least two alternative persons, officers, or contacts to be reached if the
primary contacts are unavailable who:
         (A)   can initiate appropriate actions to respond to an emergency;
         (B)   have access to information on the location of the closest
shutoff valve to any specific point in the city; and
         (C)   can furnish the common name of the material being carried by the
regulated pipeline;
      (5)   the origin point and the destination of the proposed pipeline;
      (6)   a text description of the general location of the proposed
regulated pipeline;
      (7)   the substance to be transported through the proposed regulated
pipeline;
      (8)   a copy of the material safety data sheet;
      (9)   an emergency response plan with procedures that provide for prompt
and effective response to emergencies, including:
         (A)   leaks or releases that can impact public health, safety, or
welfare;
         (B)   fire or explosions at or in the vicinity of a regulated pipeline
or pipeline easement;
         (C)   natural disasters;
         (D)   effective means to notify and communicate information to local
fire, police, and public officials during an emergency;
         (E)   the availability of personnel, equipment, tools, and materials
as necessary at the scene of an emergency;
         (F)   measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and
probability of accidental death or dismemberment;
         (G)   emergency shut down and pressure reduction of a regulated
pipeline;
         (H)   the safe restoration of service following an emergency or
incident; and
         (I)   a follow-up incident investigation to determine the cause of the
incident and require the implementation of corrective measures;
      (10)   engineering plans, drawings, and maps with summarized
specifications showing the horizontal location, covering depths, and location
of shutoff valves for the proposed regulated pipeline;
      (11)   plans showing the location of all proposed lift stations, pumps,
or other service structures related to the regulated pipeline;
      (12)   to the extent the information can be obtained, drawings showing
the location of other regulated pipelines and utilities that will be crossed or
paralleled within 15 feet of the proposed regulated pipeline;
      (13)   a description of the public safety considerations and avoidance,
as far as practicable, of habitable structures, protected uses, and areas where
people congregate;
      (14)   detailed cross-section drawings for all public street rights-of-
way and easement crossings;
      (15)   methods to be used to prevent both internal and external
corrosion;
      (16)   a binder or certificates of all bonds and insurance required in
accordance with this division;
      (17)   a tree survey that complies with
Article X; and
      (18)   a proposed alignment strip map showing the name and address of all
affected property owners.
   (c)   Review of permit applications.
      (1)   The gas inspector shall return incomplete applications to the
pipeline operator with a written explanation of the deficiencies.
      (2)   The gas inspector shall determine whether the regulated pipeline
permit should be issued, issued with conditions, or denied within 45 days after
receiving a complete regulated pipeline permit application. If the gas
inspector fails to make this determination within this specified time, the
regulated pipeline permit application is deemed denied.
      (3)   The gas inspector must issue a regulated pipeline permit if the
application meets the requirement of this division and all other applicable
city ordinances, rules, and regulations and state and federal law.
      (4)   If the application does not meet the requirements of this division
or other city rules or regulations, the gas inspector shall either deny the
application or issue the regulated pipeline application subject to written
conditions if compliance with the conditions eliminates the reasons for denial.
If the gas inspector denies a regulated pipeline permit application, the gas
inspector shall provide the pipeline operator with a written explanation of the
reasons for denial with 30 days.
   (d)   Expiration. A regulated pipeline permit shall expire if the regulated
pipeline has not been completed and the surface restored within two years. The
gas inspector may grant one extension of time not to exceed one year if the gas
inspector determines that weather or other unexpected physical conditions
justify an extension. If the regulated pipeline permit expires, and
construction of the regulated pipeline is not completed, the pipeline operator
shall immediately cease construction and complete any site remediation required
by this division or other applicable law, regulation, or ordinance.
   (e)   Revocation or suspension.
      (1)    If the pipeline operator violates this division or the regulated
pipeline permit, the gas inspector shall give written notice to the pipeline
operator describing the violation and giving the operator a reasonable time to
cure. The time to cure must take into account the nature and extent of the
violation, the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on public
health, safety, and welfare. The time to cure may not be less than 30 days
unless the violation:
         (A)   could cause imminent destruction of property or injury to
persons; or
         (B)   involves the operator’s failure to take a required immediate
action required by this division.
      (2)    If the operator fails to correct the violation within the
specified time, the gas inspector shall suspend or revoke the gas well permit.
The gas inspector shall also report any violations to the United States
Department of Transportation and Texas Railroad Commission and request that
these agencies take appropriate action.
      (3)    If a regulated pipeline permit is suspended, no person may engage
in any activities permitted under that regulated pipeline permit except for
those necessary to remedy the violation. If the violation is remedied, the gas
inspector shall reinstate the regulated pipeline permit, and the pipeline
operator may resume operations.
      (4)    If a regulated pipeline permit is revoked, the operator shall
obtain a new regulated pipeline permit before resuming operations.
      (5)    If the gas inspector denies, suspends, or revokes a regulated
pipeline permit, the gas inspector shall send the pipeline operator, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the decision and
the right to appeal.
      (6)    The operator has the right to appeal to the permit and license
appeal board in accordance with
Article IX of
Chapter 2 of the Dallas City Code. (Ord. 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.302.   INSURANCE.
   (a)   Each person must carry public liability insurance with a carrier rated
“A” or better by A.M. Best in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 for one person
and $5,000,000.00 for one accident and property damage insurance in the amount
of $10,000,000.00 for one accident, which shall remain in full force and effect
and be carried so long as the pipeline is operated.
   (b)   Each pipeline operator shall provide and maintain in full force and
effect during the term of its regulated pipeline permit insurance with the
following minimum limits:
      (1)   Worker’s compensation at statutory limits.
      (2)   Employer’s liability insurance with the following minimum limits
for bodily injury by:
         (i)   accident, $1,000,000 per each accident; and
         (ii)   disease, $1,000,000 per employee with a per-policy aggregate of
$1,000,000.
      (3)   Commercial general liability coverage, including blanket
contractual liability, products and completed operations, personal injury,
bodily injury, broad form property damage, operations hazard, pollution,
explosion, collapse and underground hazards for $2,000,000 per occurrence and
aggregate policy limit of $2,000,000.
      (4)   Automobile liability insurance (for automobiles used by the
pipeline operator in the course of its performance under the pipeline permit,
including employer’s non-ownership and hired auto coverage) for $2,000,000
combined single limit per occurrence.
      (5)   Umbrella liability insurance following the form of the primary
liability coverage described in Subsections (a) and (b) and providing coverage
with minimum combined bodily injury (including death) and property damage limit
of $25,000,000 per occurrence and $25,000,000 annual aggregate. Increased
primary liability limits equivalent to the umbrella liability insurance limits
specified will satisfy the umbrella liability insurance requirements.
   (c)   Performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit.
      (1)   Before issuance of a regulated pipeline permit, the pipeline
operator shall submit to the gas inspector a performance bond or irrevocable
letter of credit approved as to form by the city attorney in the amount of
$100,000.
      (2)   The performance bond is effective upon the issuance of the
regulated pipeline permit and must remain in full force and effect until all
work under the terms of the regulated pipeline permit has been completed.
      (3)   The performance bond may be amended to include other permitted
regulated pipelines. (Ord. 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.303.   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   A pipeline operator shall design, construct, repair, and maintain all
regulated pipelines in accordance with this division, other city ordinances,
rules and regulations, and state and federal laws.
   (b)   All new and relocated regulated pipelines must be located as near as
practicable to existing regulated pipelines or other utilities unless the
pipeline operator can demonstrate to the gas inspector that the alignment is
infeasible.
   (c)   Nothing in this section grants permission to use any street or other
public rights-of-way, utility easements, or city-owned property. To install,
construct, maintain, repair, replace, modify, remove, or operate a regulated
pipeline on, over, under, along, or across any affected city streets,
sidewalks, alleys, or other city property, the pipeline operator shall obtain
an easement or license.
   (d)   A pipeline operator must:
      (1)   not interfere with or damage existing utilities, including water,
sewer, gas, storm drains, electric lines, or the facilities of public utilities
or franchisees located on, under, or across street or other public rights-of-
way;
      (2)   equip all regulated pipelines with:
         (i)   an automated pressure monitoring system that detects leaks and
shuts off any line or any section of line that develops a leak; or
         (ii)   provide 24-hour pressure monitoring of the regulated pipeline
system that provides immediate notice of any leak to the city’s emergency
response providers;
      (3)   grade, level, and restore the affected property to the same surface
condition, as nearly as practicable, as existed before construction activities
were first commenced within 30 days after completion of the regulated pipeline;
and
      (4)   backfill all trenches and compact such trenches to 95 percent
standard density proctor in eight-inch lifts and construct the regulated
pipeline so as to maintain a minimum depth of ten feet below the finished grade
except in public rights-of-way, where minimum cover to the top of the pipe must
be at least eight feet below the bottom of any adjacent roadside ditch. The gas
inspector may require that sections of proposed regulated pipeline be
constructed at deeper depths based upon future city infrastructure needs.
During the backfill of any regulated pipeline excavations in open cut sections,
the pipeline operator shall bury “buried pipeline” warning tape one foot above
any regulated pipeline to warn future excavators of the presence of a buried
regulated pipeline. The gas inspector may also require that a proposed or
existing regulated pipeline be relocated if it conflict with the proposed
alignment and depth of a gravity dependent utility.
   (e)   When the required pipeline records are submitted to the Texas Railroad
Commission, the pipeline operator shall provide the gas inspector the following
information:
      (1)   Global positioning system (GPS) information sufficient to locate
the regulated pipelines, including the beginning and end points; sufficient
points in between the regulated pipeline route; and the depth of cover
information. This information must be submitted to the gas inspector in a
format compatible with the city’s own GIS system.
      (2)   As-built or record drawings of the regulated pipelines. The
accuracy of the record drawings must meet a survey level of one foot to 50,000
feet. The scale of the record drawings must be a minimum of one inch to 40
feet. The drawings must be provided in a digital file format with the location
tied to at least one nearby GPS city monument. If the new regulated pipeline
length exceeds 1,000 feet within the city, the regulated pipeline must be tied
to at least two GPS city monuments.
      (3)   The origin point and the destination of the regulated pipeline.
      (4)   Engineering plans, drawings, and maps with summarized
specifications showing the horizontal location, covering depths, and location
of shutoff valves of the subject regulated pipeline. The drawings must show the
location of other regulated pipelines and utilities that are crossed or
paralleled within 15 feet of the regulated pipeline right-of-way.
      (5)   Detailed cross-section drawings for all public rights-of-ways and
easement crossings on city property as permitted by the city.
      (6)   A list of the names and mailing addresses of all the residents,
property owners, and tenants adjacent to the regulated pipeline construction.
   (f)   Changes in any of the contact information required as part of the
regulated pipeline permit application must be provided to the gas inspector and
the fire marshal before the contact information is changed. (Ord. 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.304.   EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN AND INCIDENT REPORTING.
   (a)   The pipeline operator shall maintain and update the emergency response
plan to minimize hazards from an emergency.
   (b)   The pipeline operator shall meet annually with the gas inspector and
fire marshal to review the emergency response plan.
   (c)   At the annual review meeting,
      (1)   the pipeline operator shall:
         (A)   provide or update a copy of the emergency response plan;
         (B)   review the responsibilities of each governmental organization in
response to an emergency or incident;
         (C)   review the capabilities of the pipeline operator to respond to
an emergency or incident;
         (D)   identify the types of emergencies or incidents that will result
in or require contacting the city; and
         (E)   plan mutual activities that the city and the pipeline operator
can engage in to minimize risks associated with pipeline operation; and
      (2)   the city shall provide the pipeline operator with a list of
additional contacts that must be made if a pipeline emergency or incident
occurs. The city will inform the pipeline operator of the emergency response
groups that will be contacted through 911.
   (d)   Upon discovering a pipeline emergency or incident, any affected
pipeline operator shall, as soon as practical, communicate to the city’s 911
system the following information:
      (1)   a general description of the emergency or incident;
      (2)   the location of the emergency or incident;
      (3)   the name and telephone number of the person reporting the emergency
or incident;
      (4)   the name of the pipeline operator;
      (5)   whether any hazardous material is involved and identification of
the hazardous material; and
      (6)   any other information as requested by the emergency dispatcher or
other official at the time of reporting the emergency or incident.
   (e)   Each pipeline operator shall equip and maintain a regulated pipeline
containing natural gas with hydrogen sulfide in concentrations of more than 100
parts per 1,000,000,000 with an audible alarm system that will provide notice
to the general public in the event of a leak. The audible alarm system must be
of a type and design approved by the gas inspector.
   (f)   A pipeline operator shall report to the gas inspector all nonemergency
incidents involving well safety or integrity by completing an incident report
on a form furnished by the city. Incident reports must be filed by the pipeline
operator within 24 hours after discovering the incident. (Ord. 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.305.   MARKERS.
   (a)   The pipeline operator is responsible for maintaining markers in
accordance with this section and state and federal laws.
   (b)   The location of all new or replacement pipe and regulated pipeline
must be marked by the pipeline operator or the person installing or operating
the regulated pipelines as follows:
      (1)   Marker signs must be placed at all locations where pipe or
regulated pipelines cross property boundary lines and at each side of a public
rights-of-way or private street that the regulated pipeline crosses.
      (2)   The top of all marker signs must be a minimum of four feet above
ground level; the support post must be sufficient to support the marker sign;
and the markers must be painted yellow or another color approved by the
director of the department of transportation and public works.
      (3)   All marker signs must be a minimum of 12 inches square and must be
marked as “gas pipe line.”
      (4)   All marker signs must contain the name of the pipeline operator and
a 24-hour local contact number.
      (5)   Regulated pipelines must be marked along their entire length with a
buried metal wire and metallic flag tape.
      (6)   All signs must also contain an 811 designation “call before you
dig” statement.
      (7)   The pipeline operator shall annually replace signage that has been
lost, damaged, or removed. (Ord. Nos. 29228; 32864)
SEC. 51A-12.306.   ONE-CALL SYSTEM.
   (a)   A pipeline operator shall be a member in good standing with the one-
call system or other approved excavation monitoring system as required by state
law.
   (b)   A pipeline operator shall contract for service with the selected
underground utility coordinating system for a minimum of five years unless
there is an agreement between the pipeline operator and the city to change to
an alternate system. The pipeline operator shall maintain the contract for
services without interruption for the life of the regulated pipeline permit.
(Ord. 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.307.   PIPELINE INFORMATION REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The pipeline operator must file with the gas inspector an annual
verified report in letter form on or before June 30 of each year to cover the
reporting period of June 1 through May 31. The annual report must include the
following information:
      (1)   A statement that the regulated pipeline has no outstanding safety
violations as determined in an inspection or audit by either the Texas Railroad
Commission or the United States Department of Transportation.
      (2)   If any safety violations, as determined by the Railroad Commission
or the United States Department of Transportation, have not been corrected, the
violations must be reported and an action plan to correct the safety violations
must be provided. The action plan must include a timeline for corrective action
and the individual or firm responsible for each action.
      (3)   If the pipeline operator has no reporting responsibility to the
Texas Railroad Commission or the United States Department of Transportation and
is otherwise exempt from the safety regulations of either agency, the following
documents pertaining to the preceding reporting period of June 1 through May
31:
         (A)   copies of internal reports of responses to pipeline emergencies;
         (B)   current operations and maintenance logs; and
         (C)   current emergency action plan.
      (4)   Evidence that the pipeline operator has current liability insurance
in accordance with this division.
      (5)   A statement that the regulated pipeline information provided is
correct. If the information provided is no longer correct, updated or corrected
information.
   (b)   The pipeline operator must, upon the request by the gas inspector,
make available a log of all the maintenance and monitoring activities conducted
on all pipelines subject to this division for the reporting period must be made
available upon request by the gas inspector.
   (c)   The pipeline operator shall file a copy of all initial or follow-up
reports provided to the Texas Railroad Commission and the United States
Department of Transportation on unsafe pipeline conditions, pipeline
emergencies, or pipeline incidents with the gas inspector. The pipeline
operator shall file with the gas inspector any initial or follow-up reports
filed with state and federal regulatory agencies regarding pipeline releases
concurrently with the city. (Ord. 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.308.   PUBLIC EDUCATION.
   All pipeline operators must annually provide affected landowners, public
officials, and emergency providers with appropriate public awareness
information in accordance with 49 CFR 192.616 and 195.440. (Ord. 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.309.   REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   All repairs and maintenance of pipelines must be performed in
accordance with the United States Department of Transportation and Texas
Railroad Commission mechanical integrity requirements.
   (b)   A pipeline operator shall protect, maintain in a state of good repair
and condition, and regularly paint all pipeline risers and appurtenances
related to pipeline construction and operations that are composed of materials
generally protected or painted.
   (c)   If non-emergency repairs require excavation of a regulated pipeline,
the pipeline operator shall provide written notice to the residents, property
owners, and tenants within 500 feet, measured from the centerline of the
pipeline to be excavated, at least five days before beginning the repairs.
   (d)   If above-ground non-emergency repairs that are not routine maintenance
are required, the pipeline operator shall provide written notice to the
residents, property owners, and tenants within 500 feet, measured from the
centerline of the pipeline section to be repaired, at least five days before
beginning the repairs. The written notice must be:
      (1)   sent by United States mail, postage prepaid, at least five days
before beginning any non-emergency repair; or
      (2)   hand-delivery at least three days before beginning the non-
emergency repairs. (Ord. 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.310.   NO ASSUMPTION OF RESPONSIBILITY BY CITY.
   Nothing in this division shall be construed as an assumption by the city of
any responsibility of a pipeline operator of a pipeline not owned by the city,
and no city officer, employee, or agent has the authority to relieve a pipeline
operator of their responsibility under this division or by any other law,
ordinance, rule, or regulation. (Ord. 29228)
SEC. 51A-12.311.   ABANDONED PIPELINES.
   (a)   All regulated pipelines must be maintained in an active condition
unless abandoned in accordance with state and federal regulations.
   (b)   Within 60 days after the pipeline becomes idle or inactive, a pipeline
must be purged and plugged.
   (c)   The pipeline operator shall notify the gas inspector in writing within
30 days after a pipeline is abandoned. Within 60 days after abandonment, the
regulated pipeline must be purged and plugged.
   (d)   To reactivate an abandoned pipeline, the pipeline operator shall apply
for a new regulated pipeline permit in accordance with this division.
   (e)   A reactivated regulated pipeline must be pressure tested for integrity
and compliance with the Texas Railroad Commission and the United States
Department of Transportation regulations. A regulated gas permit application to
reactivate an abandoned pipeline must include the results of the pressure
testing. (Ord. 29228)
Division IV. Violations.
SEC. 51A-12.401.    VIOLATIONS.
   (a)    A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this article if
the person:
      (1)    refuses the gas inspector access to an operation site or a
regulated pipeline;
      (2)    fails to comply with a gas inspector’s orders; or
      (3)    fails to comply with any provision of this article.
   (b)    A person who knowingly violates any provision of this article is
guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the
violation is continued. Each offense is punishable by a fine of $2,000. This
fine shall be doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within any
24-month period and trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the
same offense within any 24-month period. See Section
51A-1.103 for additional provisions on enforcement. (Ord. Nos. 26920; 29228)
ARTICLE XIII.
FORM DISTRICTS.
Division 51A-13.100.
General Provisions.
SEC. 51A-13.101.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this article is to provide an additional tool for the
implementation of forwardDallas!. This article is not intended to preclude the
use of planned development districts.
   (b)   This article is intended to create walkable urban neighborhoods where
higher-density mixed uses and mixed housing-types promote less dependence on
the automobile.
   (c)   These areas are intended to transition successfully to existing
neighborhoods through the judicious mapping of permitted districts.
SEC. 51A-13.102.   APPLICABILITY.
   The following provisions in Chapter 51A apply to this article:
      (1)   Article I, “General Provisions.”
      (2)   Article II, “Interpretations and Definitions.”
      (3)   Article III, “Decisionmaking and Administrative Bodies.”
      (4)   The following provisions of Article IV, “Zoning Regulations”:
         (A)   Section
51A-4.101, “New Zoning Districts Established.”
         (B)   Section
51A-4.103, “Zoning District Map.”
         (C)   Section
51A-4.104, “Zoning District Boundaries.”
         (D)   Section
51A-4.105, “Interpretation of District Regulations.”
         (E)   Portions of Sections
51A-4.201 through
51A-4.217 of Division 51A-4.200, “Use Regulations,” as follows:
            (i)   In the RTN district, the use definitions, parking
requirements, and additional provisions apply.
            (ii)   In the WMU and WR districts, only the use definitions and
additional provisions apply.
         (F)   Section
51A-4.218, “Limited Uses.”
         (G)   Section
51A-4.219, “Specific Use Permit (SUP).”
         (H)   Section
51A-4.220, “Classification of New Uses.”
         (I)   Section
51A-4.221, “Sexually Oriented Businesses.”
         (J)   In the RTN district, the residential parking design standards of
Division 51A-4.300, “Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.”
         (K)   In all form districts, the following provisions of Division 51A-
4.300, “Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations”:
            (i)   Section
51A-4.301(d), “Construction and Maintenance Provisions for Off-Street Parking.”
            (ii)   Section
51A-4.301(e), “Lighting Provisions for Off-Street Parking,” except as modified
in Section
51A-13.601.
            (iii)   Section
51A-4.301(h), “Residential Alley Access Restrictions for Nonresidential Uses.”
            (iv)   Section
51A-4.304 (d), “Off-Street Stacking Space Regulations.”
            (v)   Section
51A-4.305, “Handicapped Parking Regulations.”
            (vi)   Section
51A-4.306, “Off-Street Parking in the Central Business District” (if the
property is located within the Central Business District).
         (L)   Section
51A-4.411, “Shared Access Development.”
         (M)   Section
51A-4.412, “Residential Proximity Slope.” (N) Section
51A-4.501, “Historic Overlay District.”
         (O)   Section
51A-4.503, “D and D-1 Liquor Control Overlay Districts.”
         (P)   Section
51A-4.504, “Airport Flight Overlay District.”
         (Q)   Section
51A-4.508, “Turtle Creek Environmental Overlay” (if the property is located
within the corridor).
         (R)   Division 51A-4.600, “Regulations of Special Applicability,”
except that the fence height special exception in Section
51A-4.602(a)(6) and the design standards in Section
51A-4.605 do not apply.
         (S)   Division 51A-4.700, “Zoning Procedures,” except that Paragraph
(1) of Section
51A-4.704(c), “Nonconforming Structures,” is replaced by the following text:
“Except as provided in Subsection 51A-4.704(c)(2), a person may renovate,
remodel, repair, rebuild, or enlarge a nonconforming structure if the work does
not cause the structure to become more nonconforming as to building placement,
building height, building facade, garage placement, open space, or landscaping
regulations.”
      (5)   Article V, “Flood Plain and Escarpment Zone Regulations.”
      (6)   Article VI, “Environmental Performance Standards.”
      (7)   Article VII, “Sign Regulations,” except as modified in Section
51A-13.603, “Signs.”
      (8)   Article VIII, “Plat Regulations,” except that Section
51A-8.604(c), “Minor Street Criteria,” does not apply.
      (9)   Article IX, “Thoroughfares.”
      (10)   Article X, “Landscape and Tree Preservation Regulations,” except
for Section
51A-10.110, Sections
51A-10.125(a), (b)(1), (2), (3)(A) and (5) through (7), and Section
51A-10.126.
      (11)   Article XI, “Development Incentives.”
      (12)   Article XII, “Gas Drilling and Production.”
      (13)   Any provision of Chapter 51A specifically stated as applying to
this article.
         (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, additions to
nonconforming structures that total 35 percent or less of the floor area
existing when the structure became nonconforming must comply with the use and
placement requirements and the height and elements requirements in Section
51A-13.304 for each development type.
         (ii)   Additions to the nonconforming structure that total 35 percent
or less of the floor area existing when the structure became nonconforming:
            (aa)   are not required to comply with maximum setback
requirements, minimum story requirements, or minimum story height requirements;
            (bb)   are not required to have an entrance on a primary street;
            (cc)   must be constructed within the buildable envelope but are
not required to fill the entire buildable envelope; and
            (dd)   do not trigger compliance with the blocks and street
standards in Section
51A-13.502(a)(2).
         (iii)   An addition to a nonconforming structure that exceeds 35
percent of the floor area existing when the structure became nonconforming must
comply with Article XIII regulations.
(Am. Ord. 29827, passed 8-15-15)
SEC. 51A-13.103.   CONFLICTS.
   (a)   If there is a conflict between this article and a provision in another
article of this chapter, this article controls.
   (b)   If there is a conflict between a chart or illustration in this article
and the text of this article, the text of this article controls.
Division 51A-13.200.
Definitions.
SEC. 51A-13.201.   DEFINED TERMS.
   In this article, unless the context requires otherwise:
      (1)   ACTIVE USE means a use allowed in the applicable district other
than parking.
      (2)   APARTMENT means a development type as defined in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (3)   ATTIC STORY means habitable or uninhabitable space within a
building situated within the structure of a pitched roof and above the
uppermost regular story.
      (4)   BAIL BONDS means a business that acts as a surety and pledges money
or property as bail for the appearance of a criminal defendant in court.
      (5)   BLANK WALL AREA means any portion of the exterior of a building
that does not include a material change, windows or doors, or columns,
pilasters, or other articulation greater than 12 inches in depth. Blank wall
area is measured horizontally on each story.
      (5.1)   BLOCKFACE means all lots on one side of a street between two
consecutive intersections, measured along the inner edges of each street right-
of-way or pedestrian passage.
      (5.2)   BUILDABLE ENVELOPE means the three dimensional form within which
the horizontal and vertical elements of a structure must be built to comply
with the use and placement requirements and the height and elements
requirements in Section
51A-13.304 for each development type.
      (6)   CHECK CASHING means a business that provides check cashing, payday
cash advance, payroll advance, short-term cash loan, instant payday cash
advance, and short-term money loan services to individuals for a specified fee.
      (7)   CIVIC BUILDING means a development type as defined in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (8)   DEVELOPMENT TYPE means a development type defined by its form and
function in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (9)   DISTRICT PARKING SPACE means a parking space in a parking
management overlay.
      (10)   DOOR YARD means the area between the edge of the sidewalk furthest
from the street and the front building facade.
      (11)   DROP-IN DAY CARE CENTER means a facility providing child care for
children, none of whom are related to the primary caregiver, for short periods
of time. An individual child may receive care in excess of four hours per day,
but may not receive care in excess of a total of 20 hours per week.
      (12)   GENERAL COMMERCIAL means a development type as defined in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (13)   GROUND STORY means the story closest to and above grade along the
street.
      (14)   HALF (½) STORY means an attic story.
      (15)   HARDSCAPE means paving with concrete, stamped concrete, pavers, or
other similar materials, including permeable materials approved by the building
official.
      (15.1)   HORIZONTAL FACADE ARTICULATION means the interval on a primary
or side street facing facade that differentiates the ground story, upper story,
and each additional upper story as applicable. Horizontal facade articulation
includes, but is not limited to, overhangs, shadow lines, change in material,
color, pattern, texture, or any variation of treatments that simulate
individual stories.
      (16)   MANOR HOUSE means a development type as defined in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (17)   MASSAGE PARLOR means any building, room, place, or establishment,
other than a regularly licensed hospital, where manipulated massage or
manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly
licensed physician or chiropractor whether with or without the use of
mechanical, therapeutic, or bathing devices, including Turkish bathhouses. This
use does not include duly licensed beauty parlors or barbershops or a place
wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a
licensed physician and operated only under the physician’s direction.
      (18)   MIXED USE PROJECT means a development on one building site with a
combination of residential, civic, place of worship, office, retail, service
and entertainment, commerce, or fabrication uses.
      (19)   MIXED USE SHOPFRONT means a development type as defined in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (20)   OPEN SPACE LOT means a development type as defined in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (21)   PRIMARY STREET means the principal frontage for a building site,
as defined during site plan review. Any street designated with a -SH overlay is
a primary street.
      (22)   REGULATING PLAN means a plan described in Division 51A-13.700,
“Administration.”
      (23)   SERVICE STREET means a service street designated on a regulating
plan or site plan.
      (24)   SIDE STREET means a frontage that is not a primary street, as
defined during site plan review.
      (25)   SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSE means a development type as defined in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (26)   SINGLE-STORY SHOPFRONT means a development type as defined in
Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (27)   SITE PLAN means a site plan as required in Section
51A-13.703, “Site Plan Review.”
      (28)   STACKED TOWNHOUSE means Townhouse Stacked.
      (29)   STREET FRONTAGE means that portion of a building that must be
located within the required setback area, expressed as a percentage of lot
width.
      (30)   STREETSCAPE means the area between back of curb and the face of a
building, including the planting zone, sidewalk, and door yard.
      (31)   TATTOO OR BODY PIERCING SHOP means a business which produces an
indelible mark or figure on the human body by scarring or inserting a pigment
under the skin using needles, scalpels, or other related equipment and a
facility where the piercing of body parts, other than ears, is performed for
purposes of allowing the inser- tion of jewelry.
      (32)   TOWNHOUSE means a development type as defined in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (33)   TOWNHOUSE STACKED means a development type as defined in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
      (34)   TRANSPARENCY means the total area of window and door opening
filled with glass, expressed as a percentage of the total facade area by story,
except that structured parking transparency is not required to be filled with
glass.
      (35)   UPPER STORY means any story above the ground story.
(Am. Ord. 29827, passed 8-15-15; Am. Ord. 30889, passed 6-13-18)
Division 51A-13.300.
District Regulations.
SEC. 51A-13.301.    DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   Walkable Urban Mixed Use (WMU-3,-5,-8,-12,-20,-40).
      (1)   The Walkable Urban Mixed Use (WMU) districts are intended to
accommodate a mix of compatible uses in close proximity to one another in a
pedestrian-friendly environment.
      (2)   The WMU districts are divided into three intensities: low (WMU-3, -
5); medium (WMU-8, -12); and high (WMU-20, -40).
      (3)   The WMU districts are intended to accommodate a limited set of
development types. (See Section
51A-13.304(a)(1), “Development Types by District.”)
      (4)   Parcels of any size are eligible for a WMU district. There is no
minimum acreage required for an application for WMU zoning. The WMU districts
are intended for locations where a sufficient critical mass of dense, walkable
urban mixed use development exists or is definitely planned. This critical mass
is present when:
         (A)   the surrounding area consists of at least 40 acres of existing
or defi- nitely planned WMU or WR zoning, high density multifamily zoning,
multiple use zoning, or planned development zoning with equivalent
characteristics;
         (B)   the surrounding area consists of at least 25 acres proposed by
an adopted area plan pursuant to forwardDallas! for WMU or WR zoning, high
density multifamily zoning, multiple use zoning, or planned development zoning
with equivalent characteristics; or
         (C)   the applicant demonstrates that the surrounding area is at least
25 acres and is or will be a mix of dense residential, commercial, and other
uses that will achieve the intent of this article for increased walkability,
reduced vehicular trip generation, and reduced parking demand.
      (5)   The WMU districts are intended for use in the vicinity of rail
transit stations, immediately adjacent to the Central Business District, and in
the 23 study areas of the Trin- ity River Comprehensive Plan. These districts
are also appropriate for major job centers and concentrations of multifamily
housing where an area plan pursuant to forwardDallas! has been adopted.
   (b)   Walkable Urban Residential (WR-3,-5,-8,-12,-20,-40).
      (1)   The Walkable Urban Residential (WR) districts are intended to
create residential neighborhoods with mixed housing options in a pedestrian-
friendly environment.
      (2)   The WR districts are divided into three intensities: low (WR-3, -
5); medium (WR-8, -12); and high (WR-20, -40).
      (3)   The WR districts are intended to accommodate a limited set of
development types. (See Section
51A-13.304(a)(1), “Development Types by District.”)
      (4)   Parcels of any size are eligible for a WR district. There is no
minimum acre- age required for an application for WR zoning. The WR districts
are intended for locations where a sufficient critical mass of dense, walkable
urban mixed use development exists or is definitely planned. This critical mass
is present when:
         (A)   the surrounding area consists of at least 40 acres of existing
or defi- nitely planned WMU or WR zoning, high density multifamily zoning,
multiple use zoning, or planned development zoning with equivalent
characteristics;
         (B)   the surrounding area consists of at least 25 acres proposed by
and is part of an adopted area plan pursuant to forwardDallas! for WMU or WR
zoning, high density multifamily zoning, multiple use zoning, or planned
development zoning with equivalent characteristics; or
         (C)   the applicant demonstrates that the surrounding area is at least
25 acres and is or will be a mix of dense residential, commercial, and other
uses that will achieve the intent of this article for increased walkability,
reduced vehicular trip generation, and reduced parking demand.
      (5)   The WR districts are intended for use in the vicinity of rail
transit stations, im- mediately adjacent to the Central Business District, and
in the 23 study areas of the Trinity River Comprehensive Plan. These districts
are also appropriate for major job centers and concentrations of multifamily
housing where an area plan pursuant to forwardDallas! has been adopted.
   (c)   Residential Transition (RTN).
      (1)   The Residential Transition (RTN) district provides single-family
and duplex living intended to serve as a land use transition between the more
intense WMU or WR districts and established single-family neighborhoods. The
RTN district may be a stand- alone district.
      (2)   The RTN district is a low intensity district.
      (3)   This RTN district is intended to accommodate a limited set of
development types with up to two dwelling units per lot. (See Section
51A-13.304(a)(1), “Development Types by District.”)
      (4)   The RTN district must be applied as a buffer of at least half a
block in depth between a proposed WMU or WR district that abuts or is across an
adjoining alley or minor street from any single family neighborhood.
   (d)   Shopfront Overlay (-sh).
      (1)   The Shopfront (-SH) overlay is intended to create pedestrian
shopping streets through the designation of specific street frontages with
development types that support active uses.
      (2)   The -SH overlay may be applied over any WMU or WR district.
      (3)   The -SH overlay is intended to accommodate a limited set of
development types. (See Section
51A-13.304(a)(1), “Development Types by District.”)
      (4)   Where a -SH overlay designation has been applied to a WMU or WR
district, the standards for a mixed use or single-story shopfront development
type apply to at least the first 30 feet of the building measured inward from
the street-facing facade. In a WR district, uses allowed by the -SH overlay
that are not allowed in a WR district may extend no more than the first 50 feet
of the building measured inward from the street-facing facade.
      (5)   Any street designated with a -SH overlay is a primary street.
      (6)   The boundaries of a -SH overlay are not required to follow lot
lines or match parcel boundaries.
      (7)   A shopfront overlay may be designated internal to a site in
anticipation of a planned public or private street.
   (e)   Height Map Overlay (-HM).
      (1)   Purpose.
         The height map (-HM) overlay is intended to modify the height
requirements in the underlying zoning district. The -HM overlay may also be
used to address the potential tunnel effect of tall buildings along roadway
corridors.
      (2)   In General.
         The boundaries of a -HM overlay are not required to follow lot lines
or match parcel boundaries.
      (3)   Height Modifications Required.
         (A)   Reduction of Maximum Height.
            The -HM overlay may reduce the maximum height in any district.
         (B)   Increase of Maximum Height.
            The -HM overlay may increase the maximum height in the WMU-40 and
WR-40 districts.
      (4)   Reduction of Minimum Height Prohibited.
         An -HM overlay may not be used to reduce the minimum height provisions
of Section
51A-13.302(b).
   (f)   Parking Management Overlay (-PM).
      (1)   The Parking Management (-PM) overlay is intended to:
         (A)   address parking needs within a designated area on an area-wide
basis rather than on a parcel-by-parcel basis;
         (B)   establish a parking management program to achieve the most
efficient use of available parking facilities within a designated area;
         (C)   reduce traffic congestion and parking shortages; and
         (D)   encourage joint-use parking facilities.
      (2)   The city council may establish a -PM overlay in accordance with
Section
51A-13.410, “Parking Management Overlay (-PM).”
SEC. 51A-13.302.   HEIGHT.
   (a)   Maximum District Height.
      (1)   Height within a WMU, WR, or RTN district cannot exceed the maximum
height limit below (in feet or stories), except as otherwise provided in this
section.
Intensity District Height in Stories (max) Height in Feet (max)
Intensity District      Height in Stories (max) Height in Feet (max)
          RTN           2½                     35
LOW       WMU-3, WR-3   3½                     50
          WMU-5, WR-5   5                       80
MEDIUM    WMU-8, WR-8   8                       125
          WMU-12, WR-12 12                      180
HIGH      WMU-20, WR-20 20                      300
          WMU-40, WR-40 40                      600
 
      (2)   Single-story shopfront, townhouse stacked, townhouse, manor house,
and single-family house development types have maximum height limits that may
be lower than the district height limits. (See Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”)
      (3)   Maximum height may be reduced by a -HM overlay.
      (4)   Height greater than 40 stories or 600 feet in WMU-40 or WR-40 is
allowed through application of the -HM overlay.
   (b)   Minimum District Height.
      (1)   Height within a WMU, WR, or RTN district must meet or exceed the
minimum requirements below (in stories), except as otherwise provided in this
section.
Intensity District Height in Stories (min)
Intensity District      Height in Stories (min)
          RTN           1
LOW       WMU-3, WR-3   1
          WMU-5, WR-5   1
MEDIUM    WMU-8, WR-8   2
          WMU-12, WR-12 2
HIGH      WMU-20, WR-20 4
          WMU-40, WR-40 5
 
      (2)   Mixed use shopfront, townhouse stacked, townhouse, and manor house
development types are required to be at least two stories in height regardless
of the minimum district height. (See Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”)
      (3)   The minimum height provisions apply to the first 30 feet of the
building measured inward from the street-facing facade on any primary or side
street, except that up to 20 percent of the required street frontage may be
lower than the minimum height for the district.
      (4)   A -HM overlay cannot be used to override the minimum height
provisions of this section.
      (5)   No minimum height requirements apply to civic buildings or open
space lots.
   (c)   Measurement of Height.
      (1)   Except as provided in this paragraph, height is measured as defined
in Section
51A-2.102, “Definitions.”
      (2)   An attic story is considered a half-story and counts toward the
calculation of maximum number of stories.
      (3)   A basement is not considered a story.
      (4)   If a ground story is more than five feet above grade, the space
below that floor counts as an additional story.
   (d)   Story Height.
      (1)   Ground story height is measured from the ground story finished
floor to the top of the ground story horizontal facade articulation break.
      (2)   Upper story height is measured from the top of the ground story
horizontal facade articulation break to the top of each additional upper story
horizontal facade articulation break.
      (3)   At least 80 percent of each story must meet the minimum and maximum
ground- and upper-story height provisions.
   (e)   Height Exceptions.
      (1)   Structures accessory to utility, public service, and institutional
uses may be erected to any height consistent with FAA airspace limitations,
airport flight overlay district regulations, residential proximity slope height
restrictions, and the building code, except that local utility and transmission
and distribution lines and supporting structures are exempt from residential
proximity slope height restrictions.
      (2)   In the RTN district, the following accessory structures may exceed
the district height limits of this section provided they do not exceed the
maximum district height by more than 12 feet:
         (A)   Amateur communications tower.
         (B)   Cooling tower.
         (C)   Clerestory.
         (D)   Chimney and vent stack.
         (E)   Elevator penthouse or bulkhead.
         (F)   Flagpoles.
         (G)   Mechanical equipment room.
         (H)   Ornamental cupola or dome.
         (I)   Parapet wall, limited to a height of four feet.
         (J)   Stairway access to roof.
         (K)   Roof top deck.
         (L)   Skylights.
         (M)   Spires and belfries.
         (N)   Solar panels.
         (O)   Tank designed to hold liquids.
         (P)   Visual screens surrounding roof-mounted mechanical equipment.
         (Q)   Wind turbines and other integrated renewable energy systems.
   (f)   Residential Proximity Slope.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, no portion of a building or
structure over 26 feet in height may be located above the residential proximity
slope as established in Section
51A-4.412.
      (2)   If a parcel of land subject to a height restriction similar to the
residential proximity slope in Section
51A-4.412 is rezoned to a WMU, WR, or RTN district, the city council must adopt
an -HM overlay applicable to the parcel. The -HM overlay and any amendments to
the overlay must provide the same height restrictions applicable to the parcel
before rezoning.
      (3)   Form districts are not sites of origination in the application of
the residential proximity slope regulations of Section
51A-4.412.
(Am. Ord. 30889, passed 6-13-18)
SEC. 51A-13.303.   OPEN SPACE.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   NET LAND AREA means gross land area minus street right-of-way.
      (2)   OFF-SITE OPEN SPACE means open space that is not located on the
building site but is within a quarter of a mile walking distance of the
property. Off-site open space may consist of parks, wildlife preserves, or any
form of open space lot as described in this article.
      (3)   ON-SITE OPEN SPACE means the portion of a building site that is
accessible to all occupants of that building site (or to the general public if
dedicated as public open space) and principally open to the sky but allows for
architectural elements such as colonnades, pergolas, and gazebos. The space
must be a contiguous open area of not less than 10 feet in width or length.
      (4)   OPEN SPACE means off-site and on-site open space.
   (b)   Open Space Required.
      At least eight percent of the net land area of a building site in a form
district must be provided as open space. Compliance with this requirement must
be demonstrated at the time of application for a building permit.
   (c)   Options For Compliance.
      (1)   In General.
         Open space may be provided as a dedication of land to the city, as
private open space, or as a combination thereof. Subject to the limitations of
this section, open space may be located on-site, off-site, or both, and need
not be contiguous.
      (2)   On-site Open Space.
         (A)   On-site open space may be provided at or below grade or above-
ground through the use of an outside roof deck, rooftop garden, pool area, or
similar type of outside common area. No more than 50 percent of the required
on-site open space may be provided as door yards, colonnades, or landscaped
medians. Except for emergency vehicles, on-site open space cannot be parked or
driven upon.
         (B)   On-site open space must be landscaped in accordance with the
following requirements:
            (i)   Plantings must comply with the general landscaping standards
set forth in Section
51A-13.304(a)(2), “Landscaping.”
            (ii)   One large canopy tree must be provided for every 2,500
square feet of required open space area. Two small canopy trees may be
substituted per re- quired large tree.
            (iii)   Site trees must be evenly distributed throughout the
development.
      (3)   Fee-in-Lieu.
         The open space requirement may be satisfied by the payment of a fee-
in-lieu if the property that is the subject of the requirement is located
within a public improve- ment district or tax increment financing district with
an established open space fund. See Section
51A-10.135(c)(2) for the calculation of the fee-in-lieu amount.
      (4)   Credit.
         A credit of up to 50 percent of the open space requirement is allowed
for existing public open space within a quarter of a mile walking distance of
the building site.
   (d)   Artifical Lot. For building sites over two acres in size, the
artificial lot provisions in Section
51A-10.122 may apply.
(Am. Ord. 29827, passed 8-15-15)
SEC. 51A-13.304.    DEVELOPMENT TYPES.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   Development Types by District.
         Mixed Use Single-   General              Townhouse           Manor Single- Civic    Open
         Shopfront Story     Commercial Apartment Stacked   Townhouse House Family  Building Space
                   Shopfront                                                House            Lot
District Mu        Ss        Gc         Apt       Ts        Th        Mh    Sf      Civ      O
            Mixed Use Single-   General              Townhouse           Manor Single- Civic    Open
            Shopfront Story     Commercial Apartment Stacked   Townhouse House Family  Building Space
                      Shopfront                                                House            Lot
District    Mu        Ss        Gc         Apt       Ts        Th        Mh    Sf      Civ      O
Walkable
Urban Mixed
Use (WMU)
Low (WMU-3, ∙       ∙       ∙        ∙       ∙       ∙       ∙           ∙      ∙
WMU-5)
Medium
(WMU-8,     ∙                 ∙        ∙       ∙       ∙                     ∙      ∙
WMU-12)
High (WMU-  ∙                 ∙        ∙                                         ∙      ∙
20, WMU-40)
Walkable
Urban
Residential
(WR)
Low (WR-3,            ∙*                 ∙       ∙       ∙       ∙           ∙      ∙
WR-5)
Medium (WR-                                ∙       ∙       ∙                     ∙      ∙
8, WR-12)
High (WR-                                  ∙                                         ∙      ∙
20, WR-40)
Residential
Transition                                                     ∙       ∙   ∙     ∙      ∙
(RTN)
Shopfront
(-SH)
Overlay     ∙       ∙                                                              ∙      ∙
over any
WMU or WR
district
* Office and Medical allowed only along thoroughfare
      (2)   Landscaping.
         (A)   In General.
            (i)   Specific landscaping requirements for each development type
are provided in Subsections (b) through (k) of this section.
            (ii)   All street trees must meet the requirements of Section
51A-10.125(b)(4).
            (iii)   All site trees must be a minimum of two inches in caliper
at time of planting and may not be located closer than four feet to any paved
surface (measured from the center of the tree trunk).
            (iv)   All site tree in-ground planting areas must be a minimum of
100 square feet for a large tree and 50 square feet for a small tree. Planters
for large or small trees must be a minimum of 25 square feet.
            (v)   Site trees must be large tree species listed in Section
51A-10.134. Small tree species may be substituted at a rate of two small trees
per required large tree.
            (vi)   Existing healthy site trees may be used to satisfy the site
tree requirements of this section in accordance with Section
51A-10.125(b)(3)(B). Whether a site tree is healthy is a determination made by
the building official.
            (vii)   In the RTN district, at least 50 percent of all required
yards must be landscaped with turf, groundcover, soil, or mulch.
         (B)   Shared Access Developments.
            (i)   One site tree must be provided for every 4,000 square feet,
or portion thereof, within the shared access development, or a minimum of one
site tree must be provided for each individual dwelling unit in the shared
access development, whichever is greater.
            (ii)   Site trees must be evenly distributed throughout the shared
access development.
      (3)   Parking Setbacks and Access.
         (A)   On-site surface parking must be located behind the parking
setback line.
         (B)   The parking setback line applies only to the ground story.
         (C)   Except when configured as a multi-way boulevard or indented
parking, no on-site surface parking is permitted between a building and the
street. (See Division 51A-13.500, “Minor Streets and Streetscapes.”)
         (D)   Structured parking must contain active uses on the ground story
along any -SH overlay or any primary street for the first 30 feet of the
building measured inward from the street-facing facade. There is no active
ground-story use requirement for structured parking along a service street.
         (E)   The requirements of Subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), and (D) above
do not apply to on-street or underground parking.
         (F)   The required street frontage may be interrupted to allow for a
maximum 30-foot-wide vehicular entrance to a parking structure or area.
      (4)   Summary of Development Type Regulations.
         A summary of standards for each development type is shown on the next
page. Specific requirements for each development type are found on the
following pages. The text on the following pages controls over the text in the
summary chart.
 Mixed Use Single-   General              Townhouse           Manor Single- Civic    Open
 Shopfront Story     Commercial Apartment Stacked   Townhouse House family  Building Space
           Shopfront                                                House            Lot
 Mu        Ss        Gc         Apt       Ts        Th        Mh    Sf      Civ      O
               Mixed Use Single-   General              Townhouse           Manor    Single-  Civic     Open
               Shopfront Story     Commercial Apartment Stacked   Townhouse House    family   Building  Space
                         Shopfront                                                   House              Lot
               Mu        Ss        Gc         Apt       Ts        Th        Mh       Sf       Civ       O
LOT
Area per unit                                                               depends
or building    none      none      none       none      1,200     1,200     on # of  3,500    3,000     2,000
(min sf )                                                                   units
Area per
building (max  none      none      none       none      none      none      20,000   5,000    none      none
sf )
Width (min ft) none      none      none       none      16        16        50       35       30        20
Width (max ft) none      none      none       none      none      none      100      45       none      none
Lot coverage   100%      80%       80%        80%       80%       80%       60%      60%      60%       5%
(max)
FRONT SETBACK
AREA
Primary street 5/15      5/15      5/15       5/15      5/15      5/15      15/none  15/none  20/none   10/
(min/max ft)                                                                                            none
Side street    5/15      5/15      5/15       5/15      5/15      5/15      10/none  10/none  10/none   10/
(min/max ft)                                                                                            none
Service street none      none      none       none      none      none      none     none     none      10/
(min/max ft)                                                                                            none
REQUIRED
STREET
FRONTAGE
Primary street 90%       90%       70%        70%       70%       70%       none     none     none      none
(min/max ft)
Side street    40%       40%       40%        40%       40%       40%       none     none     none      none
(min/max ft)
Service street none      none      none       none      none      none      none     none     none      none
(min/max ft)
PARKING
SETBACK
From primary
street (min    30        30        30         30        30        30        none     none     20        none
ft)
From side
street (min    5         5         5          5         5         5         none     none     5         none
ft)
From service
street (min    5         5         5          5         5         5         none     none     5         none
ft)
Abutting
single-family  10        10        10         10        10        10        none     none     10        none
district (min
ft)
Abutting
multifamily,
nonresidential 5         5         5          5         5         5         none     none     5         none
district,
alley (min ft)
SIDE SETBACK
Abutting
single-family  15        15        15         15        10        10        10       5        10        10
district (min
ft)
Abutting
multifamily,
nonresidential 0 or 5    0 or 5    0 or 5     0 or 5    0 or 5    0 or 5    5        5        10        10
district (min
ft)
Abutting alley 5         5         5          5         5         5         5        5        10        10
(min ft)
REAR SETBACK
Abutting
single-family  15        15        15         15        24        24        15       15       10        10
district (min
ft)
Abutting
multifamily,
nonresidential 5         5         5          5         24        24        15       15       10        10
district (min
ft)
Abutting alley 5         5         5          5         3/20+     3/20+     3/20+    3/20+    10        10
(ft)
Abutting
service street 10        10        10         10        3/20+     3/20+     none     none     10        10
(ft)
HEIGHT
Building
height (min              1                              2                   2        1        1         none
stories)       District            District   District            District
Building       dependent           dependent  dependent           dependent                   District
height (max              1 / 30                         3½ / 50            2½ / 35 2½ / 35 dependent 35
stories/ft)
STORY HEIGHT
Ground story   15/30     15/30     11/22      10/15     10/15     10/15     10/15    10/15    none      none
(min/max ft)
Upper story    10/15     none      10/15      10/15     10/15     10/15     10/15    10/15    none      none
(min/max ft)
GROUND STORY
TRANSPARENCY
Primary street 50%       50%       30%        30%       30%       30%       20%      20%      none      none
facade (min)
Side street    25%       25%       25%        25%       25%       25%       20%      20%      none      none
facade (min)
Service street none      none      none       none      none      none      none     none     none      none
facade (min)
UPPER STORY
TRANSPARENCY
Primary street 20%       none      20%        20%       20%       20%       20%      20%      none      none
facade (min)
Side street    20%       none      20%        20%       20%       20%       20%      20%      none      none
facade (min)
Service street none      none      none       none      none      none      none     none     none      none
facade (min)
ENTRANCE
Primary street required  required  required   required  required  required  required required none      none
entrance
Entrance
spacing (max   100       100       none       none      none      none      none     none     none      none
linear ft)
Side street    allowed   allowed   allowed    allowed   allowed   allowed   allowed  allowed  none      none
entrance
Service street allowed   allowed   allowed    allowed   allowed   allowed   allowed  allowed  none      none
entrance
BLANK WALL
AREA
Primary street
(max linear    20        20        30         30        30        30        30       30       none      none
ft)
Side street
(max linear    none      none      none       none      none      none      none     none     none      none
ft)
Service street
(max linear    none      none      none       none      none      none      none     none     none      none
ft)
 
      (5)   Administrative Waiver — Front Setback Area.
         (A)   The director may grant a deviation from the front setback area
regulations if:
            (i)   the front setback area cannot be met due to interference with
service provided by a public utility or state regulated entity for the
transmission of power, fuel, water, or communication services; or
            (ii)   the front setback area cannot be met due to street
easements.
         (B)   In determining whether to grant a deviation under Subparagraph
(A), the director shall consider whether or not the result of the requested
relief:
            (i)   is consistent with the purposes of Article XIII as stated in
Section
51A-13.101;
            (ii)   will complement or be compatible with the surrounding uses
and community facilities;
            (iii)   will contribute to, enhance, or promote the welfare of the
area of request and adjacent properties;
            (iv)   will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or
general welfare; and
            (v)   will conform in all other respects to all applicable zoning
regulations and standards.
      (6)   Relief from Required Street Frontage.
         (A)   The city plan commission may approve a site plan at a public
hearing that does not comply with the required street frontage regulations in
this section if:
            (i)   strict compliance with street frontage requirements are
impractical due to site constraints or would result in substantial hardship;
            (ii)   the variation or exception from the street frontage
requirements will not adversely affect surrounding properties; and
            (iii)   the site plan furthers the stated purpose of Article XIII
as described in Section
51A-13.101(b).
         (B)   A site plan that deviates from required street frontage must
follow the public notice procedure with a public hearing in accordance with
Section
51A-4.702(h)(2)(C).
(Am. Ord. 30889, passed 6-13-18)
MU MIXED USE SHOPFRONT
   (b)   Mixed Use Shopfront.
      (1)   Definition.
         A development type intended primarily for ground-story retail and
upper-story residential or offices uses.
         Ground-story spaces should be flexible enough to accommodate a variety
of retail and office uses. Upper stories should be used for offices or
residential apartments. The building must be pulled up to the street. No on-
site surface parking is permitted between the building and the street. On-site
surface parking areas must be located to the rear of the building. Primary
entrances must be prominent and street- facing. Large storefront windows must
be provided to encourage interaction between the pedestrian and the ground-
story space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9251.png]
      (2)   Character Examples.
         Character examples are provided below for illustrative purposes only
and are intended to be character examples of the development type and not the
streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9253.png]
      (3)   Districts permitted.
 
LOW:     WMU-3, WMU-5
MEDIUM:  WMU-8, WMU-12
HIGH:    WMU-20, WMU-40
OVERLAY: -SH
 
      (4)   Use and Placement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9255.png]
BUILDING USE
A summary of permitted uses by story is shown on the left. For a complete list
of permitted uses, see Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.” No nonresidential use is permitted above a residential
use.
BUILDING PLACEMENT
LOT
Area (min sf )                                                    none
Area (max sf )                                                    none
Width (min ft)                                                    none
Width (max ft)
Lot coverage (max)                                                100%
FRONT SETBACK AREA
Primary street (min/max ft)                                       5/15
Side street (min/max ft)                                          5/15
Service street (min/max ft)                                       none
REQUIRED STREET FRONTAGE
Primary street (min)                                              90%
Side street (min)                                                 40%
Service street (min)                                              none
PARKING SETBACK
From primary street (min ft)                                      30
From side street (min ft)                                         5
From service street (min ft)                                      5
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   10
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district or alley (min ft) 5
SIDE SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   15
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)          0 or 5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                           5
REAR SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   15
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)          5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                           5
Abutting service street (min ft)                                  10
 
      (5)   Height and Elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9257.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9259.png]
BUILDING HEIGHT
HEIGHT
Building height (max stories/ft) See Section
                                 51A-13.302, “Height”
Building height (min stories)
WMU-3, -5 , -8, -12              2
WMU-20                           4
WMU-40                           5
STORY HEIGHT
Ground story (min/max ft)        15/30
Upper story (min/max ft)         10/15
BUILDING FACADE
GROUND-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)      50%
Side street facade (min)         25%
Service street facade (min)      none
Measured between 0 and 10 ft above adjacent sidewalk.
UPPER-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)      20%
Side street facade (min)         20%
Service street facade (min)      none
Measured from horizontal facade articulation to horizontal facade
articulation.
ENTRANCE
Primary street                   required
Entrance spacing (max linear ft) 100
Side street                      allowed
Service street                   allowed
BLANK WALL AREA
Primary street (max linear ft)   20
Side street (max linear ft)      none
Service street (max linear ft)   none
 
      (6)   Ground-Story Shopfront Windows.
         A minimum of 60 percent of the street-fronting, street-level window
pane surface area must allow views into the ground-story use for a depth of at
least four feet. Windows must be clear or unpainted, or, if treated, must be
translucent. Spandrel glass or backpainted glass does not comply with this
provision.
SS SINGLE-STORY SHOPFRONT
   (c)   Single-Story Shopfront.
      (1)   Definition.
         A development type intended primarily for single-story retail uses.
         Ground-story spaces should be flexible enough to accommodate a variety
of retail and office uses. The building must be pulled up to the street. No on-
site surface parking is permitted between the building and the street. On-site
surface parking areas must be located to the rear of the building. Primary
entrances must be prominent and street-facing. Large storefront windows must be
provided to encourage interaction between the pedes- trian and the ground-story
space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9261.png]
      (2)   Character Examples.
         Character examples are provided below for illustrative purposes only
and are intended to be character examples of the development type and not the
streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9263.png]
      (3)   Districts Permitted.
 
LOW:     WMU-3, WMU-5
OVERLAY: -SH
 
      (4)   Use and Placement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9265.png]
BUILDING USE
A summary of permitted uses is shown on the left. For a complete list of
permitted uses, see Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.”
BUILDING PLACEMENT
LOT
Area (min sf )                                                    none
Area (max sf )                                                    none
Width (min ft)                                                    none
Width (max ft)                                                    none
Lot coverage (max)                                                80%
FRONT SETBACK AREA
Primary street (min/max ft)                                       5/15
Side street (min/max ft)                                          5/15
Service street (min/max ft)                                       none
REQUIRED STREET FRONTAGE
Primary street (min)                                              90%
Side street (min)                                                 40%
Service street (min)                                              none
PARKING SETBACK
From primary street (min ft)                                      30
From side street (min ft)                                         5
From service street (min ft)                                      5
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   10
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district or alley (min ft) 5
SIDE SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   15
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)          0 or 5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                           5
REAR SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   15
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)          5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                           5
Abutting service street (min ft)                                  10
 
      (5)   Height and Elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9267.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9269.png]
BUILDING HEIGHT
HEIGHT
Building height (max stories/ft)                                  1 / 30
Building height (min stories)                                     1
STORY HEIGHT
Ground story (min/max ft)                                         15/30
Upper story (min/max ft)                                          none
BUILDING FACADE
GROUND-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)                                       50%
Side street facade (min)                                          25%
Service street facade (min)                                       none
Measured between 0 and 10 ft above adjacent sidewalk.
UPPER-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)                                       none
Side street facade (min)                                          none
Service street facade (min)                                       none
Measured from horizontal facade articulation to horizontal facade
articulation.
BUILDING ENTRANCE
Primary street                                                    required
Entrance spacing (max linear ft)                                  100
Side street                                                       allowed
Service street                                                    allowed
BLANK WALL AREA
Primary street (max linear ft)                                    20
Side street (max linear ft)                                       none
Service street (max linear ft)                                    none
 
      (6)   Ground-Story Shopfront Windows.
         A minimum of 60 percent of the street-fronting, street-level window
pane surface area must allow views into the ground-story use for a depth of at
least four feet. Windows must be clear or unpainted, or, if treated, must be
translucent. Spandrel glass or backpainted glass does not comply with this
provision.
      (7)   Landscaping.
         (A)   General landscaping standards are set forth in Section
51A-13.304(a)(2), “Landscaping.”
         (B)   One site tree must be provided for every 4,000 square feet of
lot area, or portion thereof, or a minimum of four site trees must be provided,
whichever is greater.
         (C)   Site trees must be evenly distributed throughout the
development.
GC GENERAL COMMERICAL
   (d)   General Commercial.
      (1)   Definition.
         A development type intended primarily for nonresidential uses.
         Ground-story spaces should be flexible enough to accommodate a variety
of nonresidential uses. Upper stories should be used for offices or other types
of compatible nonresidential uses. The building must be pulled up to the
street. No on-site surface parking is permitted between the building and the
street. On-site surface parking areas must be located to the rear of the
building. Primary entrances must be street-facing.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9271.png]
      (2)   Character Examples.
         Character examples are provided below for illustrative purposes only
and are intended to be character examples of the development type and not the
streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9273.png]
      (3)   Districts Permitted.
 
LOW:    WMU-3, WMU-5
MEDIUM: WMU-8, WMU-12
HIGH:   WMU-20, WMU-40
 
      (4)   Use and Placement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9275.png]
BUILDING USE
A summary of permitted uses is shown on the left. For a complete list of
permitted uses, see Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.”
BUILDING PLACEMENT
LOT
Area (min sf )                                                    none
Area (max sf )                                                    none
Width (min ft)                                                    none
Width (max ft)                                                    none
Lot coverage (max)                                                80%
FRONT SETBACK AREA
Primary street (min/max ft)                                       5/15
Side street (min/max ft)                                          5/15
Service street (min/max ft)                                       none
REQUIRED STREET FRONTAGE
Primary street (min)                                              70%
Side street (min)                                                 40%
Service street (min)                                              none
PARKING SETBACK
From primary street (min ft)                                      30
From side street (min ft)                                         5
From service street (min ft)                                      5
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   10
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district or alley (min ft) 5
SIDE SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   15
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)          0 or 5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                           5
REAR SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   15
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)          5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                           5
Abutting service street (min ft)                                  10
 
      (5)   Height and Elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9277.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9279.png]
BUILDING HEIGHT
HEIGHT
Building height (max stories/ft) See Section
                                 51A-13.302, “Height”
Building height (min stories)
WMU-3, -5                        1
WMU-8, -12                       2
WMU-20                           4
WMU-40                           5
STORY HEIGHT
Ground story (min/max ft)        11/22
Upper story (min/max ft)         10/15
BUILDING FACADE
GROUND-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)      30%
Side street facade (min)         25%
Service street facade (min)      none
Measured from floor to horizontal facade articulation.
UPPER-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)      20%
Side street facade (min)         20%
Service street facade (min)      none
Measured from horizontal facade articulation to horizontal facade
articulation.
BUILDING ENTRANCE
Primary street                   required
Entrance spacing (max linear ft) none
Side street                      allowed
Service street                   allowed
BLANK WALL AREA
Primary street (max linear ft)   30
Side street (max linear ft)      none
Service street (max linear ft)   none
 
      (6)   Landscaping.
         (A)   General landscaping standards are set forth in Section
51A-13.304(a)(2), “Landscaping.”
         (B)   One site tree must be provided for every 4,000 square feet of
lot area, or portion thereof, or a minimum of four site trees must be provided,
whichever is greater.
         (C)   Site trees must be evenly distributed throughout the
development.
         (D)   Required landscaping may be provided aboveground when configured
as on-site open space in accordance with Section
51A-13.303, “Open Space.”
APT APARTMENT
   (e)   Apartment.
      (1)   Definition.
         A development type containing three or more dwelling units
consolidated into a single structure.
         An apartment contains common walls. Dwelling units within a building
may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units.
The building must be pulled up to the street. No on- site surface parking is
permitted between the building and the street. On-site sur- face parking must
be located to the rear of the building. The building often shares a common
entrance. Primary entrances must be prominent and street-facing. An elevated
ground floor for residential uses is recommended to ensure privacy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9281.png]
      (2)   Character Examples.
         Character examples are provided below for illustrative purposes only
and are intended to be character ex- amples of the development type and not the
streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9283.png]
      (3)   Districts Permitted.
 
LOW:    WMU-3, WMU-5   WR-3, WR-5
MEDIUM: WMU-8, WMU-12  WR-8, WR-12
HIGH:   WMU-20, WMU-40 WR-20, WR-40
 
      (4)   Use and Placement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9285.png]
BUILDING USE
A summary of permitted uses is shown on the left. For a complete list of
permitted uses, see Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.”
BUILDING PLACEMENT
LOT
Area (min sf )                                                    none
Area (max sf )                                                    none
Width (min ft)                                                    none
Width (max ft)                                                    none
Lot coverage (max)                                                80%
FRONT SETBACK AREA
Primary street (min/max ft)                                       5/15
Side street (min/max ft)                                          5/15
Service street (min/max ft)                                       none
REQUIRED STREET FRONTAGE
Primary street (min)                                              70%
Side street (min)                                                 40%
Service street (min)                                              none
PARKING SETBACK
From primary street (min ft)                                      30
From side street (min ft)                                         5
From service street (min ft)                                      5
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   10
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district or alley (min ft) 5
SIDE SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   15
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)          0 or 5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                           5
REAR SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft)   15
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)          5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                           5
Abutting service street (min ft)                                  10
 
      (5)   Height and Elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9287.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9289.png]
BUILDING HEIGHT
HEIGHT
Building height (max stories/ft)      See Section
                                      51A-13.302, “Height”
Building height (min stories)
WMU-3, -5 , -8, -12 WR-3, -5, -8, -12 2
WMU-20 WR-20                          4
WMU-40 WR-40                          5
STORY HEIGHT
Ground story (min/max ft)             10/15
Upper story (min/max ft)              10/15
BUILDING FACADE
GROUND-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)           30%
Side street facade (min)              25%
Service street facade (min)           none
Measured from floor to horizontal facade articulation.
UPPER-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)           20%
Side street facade (min)              20%
Service street facade (min)           none
Measured from horizontal facade articulation to horizontal facade
articulation.
BUILDING ENTRANCE
Primary street                        required
Entrance spacing (max linear ft)      none
Side street                           allowed
Service street                        allowed
BLANK WALL AREA
Primary street (max linear ft)        30
Side street (max linear ft)           none
Service street (max linear ft)        none
 
      (6)   Landscaping.
         (A)   General landscaping standards are set forth in Section
51A-13.304(a)(2), “Landscaping.”
         (B)   One site tree must be provided for every 4,000 square feet of
lot area, or portion thereof, or a minimum of four site trees must be provided,
whichever is greater.
         (C)   Site trees must be evenly distributed throughout the
development.
         (D)   Required landscaping may be provided aboveground when configured
as on-site open space in accordance with Section
51A-13.303, “Open Space.”
TS TOWNHOUSE STACKED
   (f)   Townhouse Stacked.
      (1)   Definition.
         A development type with six or more attached units consolidated into a
single structure that creates separate ground-story units for residential or
office purposes.
         Each unit shares a common side wall and a common floor or ceiling.
Units are stacked vertically, however, no more than one unit is permitted above
another unit. Each building must contain at least three units horizontally (six
units total). Each unit typically has its own external entrance. No on-site
surface parking is permitted between the building and the street. Garages
facing the primary street are not per- mitted. An elevated ground floor for
residential uses is recommended to ensure privacy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9291.png]
      (2)   Character Examples.
         Character examples are provided below for illustrative purposes only
and are intended to be character examples of the development type and not the
streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9293.png]
      (3)   Districts Permitted.
 
LOW:    WMU-3, WMU-5  WR-3, WR-5
MEDIUM: WMU-8, WMU-12 WR-8, WR-12
 
      (4)   Use and Placement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9295.png]
BUILDING USE
A summary of permitted uses by story is shown on the left. For a complete list
of permitted uses, see Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.”
BUILDING PLACEMENT
LOT
Area (min sf )                                                  1,200
Area (max sf )                                                  none
Width (min ft)                                                  16
Width (max ft)                                                  none
Lot coverage (max)                                              80%
FRONT SETBACK AREA
Primary street (min/max ft)                                     5/15
Side street (min/max ft)                                        5/15
Service street (min/max ft)                                     none
REQUIRED STREET FRONTAGE
Primary street (min)                                            70%
Side street (min)                                               40%
Service street (min)                                            none
PRIMARY STREET
PARKING SETBACK
From primary street (min ft)                                    30
From side street (min ft)                                       5
From service street (min ft)                                    5
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft) 10
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district or alley (min   5
ft)
SIDE SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft) 10
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)        0 or 5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                         5
REAR SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft) 24
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)        24
Abutting alley (ft)                                             3 or 20 or more
Abutting service street (ft)                                    3 or 20 or more
 
      (5)   Height and Elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9297.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9299.png]
BUILDING HEIGHT
HEIGHT
Building height (max stories/ft)
WMU-3, -5 , -8, -12 WR-3, -5, -8, -12 3½ / 50
Building height (min stories)
WMU-3, -5 , -8, -12 WR-3, -5, -8, -12 2
Detached garage (max ft)              26
STORY HEIGHT
Ground story (min/max ft)             10/15
Upper story (min/max ft)              10/15
BUILDING FACADE
GROUND-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)           30%
Side street facade (min)              25%
Service street facade (min)           none
Measured from floor to horizontal facade articulation.
UPPER-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)           20%
Side street facade (min)              20%
Service street facade (min)           none
Measured from horizontal facade articulation to horizontal facade
articulation.
BUILDING ENTRANCE
Primary street                        required
Entrance spacing (max linear ft)      none
Side street                           allowed
Service street                        allowed
BLANK WALL AREA
Primary street (max linear ft)        30
Side street (max linear ft)           none
Service street (max linear ft)        none
 
      (6)   Garage Placement.
         (A)   Except for an alley, no garage access is permitted from a public
street.
         (B)   All vehicular access must be to the rear of the building.
         (C)   Where the garage is less than 20 feet from the alley, an
automatic garage door opener is required.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9301.png]
      (7)   Landscaping.
         (A)   General landscaping standards are set forth in Section
51A-13.304(a)(2), “Landscaping.”
         (B)   One site tree must be provided in the front yard for each two
units stacked vertically on an individually platted lot.
         (C)   If more than two units stacked vertically are located on the
same lot, the following requirements apply:
            (i)   One site tree must be provided for every 4,000 square feet of
lot area, or portion thereof, or a minimum of one site tree must be provided
for each set of two units stacked vertically, whichever is greater.
            (ii)   Site trees must be evenly distributed throughout the
development.
TH TOWNHOUSE
   (g)   Townhouse.
      (1)   Definition.
         A development type with three or more attached dwelling units
consolidated into a single structure.
         Each unit must be separated by a com- mon side wall. A townhouse unit
must be more than one story in height, however, units must not be vertically
mixed. Each unit must have its own external entrance. No on-site surface
parking is permitted between the building and the street. Garages facing the
primary street are pro- hibited. In the RTN district, only one unit per lot is
permitted. An elevated ground floor for residential uses is recommended to
ensure privacy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9303.png]
      (2)   Character Examples.
         Character examples are provided below for illustrative purposes only
and are intended to be character examples of the development type and not the
streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9766.png]
      (3)   Districts Permitted.
 
LOW:    WMU-3, WMU-5  WR-3, WR-5  RTN
MEDIUM: WMU-8, WMU-12 WR-8, WR-12
 
      (4)   Use and Placement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9307.png]
BUILDING USE
A summary of permitted uses is shown on the left. For a complete list of
permitted uses, see Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.”
BUILDING PLACEMENT
LOT
Area (min sf)                                                   1,200
Area (max sf)                                                   none
Width (min ft)                                                  16
Width (max ft)                                                  none
Lot coverage (max)                                              80%
FRONT SETBACK AREA
Primary street (min/max ft)                                     5/15
Side street (min/max ft)                                        5/15
Service street (min/max ft)                                     none
REQUIRED STREET FRONTAGE
Primary street (min)                                            70%
Side street (min)                                               40%
Service street (min)                                            none
PARKING SETBACK
From primary street (min ft)                                    30
From side street (min ft)                                       5
From service street (min ft)                                    5
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft) 10
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district or alley (min   5
ft)
SIDE SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft) 10
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)        0 or 5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                         5
REAR SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft) 24
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)        24
Abutting alley (ft)                                             3 or 20 or more
Abutting service street (ft)                                    3 or 20 or more
 
      (5)   Height and Elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9309.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9311.png]
BUILDING HEIGHT
HEIGHT
Building height (max stories/ft)
RTN                                   2½ / 35
WMU-3, -5 , -8, -12 WR-3, -5, -8, -12 3½ / 50
Building height (min stories)
RTN                                   2
WMU-3, -5 , -8, -12 WR-3, -5, -8, -12 2
Detached garage (max ft)              26
STORY HEIGHT
Ground story (min/max ft)             10/15
Upper story (min/max ft)              10/15
BUILDING FACADE
GROUND-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)           30%
Side street facade (min)              25%
Service street facade (min)           none
Measured from floor to horizontal facade articulation.
UPPER-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)           20%
Side street facade (min)              20%
Service street facade (min)           none
Measured from horizontal facade articulation to horizontal facade
articulation.
BUILDING ENTRANCE
Primary street                        required
Entrance spacing (max linear ft)      none
Side street                           allowed
Service street                        allowed
BLANK WALL AREA
Primary street (max linear ft)        30
Side street (max linear ft)           none
Service street (max linear ft)        none
 
      (6)   Garage Placement.
         (A)   Except for an alley, no garage access is permitted from a public
street.
         (B)   All vehicular access must be to the rear of the building.
         (C)   Where the garage is less than 20 feet from the alley, an
automatic garage door opener is required.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9313.png]
      (7)   Landscaping.
         (A)   General landscaping standards and alternative requirements for
shared access developments are set forth in Section
51A-13.304(a)(2), “Landscaping.”
         (B)   Except in a shared access development, one site tree must be
provided in the front yard for a townhouse on an individually-platted lot in
all districts.
         (C)   In a shared access development or if more than one townhouse
unit is located on the same lot, the following requirements apply:
            (i)   One site tree must be provided for every 4,000 square feet of
lot area, or portion thereof, or a minimum of one site tree must be provided
for each indi- vidual unit, whichever is greater.
            (ii)   Site trees must be evenly distributed throughout the
development.
      (8)   Townhouses on Individually-Platted lots.
         (A)   Except for the foundation, a dwelling unit must be physically
separable from contiguous dwelling units in the event of removal of a dwelling
unit. Each party wall must be governed by a set of deed restrictions,
stipulating that if a dwelling unit is removed, the party wall stays with the
remaining dwelling unit.
         (B)   Each dwelling unit must have separate utility services; however,
general utility services on land owned and maintained by a homeowner’s
association are allowed.
MH MANOR HOUSE
   (h)   Manor House.
      (1)   Definition.
         A development type with two to five attached dwelling units
consolidated in a single structure.
         A manor house must be located on a single lot and must contain common
walls. The building must look like a conventional single- family house with a
single primary entrance except that a manor house with two dwelling units
(duplex) may have one primary entrance for each unit. Dwelling units within a
building may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other
dwelling units. No garage may face a primary street. In the RTN district, up to
two units per lot are permitted. An elevated ground floor for residential uses
is recommended to ensure privacy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9315.png]
      (2)   Character Examples.
         Character examples are provided below for illustrative purposes only
and are intended to be character examples of the development type and not the
streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9317.png]
      (3)   Districts Permitted.
         LOW:   WMU-3, WMU-5, WR-3, WR-5   RTN
      (4)   Use and Placement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9319.png]
BUILDING USE
A summary of permitted uses is shown on the left. For a complete list of
permitted uses, see Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.”
BUILDING PLACEMENT
LOT
Area (min sf )
2 units (duplex)                                                6,000
3 to 5 units                                                    10,000
Area (max sf )                                                  20,000
Width (min ft)                                                  50
Width (max ft)                                                  100
Lot coverage (max)                                              60%
FRONT SETBACK AREA
Primary street (min ft)                                         15
Side street (min ft)                                            10
SIDE SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft) 10
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)        5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                         5
REAR SETBACK (principal building)
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft) 15
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)        15
REAR SETBACK (detached garage)
Abutting common lot line (min ft)                               3
Abutting alley (min ft)                                         3 or 20+
 
      (5)   Height and Elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9321.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9323.png]
BUILDING HEIGHT
HEIGHT
Building height (max stories/ft) 2½ / 35
Building height (min stories)    2
Detached garage (max ft)         26
STORY HEIGHT
Ground story (min/max ft)        10/15
Upper story (min/max ft)         10/15
BUILDING FACADE
GROUND-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)      20%
Side street facade (min)         20%
Service street facade (min)      none
Measured from floor to horizontal facade articulation.
UPPER-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)      20%
Side street facade (min)         20%
Service street facade (min)      none
Measured from horizontal facade articulation to horizontal facade
articulation.
BUILDING ENTRANCE
Primary street                   required
Entrance spacing (max linear ft) none
Side street                      allowed
Service street                   allowed
BLANK WALL AREA
Primary street (max linear ft)   30
Side street (max linear ft)      none
Service street (max linear ft)   none
 
      (6)   Garage Placement.
         (A)   Alley Provided.
            (i)   When an alley is provided and developed, all vehicular access
must take place from the alley. On corner lots, access may be taken from the
side street, in which case the garage door may face a side street.
            (ii)   If the garage is less than 20 feet from the alley, an
automatic garage door opener is required.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9325.png]
         (B)   No Alley Provided.
            (i)   When an alley is not provided or developed, street-facing
garages may be positioned as set forth below.
            (ii)   If the garage is less than 20 feet from the street, an
automatic garage door opener is required.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9327.png]
      (7)   Landscaping.
         (A)   General landscaping standards are set forth in Section
51A-13.304(a)(2), “Landscaping.”
         (B)   In the RTN district, one site tree must be provided in the front
yard of a manor house on an individually platted lot.
         (C)   A minimum of one site tree must be provided on the lot for each
individual unit in the manor house. At least one site tree must be located in
the front yard of each manor house.
SF SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSE
   (i)   Single-Family house.
      (1)   Definition.
         A development type containing one dwelling unit located on a single
lot.
         A single-family house has vehicular access only from the rear of the
lot. Garages fac- ing the primary street are prohibited. Only one unit per lot
is permitted. An elevated ground floor for residential uses is recom- mended to
ensure privacy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9329.png]
      (2)   Character Examples.
         Character examples are provided below for illustrative purposes only
and are intended to be character examples of the development type and not the
streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9331.png]
      (3)   Districts Permitted.
         LOW:   RTN
      (4)   Use and Placement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9333.png]
BUILDING USE
A summary of permitted uses is shown on the left. For a complete list of
permitted uses, see Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.”
BUILDING PLACEMENT
LOT
Area (min sf)                                                   3,500
Area (max sf)                                                   5,000
Width (min ft)                                                  35
Width (max ft)                                                  45
Lot coverage (max)                                              60%
FRONT SETBACK AREA
Primary street (min ft)                                         15
Side street (min ft)                                            10
SIDE SETBACK
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft) 5
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)        5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                         5
Abutting side street                                            10
REAR SETBACK (principal building)
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family (min ft) 15
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district (min ft)        15
REAR SETBACK (detached garage)
Abutting a common lot line (min ft)                             5
Abutting alley (min ft)                                         3 or 20+
 
      (5)   Height and Elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9335.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9337.png]
BUILDING HEIGHT
HEIGHT
Building height (max stories/ft) 2½ / 35
Building height (min stories)    1
Detached garage (max ft)         26
STORY HEIGHT
Ground story (min/max ft)        10/15
Upper story (min/max ft)         10/15
BUILDING FACADE
GROUND-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)      20%
Side street facade (min)         20%
Service street facade (min)      none
Measured from floor to horizontal facade articulation.
UPPER-STORY TRANSPARENCY
Primary street facade (min)      20%
Side street facade (min)         20%
Service street facade (min)      none
Measured from horizontal facade articulation to horizontal facade
articulation.
BUILDING ENTRANCE
Primary street                   required
Entrance spacing (max linear ft) none
Side street                      allowed
Service street                   allowed
BLANK WALL AREA
Primary street (max linear ft)   30
Side street (max linear ft)      none
Service street (max linear ft)   none
 
      (6)   Garage Placement.
         (A)   Except on a corner lot, all vehicular access must take place
from an alley. On a corner lot, access may be taken from the side street, in
which case the garage door may face a side street.
         (B)   If the garage is less than 20 feet from the alley, an automatic
garage door opener is required.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9339.png]
      (7)   Landscaping.
         (A)   General landscaping standards and alternative requirements for
shared access developments are set forth in Section
51A-13.304(a)(2), “Landscaping.”
         (B)   A minimum of two site trees must be provided on the lot for each
single-family house. At least one site tree must be located in the front yard
of each single-family house.
CIV CIVIC BUILDING
   (j)   Civic Building.
      (1)   Definition.
         A development type containing civic or place of worship uses that
serve the sur- rounding community.
         Civic buildings should be designed to physically express their
prominence in the community. Civic buildings should either be sited adjoining
or surrounded by civic spaces or placed at the axial termination of a street in
order to provide a visual landmark. In order to provide greater flexibility and
allow more distinctive architectural expression, civic buildings do not have
mandatory street frontage requirements. No surface parking is permitted between
the building and any primary street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9341.png]
      (2)   Character Examples.
         Character examples are provided below for illustrative purposes only
and are intended to be character examples of the development type and not the
streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9343.png]
      (3)   Districts Permitted.
 
LOW:     WMU-3, WMU-5   WR-3, WR-5   RTN
MEDIUM:  WMU-8, WMU-12  WR-8, WR-12
HIGH:    WMU-20, WMU-40 WR-20, WR-40
OVERLAY: -SH
 
      (4)   Use, Height, and Placement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9345.png]
BUILDING USE
A summary of permitted uses is shown on the left. For a complete list of
permitted uses, see Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.”
BUILDING HEIGHT
Building height (max)                                  See Section
                                                       51A-13.302, “Height”
Building height (min stories)                          1
BUILDING PLACEMENT
LOT
Area (min sf )                                         3,000
Width (min ft)                                         30
Lot coverage (max)                                     60%
SETBACKS
Primary street (min ft)                                20
Side street (min ft)                                   10
Interior side (min ft)                                 10
Rear (min ft)                                          10
PARKING SETBACK
From primary street (min ft)                           20
No on-site surface parking is permitted between the building and the primary
street.
From side street (min ft)                              5
From service street (min ft)                           5
Abutting residential districts other than multi-family 10
(min ft)
Abutting multifamily or nonresidential district or     5
alley (min ft)
 
      (5)   Landscaping.
         (A)   General landscaping standards are set forth in Section
51A-13.304(a)(2), “Landscaping.”
         (B)   One site tree must be provided for every 4,000 square feet of
lot area, or portion thereof, or a minimum of four site trees must be provided,
whichever is greater.
         (C)   Site trees must be evenly distributed throughout the
development.
O OPEN SPACE LOT
   (k)   Open Space Lot.
      (1)   Definition.
         A development type located and designed to accommodate civic open
space or natural area worthy of preservation.
         An open space lot is intended primarily to provide for public or
private open space. Open space lots can also be used to accommodate commercial
surface parking lots, although commercial surface parking lots may not be used
to satisfy open space requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9347.png]
      (2)   Character Examples.
         Character examples are provided below for illustrative purposes only
and are intended to be character examples of the development type and not the
streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9349.png]
      (3)   Districts Permitted.
 
LOW:     WMU-3, WMU-5   WR-3, WR-5   RTN
MEDIUM:  WMU-8, WMU-12  WR-8, WR-12
HIGH:    WMU-20, WMU-40 WR-20, WR-40
OVERLAY: -SH
 
      (4)   Use, Height, and Placement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9351.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9353.png]
USE
A summary of permitted uses is shown on the left. For a complete list of
permitted uses, see Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.” Parking as an accessory use is not permitted on an open
space lot.
HEIGHT
Building/Structure Height (max ft) 35
BUILDING/STRUCTURE PLACEMENT
No more than five percent of the total lot area may be occupied by buildings or
structures.
Rear setback (min):                10’
LOT
Area (min sf )                     2,000
Width (min ft)                     20
Lot coverage (max)                 5%
SETBACKS
Front (min ft)                     10
Side street (min ft)               10
Interior side (min ft)             10
Rear (min ft)                      10
 
      (5)   Configuration.
         (A)   In General.
            An open space lot must be configured as set forth in Subparagraphs
(B) through (K).
         (B)   Plaza or Esplanade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9355.png]
            (i)   A plaza is a formal open space defined by building frontages
and abutting streets. An esplanade is a linear, open area, abutting a river,
large body of water, or street, where people may walk.
            (ii)   A plaza or esplanade must be at least 2,000 square feet. A
plaza may not exceed a maximum of one acre.
            (iii)   An esplanade must have a minimum width of 40 feet.
            (iv)   A plaza or esplanade must be bounded by a street on at least
one side.
            (v)   A plaza or esplanade is typically furnished with paths,
benches, and open shelters.
            (vi)   A plaza or esplanade may contain landscaping and paved
surfaces. Pervious paving materials must make up a minimum of 70 percent of any
paved surface. Trees and shrubs must be planted in formal patterns.
            (vii)   For a plaza, perimeter street trees and sidewalks must be
installed in accordance with the ST-1 streetscape standard. (See Division 51A-
13.500, “Minor Streets and Streetscapes.”)
            (viii)   For an esplanade, street trees must be installed in
accordance with the ST-1 streetscape standard. (See Division 51A-13.500, “Minor
Streets and Streetscapes.”)
            (ix)   Site trees must be planted at the rate of one large canopy
tree per 2,500 square feet of lot area. Each tree must have a caliper of at
least two inches at the time of planting. Trees may be planted in planters or
tree grates.
            (x)   A plaza may be level, stepped, or gently sloping. An
esplanade must be level.
            (xi)   Lots that share a common lot line with a plaza or esplanade
must configure development as though the plaza or esplanade were a primary
street.
         (C)   Square.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9357.png]
            (i)   A square is a formal open space defined by building frontages
and abutting streets. A square must be at least 10,000 square feet in size, but
may not exceed two acres.
            (ii)   A square is bounded by streets on a minimum of three sides.
            (iii)   A square is typically furnished with paths, benches, and
open shelters.
            (iv)   Landscaping must consist of lawn, trees, and shrubs planted
in formal patterns.
            (v)   A square must contain a minimum 30 percent turf, groundcover,
soil, or mulch. The balance of the area may be any paved surface. Pervious
paving materials must make up a minimum of 70 percent of any paved surface.
            (vi)   Perimeter street trees and sidewalks must be installed in
accordance with the ST-1 streetscape standard. (See Division 51A-13.500, “Minor
Streets and Streetscapes.”)
            (vii)   Site trees must be planted at the rate of one large canopy
tree per 2,500 square feet of lot area. Each tree must have a caliper of at
least two inches at the time of planting.
            (viii)   A square may be level, stepped, or gently sloping.
            (ix)   Lots that share a common lot line with a square must
configure development as though the square were a primary street.
         (D)   Green.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9359.png]
            (i)   A green is an informal open space defined by abutting
streets.
            (ii)   A green must be at least 10,000 square feet in size, but may
not exceed two acres.
            (iii)   A green must be bound by streets on a minimum of two sides.
            (iv)   A green is typically furnished with paths, benches, and open
shelters.
            (v)   Landscaping must consist of lawn and informally arranged
trees and shrubs.
            (vi)   A green must contain a minimum of 60 percent turf, ground-
cover, soil, or mulch. The balance of the area may be any paved surface.
Pervious paving materials must make up a minimum of 70 percent of any paved
surface.
            (vii)   Perimeter street trees and sidewalks must be installed in
accordance with the ST-1 streetscape standard. (See Division 51A-13.500, “Minor
Streets and Streetscapes.”)
            (viii)   Site trees must be planted at the rate of one large canopy
tree per 2,500 square feet of lot area. Each tree must have a caliper of at
least two inches at the time of planting. Site tree plantings may be informal.
            (ix)   The topography may be irregular.
            (x)   Lots that share a common lot line with a green must configure
development as though the green were a primary street.
         (E)   Neighborhood Park.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9361.png]
            (i)   A neighborhood park is a natural landscape consisting of open
and wooded areas and may also include, but are not limited to, tennis courts,
racquet ball courts, basketball courts, volley ball courts, ball fields,
swings, slides, playgrounds, dog parks, benches, restrooms, picnic units,
shelters, and walking paths.
            (ii)   A neighborhood park must be at least 20,000 square feet in
size.
            (iii)   A neighborhood park is bounded by streets on a minimum of
one side.
            (iv)   Neighborhood parks are often irregularly shaped but may be
linear in order to parallel creeks, canals, or other corridors.
            (v)   Landscaping must consist of informally arranged trees and
shrubs. The topography may be irregular.
            (vi)   A neighborhood park may have a maximum of 15 percent
impervious surface.
            (vii)   Perimeter street trees and sidewalks must be installed in
accordance with the ST-1 streetscape standard. (See Division 51A-13.500, “Minor
Streets and Streetscapes.”)
            (viii)   Site trees must be planted at the rate of one large canopy
tree per 2,500 square feet of lot area. Each tree must have a caliper of at
least two inches at the time of planting.
         (F)   Tot Lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9363.png]
            (i)   A tot lot provides play areas for children as well as open
shelter and benches.
            (ii)   A tot lot must be at least 2,000 square feet in size, but
may not exceed one acre.
            (iii)   Tot lots may be freestanding or located within squares,
greens, or neighborhood parks.
            (iv)   The impervious surface of a tot lot may not exceed 15
percent.
            (v)   Perimeter street trees and sidewalks must be installed in
accordance with the ST-1 streetscape standard. (See Division 51A-13.500, “Minor
Streets and Streetscapes.”)
            (vi)   Site trees must be planted at the rate of one large canopy
tree per 2,500 square feet of lot area. Each tree must have a caliper of at
least two inches at the time of planting.
         (G)   Community Garden.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9365.png]
            (i)   A community garden is a grouping of garden plots available to
nearby residents for small-scale cultivation, including storage facilities for
necessary equipment.
            (ii)   A community garden must be at least 10,000 square feet in
size, but may not exceed two acres.
            (iii)   The impervious surface of a community garden may not exceed
15 percent.
            (iv)   Perimeter street trees and sidewalks must be installed in
accordance with the ST-1 streetscape standard. (See Division 51A-13.500, “Minor
Streets and Streetscapes.”)
         (H)   Landscaped Median.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9367.png]
            (i)   A wide landscape median provides open space and green area
embedded within the public realm of a minor street.
            (ii)   A landscape median must be at least 20 feet in width and one
block in the length, with a reduction of the width to eight feet at the
location of turn lanes.
            (iii)   Landscaping must consist of lawn and formally arranged
trees.
            (iv)   A double row of street trees must be planted at the rate of
one large canopy tree every 40 feet on center, on average. Each tree must have
a caliper of at least three inches at the time of planting.
            (v)   Trees must be planted no more than 10 feet nor less than six
feet from the back of curb.
            (vi)   Improvements may include paved walks, trails, benches, and
trash receptacles.
         (I)   Greenbelt.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9369.png]
            (i)   Greenbelts typically follow natural features such as streams
or rivers. They are designed to incorporate natural settings such as creeks and
significant stands of trees within neighborhoods, and are used for
transportation, recreation, and environmental protection.
            (ii)   Greenbelts differ from neighborhood parks, plazas, and
squares in that their detailing is natural (i.e. informally planted), except
along rights-of-way, and may contain irregular topography.
            (iii)   Design of the greenbelt should incorporate conservation of
existing mature tree canopy and landscape and protection of existing natural
drainage-ways and creeks.
            (iv)   Land within the 100-year floodplain may be used to
accommodate a greenbelt.
            (v)   The greenbelt must be accessible from adjacent development.
            (vi)   Improvements may include paved walks, trails, benches, and
trash receptacles.
            (vii)   No rear-facing lots may abut a greenbelt.
         (J)   Private Open space under 2,000 SF.
            Private open space of less than 2,000 square feet must be designed
to meet the standards for landscaping or private open space for the appropriate
development type.
         (K)   Commercial Surface Parking Lot.
            A commercial surface parking lot on an open space lot may be
approved through the specific use permit process. The length of time the use
may be op- erated must be set during approval of the specific use permit. The
commercial surface parking lot must meet all standards for design and
landscaping required in this article. No commercial surface parking lot may be
used to satisfy public or private open space requirements.
      (6)   Certificate of Occupancy Eequired.
         Except for a landscape median and greenbelt, a certificate of
occupancy is required for all open space lots.
(Am. Ord. 30889, passed 6-13-18; Am. Ord 31470, passed 2-24-20)
SEC. 51A-13.305. BUILDING ELEMENTS.
   (a)   Arcades.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9371.png]
      (1)   Arcades are permitted on mixed use shopfront, single-story
shopfront, general commercial, and civic development types.
      (2)   An arcade must have a clear depth from the support columns to the
building’s facade of at least eight feet and a clear height above the sidewalk
of at least 10 feet.
      (3)   An arcade must be contiguous and extend over at least 50 percent of
the width of the building facade.
      (4)   No arcade may encroach into the door yard or the public right-of-
way.
   (b)   Galleries.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9373.png]
      (1)   Galleries are permitted on mixed use shopfront, single-story
shopfront, general commercial, and civic development types.
      (2)   A gallery must have a clear depth from the support columns to the
building’s facade of at least eight feet and a clear height above the sidewalk
of at least 10 feet.
      (3)   A gallery must be contiguous and extend over at least 50 percent of
the width of the building facade from which it projects.
      (4)   A gallery may encroach into the door yard. No gallery may encroach
into the public right-of-way without a license for the use of that right-of-
way.
   (c)   Awnings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9375.png]
      (1)   Awnings are permitted on mixed use shopfront, single-story
shopfront, general commercial, apartment, and civic development types.
      (2)   A ground-story awning must have a minimum clearance of 10 feet
above the sidewalk and must have a minimum depth of six feet.
      (3)   An awning may encroach into the door yard. No awning may encroach
into the public right-of-way without a license for the use of that right-of-
way.
   (d)   Balconies.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9377.png]
      (1)   Balconies are permitted only on the upper stories of mixed use
shopfront, general commercial, apartment, townhouse stacked, townhouse, manor
house, single- family house, and civic development types.
      (2)   No balcony may project within five feet of a common lot line.
      (3)   A balcony may encroach into the door yard. No balcony may encroach
into the public right-of-way without a license for the use of that right-of-
way.
   (e)   Stoops.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9770.png]
      (1)   Stoops are permitted on townhouse stacked, townhouse, manor house,
apartment, and single-family house development types.
      (2)   A stoop must be no more than five feet deep (including the steps)
and six feet wide.
      (3)   A stoop may be roofed, but not enclosed.
      (4)   Partial walls and railings on a stoop may be no higher than 3 1/
2 feet.
      (5)   A stoop may encroach into the door yard. No stoop may encroach into
the public right-of-way without a license for the use of that right-of-way.
   (f)   Front Porches.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9381.png]
      (1)   Front porches are permitted on townhouse stacked, townhouse, manor
house, apartment, and single-family house development types.
      (2)   A front porch must be a minimum of six feet deep (not including the
steps).
      (3)   Except as provided in this paragraph, a front porch must be
contiguous with a width not less than 50 percent of the building facade from
which it projects. This provision does not apply to the apartment development
type.
      (4)   A front porch may be roofed, but not enclosed.
      (5)   Partial walls and railings on a porch may be no higher than 3 1/
2 feet.
      (6)   A front porch may encroach into the door yard. No front porch may
encroach into the public right-of-way without a license for the use of that
right-of-way.
   (g)   Roof Treatments.
      Dormers are permitted in an attic story. Dormers must not break the
primary eave line, be individually more than 15 feet wide, and collectively be
more than 60 percent of the facade length.
   (h)   Building Entrances.
      (1)   The following building entrance requirements apply to mixed use
shopfront, single-story shopfront, general commercial, and apartment
development types.
      (2)   An entrance providing both ingress and egress, operable during
normal business hours, is required to meet primary street entrance
requirements. Additional entrances off another street, pedestrian area, or
internal parking area are permitted.
      (3)   The entrance separation requirements provided for the development
type must be met for each building, but are not applicable to adjacent
buildings.
      (4)   An angled entrance may be provided at either corner of a building
along the primary street to meet the primary street entrance requirements,
provided any applicable entrance spacing requirements can still be met.
      (5)   A minimum of 50 percent of a required entrance must be transparent.
      (6)   A required fire exit door with no transparency may front on a
primary, side, or service street.
   (i)   Fences and Walls.
      (1)   Except as provided below, the provisions of Section
51A-4.602 apply.
      (2)   In a door yard, a fence may not exceed three feet in height above
grade. In all other required yards, no fence or wall may exceed six feet in
height above grade.
(Am. Ord. 30889, passed 6-13-18)
SEC. 51A-13.306.    USES.
   (a)   General Provisions.
      (1)   Allowed uses.
         No certificate of occupancy may be issued for a use in a WMU, WR, or
RTN district that is not allowed by this section. Existing nonconforming uses
may continue in accordance with Section
51A-4.704.
      (2)   Use Categories.
         (A)   In order to regulate uses more efficiently, categories of uses
have been established.
         (B)   Use categories provide a systematic basis for assigning land
uses to appropriate development types. Use categories classify land uses and
activities based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics.
         (C)   Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the
type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered,
likely impact on surrounding properties, and site conditions.
      (3)   Principal Uses.
         Principal uses are grouped into categories of uses. Permitted uses are
shown in Section
51A-13.306(b), “Use Chart.” The use categories used in the use chart are listed
in Section
51A-13.306(d), “Use Categories.” The examples of permitted uses listed are not
an exhaustive list. The building official has the responsibility for
categorizing uses. See Paragraph (6) below.
      (4)   Transitional Uses.
         Transitional uses are intended to provide an opportunity for owners in
a form district to make appropriate use of their property during the interim
period as the district develops. For a list of permitted transitional uses and
regulations, see Section
51A-13.306(e), “Transitional Uses.”
      (5)   Accessory uses.
         (A)   Except as provided below, accessory uses are allowed in
conjunction with a permitted principal use in accordance with Section
51A-4.217.
         (B)   A use listed in Section
51A-13.306, “Uses,” (and not Sections
51A-4.201 through 51A-4.216) may be an accessory use if the building official
determines that the use is customarily incidental to a main use and otherwise
complies with this section.
         (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this article or in Article IV,
accessory uses are subject to the following area restrictions.
            (i)   If the use is conducted outside, it may not occupy more than
five percent of the area of the lot containing the main use.
            (ii)   If the use is conducted inside, it may not occupy more than
five percent of the floor area of the main use.
            (iii)   Any use that exceeds these area restrictions is considered
to be a separate main use.
         (D)   Pedestrian sky bridges are not permitted in the form districts.
         (E)   Wind turbines and other integrated renewable energy systems are
permitted in the form districts.
      (6)   Building Official Responsibility.
         (A)   The building official is responsible for categorizing all uses.
If a proposed use is not listed in a use category, but is similar to a listed
use, the building official shall place the proposed use under that use
category.
         (B)   When determining whether a proposed use is similar to a listed
use in Section
51A-13.306(d), “Use Categories,” the building official shall consider the
following criteria:
            (i)   The actual or projected characteristics of the proposed use.
            (ii)   The relative amount of site area or floor area and equipment
devoted to the proposed use.
            (iii)   Relative amounts of sales.
            (iv)   The customer type.
            (v)   The relative number of employees.
            (vi)   Hours of operation.
            (vii)   Building and site arrangement.
            (viii)   Types of vehicles used and their parking requirements.
            (ix)   The number of vehicle trips generated.
            (x)   Signs.
            (xi)   How the proposed use is advertised.
            (xii)   The likely impact on surrounding properties.
            (xiii)   Whether the activity is likely to be independent of the
other activities on the site.
      (7)   Additional Use Regulations.
         Except as otherwise provided in this article, the additional
provisions in Division 51A-4.200 for a specific use apply to that use under
this article.
   (b)   Use Chart.
      The use chart identifies the uses allowed by right, the uses requiring a
specific use permit, and uses that are not allowed. The use chart key is set
forth below.
      (A)   Permitted. (∙)
         Indicates that the use is allowed by right in that development type.
      (B)   specific use Permit. ([])
         Indicates that a use is permitted in that development type only in
accordance with Section
51A-4.219, “Specific Use Permit (SUP).”
      (C)   Blank Cell.
         A blank cell indicates that a use is not permitted in that development
type.
Use Chart
  Mixed Use Single-   General              Townhouse           Manor Single- Civic    Open  Additional
  Shopfront Story     Commercial Apartment Stacked   Townhouse House family  Building Space Regulations
            Shopfront                                                House            Lot
                            Mixed Use      Single-   General              Townhouse                Manor   Single- Civic    Open  Additional
                            Shopfront      Story     Commercial Apartment Stacked        Townhouse House   family  Building Space Regulations
                                           Shopfront                                                       House            Lot
                            Mu             Ss        Gc         Apt       Ts             Th        Mh      Sf      Civ      O
Principal Use Use Category  Ground Upper   Ground    All        All       Ground Upper   All       All     All     All      ---
                            Story  Stories Story     Stories    Stories   Story  Stories Stories   Stories Stories Stories
              Single-family        ∙                                    ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙     ∙                    (c)(1), (c)
             living                                                                                                              (2)
Residential   Multifamily          ∙                          ∙       ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙
              living
              Group living         ∙                          ∙       ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙                            (c)(1)
              Community
              service,      []     []      []        []                   []                                       []
              except as
              listed below:
              Museum,       ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙                  ∙                                      ∙            (c)(3)
              library
              Day care      ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙                                                           ∙            (c)(3)
             Educational   ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙                                                           ∙            (c)(3)
             Government
             service,      ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙                                                           ∙            (c)(3)
             except as
             listed below:
             Detention
             center, jail,                          []                                                            []
Civic         or prison
              Park or Open                                                                                                  ∙
              space
              Social        []     []      []        []                                                                           (c)(8)
              service
              Transit       ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙                                                           ∙
              station
              Utilities                                                                                                     ∙   (c)(4)
Place of      Place of      ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙                                                           ∙
Worship       Worship
Office        Medical       ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙
              Office        ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙                  ∙
              Drive-thru    []             []        []                                                                           (c)(9)
              facility
             Restaurant or ∙            ∙                                                                                    (c)(5)
Retail        Bar
              Retail sales  ∙            ∙                                                                                    (c)(5)
              Vehicle sales ∙            ∙
              Commercial
              amusement     []     []      []        []
              (inside)
             Indoor        ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙
Service and   recreation
Entertainment Personal
              service,      ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙
              except as
              listed below:
              Animal care   ∙    ∙     ∙       ∙                                                                          (c)(6)
              Commercial    ∙    ∙               ∙                                                                    []
              parking
              Passenger
             terminal             []                []
             limited to a
Commerce      Helistop
              Overnight            ∙               ∙                                                                          (c)(7)
              lodging
              Self-service         []                []
              storage
              Light                                  ∙
              manufacturing
             Research and                           ∙
Fabrication   development
              Vehicle                                ∙
              service
 
Key: ∙ = Permitted [] = Specific Use Permit Blank Cell = Not Permitted
   (c)   Additional Regulations.
      (1)   Handicapped Group Dwelling Unit and Group Residential Facilities.
         A handicapped group dwelling unit or group residential facility must
be located at least 1,000 feet from any other group residential facility or
licensed handicapped group dwelling unit. Dwellings or facilities that do not
meet this standard may request a spe- cific use permit. For purposes of this
provision, the distance between uses is measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, between the nearest boundaries of
the building sites on which the uses are located. (Note: The spacing compo-
nent of these use regulations is based, not on the handicapped status of the
residents, but on the non-family status of the groups.)
      (2)   Townhouse and Manor House in the RTN District.
         A townhouse or manor house in the RTN district must be located on an
individually-platted lot. No more than two dwelling units are permitted on a
lot. No multifamily or group living is permitted in the RTN district.
      (3)   Special Regulations in the RTN District.
         In the RTN district, museum, library, day care, educational, and
government service uses are permitted only by specific use permit.
      (4)   Tower/Antenna for Cellular Communication.
         (A)   In General.
            For tower/antenna for cellular communication uses, the provisions
of Section
51A-4.212(10.1) apply, except as modified in Subparagraphs (B) and (C).
         (B)   Mounted Cellular Antennas.
            (i)   Permitted by right in the RTN district when attached to an
existing structure that is currently occupied or was last occupied by a
nonresidential use.
            (ii)   Permitted by right in a WMU or WR district when attached to
any existing structure.
         (C)   Monopole and Other Cellular Towers.
            (i)   Not permitted in the RTN district.
            (ii)   Permitted by specific use permit in a WMU or WR district.
      (5)   Restaurant or Bar and Retail Sales.
         (A)   A permitted ground-story restaurant or bar or retail sales use
is allowed in the upper stories of a building provided that a restaurant or bar
or retail use also exists on the ground story of the building.
         (B)   A restaurant or bar is permitted in the upper stories of an
overnight lodging facility in a mixed use shopfront.
      (6)   Animal Care.
         No outdoor runs are permitted in association with an animal grooming,
animal hospital, veterinary clinic, pet clinic, animal boarding, animal
shelter, kennel, or doggy day care facility.
      (7)   Overnight Lodging.
         A lobby serving an overnight lodging facility is permitted on the
ground story of a mixed use shopfront building.
      (8)   Overnight General Purpose Shelter.
         No overnight general purpose shelter may provide shelter to more than
20 overnight guests.
      (9)   Drive-thru Facility.
         Except as provided in this paragraph, a drive-thru facility is only
permitted by specific use permit. A drive-thru facility may be established
within the ground story of a parking structure without obtaining a specific use
permit if all stacking spaces are completely contained within the structure.
   (d)   Use Categories.
      (1)   Residential Use Categories.
         (A)   Single-Family Living.
            (i)   Definition. Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by one
family, on a monthly or longer basis, within a structure that contains no more
than two dwelling units.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted Uses.
               Single-family or duplex.
               Handicapped group dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multifamily Living.
            (i)   Definition. Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by one
family, on a monthly or longer basis, within a structure that contains at least
three dwelling units.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Multifamily and retirement housing.
         (C)   Group Living.
            (i)   Definition. Residential occupancy of a structure by a group
of people who may not meet the definition of a family. Tenancy is usually
arranged on a monthly or longer basis. Generally, group living facilities have
a common eating area for residents, and residents may receive care or training.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted Uses.
               Boarding house, rooming house, or lodging house.
               Foster home (seven or more residents).
               Fraternity, sorority, or college dormitory.
               Group residential facility.
               Hospice.
               Monastery or convent.
               Nursing home.
               Residential hotel.
      (2)   Civic Use Categories.
         (A)   Community Service.
            (i)   Definition. Uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature
providing ongoing public safety, educational training, or counseling to the
general public on a regular basis, without a residential component.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted Uses.
               Museum or library.
               Community service center.
               Neighborhood arts center or similar public community facility.
         (B)   Day care.
            (i)   Definition. Uses providing care, protection, and supervision
of children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence.
Care is typically provided to a given individual for fewer than 18 hours each
day, although the facility may be open 24 hours each day.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted Uses.
               Adult day care facility.
               Child care facility.
               Nursery school or preschool.
         (C)   Educational.
            (i)   Definition. Public and private (including charter or
religious) schools at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high, or high
school level that provide basic academic education. This use also includes
colleges and other institutions of higher learning that offer courses of
general or specialized study leading to a degree.
            (ii)   Example of Permitted uses.
               Academy (special training).
               College, community college, university, or seminary. Public or
private (K-12) school.
               Charter, trade, vocational, or business school.
         (D)   Government Service.
            (i)   Definition. Office, storage, maintenance, or other facility
for the operation of local, state, or federal government.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               City, county, state, federal, or government office.
               Convention center or trade center.
               Detention center, jail, or prison.
               Police, fire, EMS station, substation, or ambulance service.
               Post office.
         (E)   Park/Open space.
            (i)   Definition. A use focusing on public gathering areas for
passive or active outdoor recreation, and having few structures.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Botanical garden, nature preserve, or recreational trail.
               Cemetery, mausoleum, columbarium, or memorial park.
               Square, green, plaza, neighborhood park, tot lot, or community
garden.
               Farmers market.
         (F)   Social Service.
            (i)   Definition. A use that primarily provides housing related to
social service programs, including treatment of those with psychiatric,
alcohol, or drug problems, and transients.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted Uses.
               Halfway house.
               Overnight general purpose shelter.
         (G)   Transit Station.
            (i)   Definition. A facility for the boarding of non-commercial
transit.
         (H)   Utilities.
            (i)   Definition. Public or private infrastructure serving a
limited area with no on-site personnel (minor utility) or serving the general
community with on-site personnel (major utility).
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted Uses.
               Minor utilities, including on-site stormwater retention or
detention facility, neighborhood-serving telephone exchange or switching
center, gas or electric installation or transmission, water and wastewater pump
station or lift station, gas gates, reservoir, control structure, drainage
well, and water supply water well. Major utilities, including aeration
facility, electrical substation, electric or gas generation plant, filter bed,
railroad right-of-way, transmission tower, waste treatment plant, water pumping
facility, and water tower or tank.
               Mounted cellular antennas or monopole cellular towers.
      (3)   Place of Worship.
         (A)   Place of Worship.
            (i)   Definition. A place of assembly that provides meeting areas
for religious practice.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Church, mosque, shrine, synagogue, tabernacle, or temple.
      (4)   Office Use Categories.
         (A)   Medical.
            (i)   Definition. A use providing medical or surgical care to
patients. Some uses may offer overnight care.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Blood plasma donation center.
               Medical or dental laboratory.
               Hospital, urgent care, or emergency medical office.
               Medical, dental office, or chiropractor’s office.
               Ambulatory surgical center.
         (B)   Office.
            (i)   Definition. Activities conducted in an office setting that
generally focus on business, professional, or financial services.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Offices including advertising, business management consulting,
data processing, collection agency, real estate or insurance agent,
professional services such as a lawyer, accountant, bookkeeper, engineer, or
architect, sales office, or travel agency.
               Financial services such as lender, investment, or brokerage
house, or bank.
               Call center.
               Counseling in an office setting.
               Radio, TV, or recording studio.
               Art studio or art gallery.
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Bail bonds.
      (5)   Retail Use Categories.
         (A)   Drive-thru Facility.
            (i)   Definition. A facility that provides direct window service
for customers in motor vehicles.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted Uses.
               Restaurant with drive-through service.
               Financial institution with drive-through service.
               Dry cleaners, pharmacies, and other retail uses with drive-
through service.
               Pay stations for various uses, including utility services, with
drive-through windows.
         (B)   Restaurant or Bar.
            (i)   Definition. Establishment that prepares and sells food or
drink for on- or off-premise consumption.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Alcoholic beverage establishment.
               Bar, tavern, lounge, or brew pub.
               Pizza or other meal delivery facility.
               Restaurant, fast-food restaurant, take-out, yogurt, ice cream,
or coffee shop.
         (C)   Retail Sales.
            (i)   Definition. A facility involved in the sale, lease, or rental
of new or used products.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption.
               Sale of baked goods, flowers, fuel (including gasoline and
diesel fuel), pets, pharmaceuticals, produce, groceries, and tobacco.
               Sale, lease, or rental of antiques, appliances, art supplies,
bicycles, books, building supplies, cameras, carpet and floor coverings,
crafts, clothing, computers, convenience goods, dry goods, electronic
equipment, fabric, furniture, garden supplies, gifts or novelties, hardware,
home improvement, household products, jewelry, liquor, medical supplies, music,
musical instruments, office supplies, package shipping, pet supplies, photo
finishing, picture frames, plants, printed materials, souvenirs, sporting
goods, stationery, used or secondhand goods, vehicle parts and accessories, or
videos. General merchandise or food store.
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Check cashing.
               Pawnshop.
         (D)   Vehicle Sales.
            (i)   Definition. Direct sales, rental, or leasing of passenger
vehicles, light and medium trucks, and other consumer motor vehicles such as
motorcycles, boats, and recreational vehicles.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Vehicle sales, rental, or leasing.
               Boats and other recreational vehicle sales. Vehicle rental.
      (6)   Service and Entertainment Use Categories.
         (A)   Commercial Amusement (Inside).
            (i)   Definition. A facility wholly enclosed in a building that
offers entertainment or games of skill for a fee to the general public.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Adult cabaret.
               Amusement center, arcade, or children’s amusement center.
               Billiard hall or pool hall.
               Bingo parlor.
               Bowling alley.
               Dance hall.
               Motor track.
               Skating rink.
         (B)   Indoor Recreation.
            (i)   Definition. A generally commercial use, varying in size,
providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities in an
indoor setting.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Athletic, tennis, swim, or health club.
               Dance, martial arts, music studio, or classroom.
               Gymnastic facility or indoor sports academy.
               Lodge or membership club.
               Movie or other theater.
         (C)   Outdoor Recreation.
            (i)   Definition. A generally commercial use, varying in size,
providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities. These
activities may take place wholly outdoors or within a number of outdoor
structures.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               None.
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Drive-in theater.
               Campground, travel trailer park, or recreational vehicle park.
               Extreme sports such as paintball, BMX, or skateboarding
facility.
               Golf course, country club, or executive par three golf course.
               Outdoor entertainment activity such as batting cage, golf
driving range, mini-amusement park, miniature golf facility, or water park.
               Horse stable, riding academy, or equestrian center.
               Outdoor shooting range.
               Sports academy for active recreational or competitive sports.
               Stadium, arena, or commercial amphitheater.
               Commercial amusement (outside).
         (D)   Personal Service.
            (i)   Definition. Facilities involved in providing personal
services or repair services to the general public.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Animal care (animal grooming, animal hospital, veterinary
clinic, pet clinic, animal boarding, animal shelter, kennel, or doggy day
care). No outside runs are permitted.
               Catering establishment (small-scale) or small-scale cleaning
establishment.
               Dry-cleaning or laundry drop-off facility, laundromat, cleaning,
pickup station, or coin-operated pickup station.
               Drop-in child care center.
               Funeral home, mortuary, undertaking establishment, or commercial
wedding chapel.
               Hair, nail, tanning, massage therapy, personal care service, or
barber and beauty shop.
               Modeling studio.
               Photocopy, blueprint, package shipping and quick-sign service,
printing, and publishing.
               Palmist, psychic, or medium.
               Security service.
               Appliance, bicycle, canvas product, clock, computer, jewelry,
musical instrument, office equipment, radio, shoe, television or watch repair.
               Tailor, milliner, upholsterer, or locksmith.
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Massage parlor.
               Tattoo or body piercing.
               Taxidermist.
      (7)   Commerce Use Categories.
         (A)   Commercial Parking.
            (i)   Definition. A facility that provides parking not accessory to
a principal use, for which a fee may or may not be charged.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Park-and-ride facility.
               Short- and long-term fee parking facility. Surface parking lot.
         (B)   Overnight Lodging.
            (i)   Definition. Accommodations arranged for short term stays of
less than 30 days for rent or lease.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Hotel, motel, inn, extended-stay facility, bed and breakfast, or
youth hostel.
         (C)   Passenger Terminal.
            (i)   Definition. A public or commercial facility for the takeoff
and landing of airplanes and helicopters, and a facility for bus, taxi, or limo
service.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Helistop (SUP required).
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Airport, heliport, or airline terminal.
               Bus passenger terminal or multi-modal facility. Taxi dispatch
center or limousine service.
         (D)   Self-Service Storage.
            (i)   Definition. A facility that provides separate storage areas
for personal or business use designed to allow private access by the tenant for
storing or removing personal property.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Warehouse, self-service, fully enclosed indoor multi-story
storage, or mini-warehouse.
      (8)   Fabrication Use Categories.
         (A)   Light Industrial.
            (i)   Definition. A facility that manufactures, assembles,
disassembles, repairs, or services industrial, business, or consumer machinery,
equipment, products, or by-products mainly by providing centralized services
for separate retail outlets. Contrac- tors and building maintenance services
and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the
general public, come to the facility.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               None.
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Brewery, winery, or large-scale catering establishment.
               Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility.
               Contractors storage including janitorial and building
maintenance service, exterminator, or other maintenance yard or facility,
building, heating, plumbing, landscaping, or electrical contractor and others
who perform services off-site, but store equipment and materials or perform
fabrication or similar work on-site.
               Crematorium or pet crematorium.
               Electronics service center.
               Food or beverage production.
               Labor hall.
               Lawn, tree, or garden service.
               Laundry, dry-cleaning, carpet cleaning plants, or large-scale
cleaning establishment.
               Leather production.
               Lumberyard and wood products, sheet metal shop, or soft drink
bottling.
               Stone, clay, glass, and concrete products.
         (B)   Light Manufacturing.
            (i)   Definition. A facility conducting light manufacturing
operations within a fully-enclosed building.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Bulk mailing service.
               Clothing or textile apparel manufacturing.
               Manufacture or assembly of equipment, instruments (including
musical instruments), appliances, precision items, electrical items, sporting
goods, office and art supplies, electrical equipment/items, paper products
(except pulp mills), metal and glass products.
               Office showroom/warehouse.
               Printing, publishing, and lithography.
               Production of artwork and toys, sign-making, movie production
facility, or photo-finishing laboratory.
               Repair of scientific or professional instruments and electric
motors.
               Sheet metal, welding, machine, tool repair shop, or studio.
               Woodworking, including cabinet makers and furniture
manufacturing.
         (C)   Research and Development.
            (i)   Definition. A facility focused primarily on the research and
development of new products.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Laboratories, offices, and other facilities used for research
and development by or for any individual, organization, or concern, whether
public or private.
               Prototype production facilities that manufacture a limited
amount of a product in order to fully investigate the merits of such a product.
               Pilot plants used to test manufacturing processes planned for
use in production elsewhere.
               Production facilities and operations with a high degree of
scientific input.
               Facilities and operations in which the input of science,
technology, research, and other forms of concepts or ideas constitute a major
element of the value added by manufacture per unit of product.
         (D)   Vehicle Service.
            (i)   Definition. A facility providing repair and service to
passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, and other con- sumer motor
vehicles such as motorcycles, boats, and recreational vehicles.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               Audio and alarm system installation, custom accessories, quick
lubrication facilities, auto detailing, minor scratch and dent repair, bedliner
installation, glass repair and replacement, tire sales and mounting, or full-
or self-service vehicle wash.
               Alignment shop, body shop, engine replacement or overhaul,
repair of cars, trucks, RVs, and boats, repair or replacement of brakes,
shocks, mufflers, and transmissions.
               Towing service or truck service.
         (E)   Wholesale trade.
            (i)   Definition. A facility involved in the sale, lease, or rental
of products to industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses only. The
use emphasizes on-site sales or order-taking and often includes display areas.
Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               None.
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Mail-order house.
               Sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy equipment,
building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts,
electrical supplies, plumbing supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant
equipment, and store fixtures.
               Wholesale sales of food, clothing, auto parts, building
hardware, and similar products.
      (9)   Industrial Use Categories.
         (A)   Agriculture.
            (i)   Definition. A use that creates or preserves areas intended
primarily for the raising of animals and crops, conserva- tion, and the
secondary industries associated with agricultural production.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               None.
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Animal raising including horses, hogs, cows, sheep, goats,
swine, poultry, rabbits, and other small animals.
               Apiculture, aquaculture, or dairying.
               Crop production, soil preparation, agricultural services, large
animal and veterinary services, or farm labor and management services.
               Floriculture, horticulture, pasturage, row and field crops,
viticulture, tree or sod farm, silviculture, or sale of agriculture products.
               Fish hatcheries and preserves.
               Grain, fruit, field crop and vegetable cultivation and storage.
               Hunting, trapping, and game propagation.
               Livestock, dairy, poultry, and egg products.
               Livestock auction.
               Milk processing plant.
               Packing house for fruits or vegetables.
               Personal or commercial animal breeding and development.
               Plant nursery or plant nursery with landscape supply.
               Poultry slaughtering and dressing.
               Timber tracts or forest nursery gathering of forest products.
         (B)   Heavy Industrial.
            (i)   Definition. A use emphasizing industrial businesses and the
sale of heavier equipment. Factory production and industrial yards are located
here. Sales to the general public are limited.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               None.
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Any use that is potentially dangerous, noxious, or offensive to
neighboring uses in the district or those who pass on public ways by reason of
smoke, odor, noise, glare, fumes, gas, vibration, threat of fire or explosion,
emission of particulate matter, interference with radio or television
reception, or radiation.
               Asbestos or radioactive materials.
               Animal processing, packing, treating and storage, livestock or
poultry slaughtering, concentrate plant, processing of food and related
products, production of lumber, tobacco, chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone,
paper, pulp, plastic, stone, or glass materials or products, production or
fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing,
automobile dismantlers and recyclers.
               Bulk storage of flammable liquids, chemicals, cosmetics, drugs,
soaps, paints, fertilizers, and abrasive products.
               Commercial feed lot.
               Concrete batching and asphalt processing and manufacture or
batch plant.
               Earth-moving, heavy construction equipment or transportation
equipment.
               Explosives, fabricated metal products, and machinery.
               Impound lot, wrecker service including city wreckers, auto
storage, and wrecking, junk, or salvage yard.
               Manufactured or modular housing sales.
               Petroleum, liquefied petroleum gas, and coal products and
refining.
               Primary metal manufacturing.
               Pulp mill, rubber and plastic products, or rubber manufacturing.
               Scrap metal processors, sawmills, or secondary materials
dealers.
               Tanning and finishing of leather products.
               Trailer leasing, auction vehicle, or broker vehicle.
               Tire recapping, tobacco products, or transportation equipment.
         (C)   Resource Extraction.
            (i)   Definition. A use that extracts minerals and other solids and
liquids from land.
            (ii)   Example of Permitted uses.
               Gas drilling (see Article XII, “Gas Drilling and Production”).
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Mining, dredging, earth extraction, clearing or grading (timber
cutting).
               Extraction of phosphate or minerals.
               Extraction of sand or gravel or borrow pit.
               Metal, sand, stone, gravel, or clay mining and other related
processing.
               Stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other aggregate materials.
         (D)   Warehouse and Distribution.
            (i)   Definition. A facility for the storage or movement of goods
for itself or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the
final consumer with little on-site sales activity to customers.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               None.
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Bulk storage, including nonflammable liquids, cold storage
plants, including frozen food lockers, household moving and general freight
storage, or separate warehouse used by retail store such as furniture or
appliance store.
               Bus barn.
               Central postal facility.
               Freight or service facility.
               Outdoor storage yard.
               Parcel services.
               Railroad switching yard, freight terminal, or piggyback yard.
               Transfer and storage business where there are no individual
storage areas or where employees are the primary movers of the goods to be
stored or transferred.
               Trailer storage or drop-off lot.
               Truck or motor freight terminal or service facility.
               Warehouse.
         (E)   Waste-Related Service.
            (i)   Definition. A use that receives solid or liquid wastes from
others for transfer to another location and a use that collects sanitary wastes
or that manufactures or produces goods or energy from the composting of organic
material.
            (ii)   Examples of Permitted uses.
               None.
            (iii)   Examples of Prohibited uses.
               Animal waste processing.
               Landfill.
               Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic
material.
               Recycling facility including recyclable material storage,
including construction material.
               Recycling drop-off facility, recycling buy-back center, or
recycling collection center.
               Solid or liquid waste transfer station, waste incineration.
   (e)   Transitional Uses.
      (1)   Purpose.
         When a form district is initiated, it may not be possible to develop
and completely transition the entire area at the inception. Transitional uses
are intended to provide an opportunity for owners in a form district to make
appropriate use of their property during the interim period as the district
develops. No transitional use is allowed without a specific use permit which
must contain a specified duration and, which may, if necessary, provide
regulations as provided in this subsection to ensure compatibility of the use
with surrounding property.
      (2)   Specific Use Permit.
         (A)   The uses listed in Paragraph (3) are permitted in the WMU and WR
districts subject to a specific use permit.
         (B)   A specific use permit approved for a transitional use must
contain a specified duration, which may not exceed five years. A specific use
permit for a transitional use is not subject to automatic renewal. No off-
street parking reductions are permitted.
         (C)   A specific use permit approved for a transitional use may modify
the following regulations of this article if the city council determines that
no adverse impact on surrounding properties will result:
            (i)   Section
51A-13.302, “Height.”
            (ii)   Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
            (iii)   Section
51A-13.305, “Building Elements.”
         (D)   A specific use permit for a transitional use does not create
nonconforming rights in the use, structure, or any modifications of the
regulations of this article. Upon expi- ration of the specific use permit,
immediate compliance with all regulations of this article is required.
         (E)   No expiration of a specific use permit may occur while an
application for renewal of the specific use permit is pending before the city
plan commission or city council. If an application is pending at the end of the
current time limit stated in the specific use permit ordinance, the time limit
shall be extended as a matter of law:
            (i)   until the day following the next succeeding official agenda
meeting of the city council after the council makes a final decision to deny
the application; or
            (ii)   if the city council votes to create a new time limit, until
the effective date of the amending ordinance establishing the new time limit.
      (3)   List of Transitional Uses.
         (A)   All uses permitted under Section
51A-13.306, regardless of the district or development type in which the use is
located.
         (B)   Crop production.
         (C)   Building repair and maintenance shop.
         (D)   Catering service, large scale.
         (E)   Electronics service center.
         (F)   Tool or equipment rental.
         (G)   Lumber, brick, or building materials sales yard.
         (H)   Recycling collection center.
         (I)   Outdoor recreation, including, but not limited to, country club
with private membership, private recreation center, club, or area (outside),
public golf course, and com- mercial amusement (outside).
         (J)   Nursery or plant sales on an open lot.
      (4)   RTN District.
         Transitional uses are not permitted in the RTN district.
(Am. Ord. 30889, passed 6-13-18)
Division 51A-13.400.
Parking Regulations.
SEC. 51A-13.401.   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Accessory or Main Use.
      (1)   Except as provided in this division, all off-street parking must be
provided on the lot occupied by the main use.
      (2)   Off-street parking is considered an accessory use.
      (3)   Off-street parking may be provided as a main use, subject to the
standards of this article (see Commercial Parking).
      (4)   Parking may be provided in a parking overlay district in accordance
with Section
51A-13.410, “Parking Management Overlay (-PM).”
   (b)   Calculation of Required Parking.
      (1)   Except as provided in this division, when a lot is used for a
combination of uses, the parking requirements are the sum of the requirements
for each use, and no parking space for one use is included in the calculation
of the parking requirements for any other use.
      (2)   In determining the required number of parking spaces, fractional
spaces are counted to the nearest whole number, with one-half counted as an
additional space.
   (c)   Parking Charges.
      Except as provided in this subsection, required parking must be available
as free parking. Required parking located in a parking structure may be
available as free parking, contract parking, or parking on an hourly or daily
fee basis. On-street parking may be metered or otherwise be offered for a fee
by the city of Dallas or where authority has been appropriately delegated by
the city in a -PM overlay.
   (d)   Outdoor Dining.
      The area of any uncovered outdoor dining (not to exceed 50 percent of the
indoor dining area) is exempt from the calculation of required parking spaces.
   (e)   Maximum Reserved Parking.
      (1)   Surface parking spaces may be reserved for a specific tenant or
dwelling unit, provided that the following standards are not exceeded.
 
Use            Reserved Spaces (maximum)
               1.5 per single-family living unit
              1.0 per one-bedroom multifamily living unit
Residential    1.0 per two-bedroom multifamily living unit
               2.0 per three-bedroom (or more) multifamily living unit
Nonresidential 1.2 per 1,000 SF
 
      (2)   Underground parking may be reserved without the imposition of
maximum standards.
   (f)   Surface Parking Cap (maximum).
      Surface parking may not exceed 125 percent of the required parking
specified in Sec- tion 13.402, except where the parking is part of a -PM
overlay.
   (g)   Handicapped Parking.
      If more than 10 parking spaces are required, handicapped parking spaces
are re- quired as set out in Section
51A-4.305, and designed in accordance with the latest edition of the city of
Dallas Off-Street Parking and Driveways Handbook (latest edition).
SEC. 51A-13.402.    REQUIRED PARKING.
   (a)   Spaces Required.
      (1)   RTN District Required Spaces.
         (A)   Except as otherwise provided, the residential parking design
standards of Division 51A-4.300 and the number of required off-street parking
spaces in Division 51A-4.200 apply in the RTN district.
         (B)   No compact parking is permitted on surface parking lots. A
maximum of 20 percent of the required parking in a structure may be compact
parking.
         (C)   No parking reductions are permitted in the RTN district.
      (2)   WMU and WR District Required Spaces.
         The following spaces are required in the WMU or WR districts.
         Required Parking in WMU and WR Districts
 Use Category Number of Spaces Required
              Use Category  Number of Spaces Required
                            1.50 per single-family living unit
                          1.15 per one-bedroom or smaller multifamily living unit
             Household     1.65 per two-bedroom multifamily living unit
Residential   living        2.00 per three-bedroom or larger multifamily living unit
                            0.70 per retirement housing living unit
              Group living  0.25 per bed PLUS 1 per 200 SF office, minimum 4
              Community     1 per 200 SF
              service
              Day care      1 per 500 SF
                            1.50 per elementary classroom
                          3.50 per junior high or middle classroom
             Educational   9.50 per senior high classroom
                           1 per 25 SF seats in any other classroom type
             Government    1 per 200 SF
             service
             Park/open     None
Civic         space
              Place of      1.00 per 4 fixed seats or per 18” length of bench OR 1 per 28.00 SF floor
              worship       area without seating
              Social        see Group Living
              service
              Medical       1 per 222 SF
              Office,
              except:
             Art studio,   1 per 333 SF
Office        gallery       1 per 500 SF
              Financial     1 per 222 SF
              services,     1 per 167 SF
              Bank Call
              center
              Restaurants,  1 per 100 SF
             except: Bar,  1 per 83 SF
Retail        private club
              Retail sales  1 per 250 SF
              Vehicle sales 1 per 200 SF sales area
              Commercial
              amusement     1 per 200 SF
              (inside),      
              except: Dance 1 per 25 SF
              hall
             Indoor
             recreation,   1 per 150 SF
Service and   except:        
Entertainment Health club   1 per 143 SF
              or spa Movie  0.27 per seat
              theater       0.40 per seat
              Performing
              arts theater
              Personal      1 per 250 SF
              service
              Overnight     1.25 per room PLUS 1 per 200 SF of meeting room
Commerce      lodging
              Self-service  minimum 6
              storage
              Light         1 per 600 SF
              manufacturing
             Research &    1 per 300 SF
Fabrication   development
              Vehicle       1 per 500 SF, minimum 5
              service
 
   Note:   The parking requirements of Division 51A-4.200 apply to uses not
listed in the preceding chart nor deemed to be an equivalent use pursuant to
the provisions of Section
51A-13.306, “Uses.”
(Am. Ord 31470, passed 2-24-20)
SEC. 51A-13.403.    PARKING REDUCTIONS.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   No parking reductions are permitted in the RTN district.
      (2)   In the WR and WMU districts, if a parking reduction is requested,
delta credits may not be used to supply required parking, and all rights to
future delta credits must be relinquished except in the following cases:
         (A)   any building certified or eligible for certification as historic
on the National Register of Historic Places or located within a city of Dallas
historic overlay district; and
         (B)   any building on the city of Dallas Landmark Commission’s
historic resources list.
   (b)   Maximum Parking Reductions.
      The maximum cumulative parking reduction allowed under Section
51A-13.403, “Parking Reductions,” and Section
51A-13.501(f ), “Pedestrian Amenities,” is 50 percent of the parking specified
in Section
51A-13.402(a)(2).
   (c)   Access to Transit.
      (1)   Rail Transit Station Access.
         (A)   The following parking reductions apply for locations within a
2,640-foot walking distance of a rail transit station:
            (i)   A parking reduction of two percent for properties located
within a 1,321- to 2,640-foot walking distance of a rail transit station.
            (ii)   A parking reduction of 15 percent for properties located
within a 601- to 1,320-foot walking distance of a rail transit station.
            (iii)   A parking reduction of 25 percent for properties located
within a 600- foot walking distance of a rail transit station.
         (B)   The rail transit station must be in operation or anticipated to
be in operation within one year of the requested reduction.
         (C)   For purposes of this paragraph, a stop on a fixed rail system is
considered a rail transit station.
      (2)   Bus or Trolley Transit.
         The building official may approve a five percent reduction in the
number of required parking spaces for uses with a main entrance within a 600-
foot walking distance of an improved bus or trolley transit stop providing both
shade and seating. This reduction will be granted only where a rail transit
station is not available.
      (3)   Measurement of Walking Distance.
         Walking distance is measured from the primary entrance of the use to
the rail platform (or in the case of an underground station, the top of the
nearest elevator, stair, or escalator leading to the rail platform) or the
nearest bus boarding location using the most convenient pedestrian path.
      (4)   Restaurant and Bar Uses.
         No parking reduction for access to transit is allowed for restaurant
or bar uses located within a 600-foot radius of the property in a residential
district other than multifamily. For purposes of this subparagraph, distance is
measured from the primary entrance of the bar or restaurant use to the nearest
point of the property in a residential district other than multifamily.
   (d)   Access to Car-Sharing Program.
      The building official may approve a reduction in the number of required
parking spaces for residential units in a residential project or mixed use
project with a residential component where an active car-sharing program is
made available to residents, and where cars for the program are available on
the site or within a 600-foot walking distance of the site. The building
official may reduce parking requirements by five spaces for each car-share
vehicle available.
   (e)   Affordable Housing.
      (1)   The building official may approve a reduction in the number of
spaces for each standard affordable housing dwelling unit, as defined in
Division 51A-4.900, to 50 percent of the spaces required in Section
51A-13.402(a)(2) provided the following findings are made:
         (A)   any parking problems that may be caused by the development in
the future can be corrected either on-site or on one or more sites in the
immediate area that are bound by a covenant running with the land to provide
parking for the site in question; and
         (B)   alternate transportation is available for the residents of the
development or public transportation is within 1,320 feet of the site.
      (2)   Approval is conditioned upon the owner of the property recording a
covenant, approved as to form by the city attorney. The covenant must run with
the land for the benefit of the city. The covenant must also ensure that no
change in the affordable housing status of the property as described in the
application is allowed unless parking that meets the requirement of all
applicable laws in effect at the time the affordable housing status change is
provided.
   (f)   Employer Transportation Demand Management (TDM).
      (1)   The building official may approve up to a 25 percent reduction in
the number of spaces for uses that institute and commit to maintain a
transportation demand management (TDM) program, considering information the
applicant submits that clearly indicates the types of TDM activities and
measures proposed. The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
building official that a specific reduction will occur. If the applicant
demonstrates that a specific reduction will occur, the building of- ficial
shall reduce the amount of required parking equal to the amount of the
reduction, up to a maximum of 25 percent.
      (2)   There is no limitation on the types of TDM activities for which
reductions may be granted. The following measures serve as a guide to potential
transportation management activities that may be used in combination to reduce
parking demand.
      (3)   No TDM program may be discontinued without notice to the building
official and proof of compliance with all applicable parking requirements.
      (4)   No TDM program may be changed without the approval of the building
official. The building official may approve a change only if the applicant
demonstrates that the changes proposed will either maintain the previously
approved reduction, support an increase in the previously approved reduction,
or that parking is provided to compensate for any reduction lost by the
proposed change to the plan.
         (A)   Transportation Coordinator.
            The occupant of the use may appoint an employee to act as
transportation coordinator with responsibility for disseminating information on
ride-sharing and other transportation options that may be cause for a reduction
in otherwise applicable parking requirements. In addition to acting as
liaisons, transportation coordinators must be available to attend meetings and
training sessions with transit providers.
         (B)   Preferential Parking.
            The occupant of the use may provide specially marked spaces for
each registered car pool and van pool.
         (C)   Financial Incentives.
            The occupant of the use may provide cash or in-kind financial
incentives for employees telecommuting or commuting by car pool, van pool, and
mass transit.
         (D)   Telecommuting.
            The occupant of the use may allow work from home or otherwise
outside the facility on specific days.
         (E)   Emergency Ride Home.
            The occupant of the use may provide an emergency ride home for
those with family, medical, or other similar emergencies.
   (g)   Increased Pedestrian Amenities.
      A parking reduction of two percent will be granted where a higher level
of pedes- trian amenity is provided in accordance with Section
51A-13.501(f), “Pedestrian Amenities.”
   (h)   Underground Office Parking.
      When all or part of the parking for an office use is provided
underground, the building official shall approve a parking reduction of 0.33
spaces for each space provided underground.
   (i)   Tree Preservation.
      (1)   The building official may approve a reduction in the number of
parking spaces required by one space for each protected tree (as defined in
Article X) retained that would otherwise have to be removed to provide required
parking.
      (2)   The preserved tree must be protected from vehicular traffic through
the use of concrete curbs, wheel stops, or other permanent barriers and meet
the planting area requirements of Section
51A-10.104.
      (3)   The maximum reduction authorized by this subsection is five percent
or one space, whichever is greater.
(Am. Ord. 30889, passed 6-13-18)
SEC. 51A-13.404.   SPECIAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Purpose.
      (1)   This section provides alternatives to standard parking design.
      (2)   Joint parking allows the connection of parking lots on abutting
properties.
      (3)   Shared parking allows an exception to the requirement that no
parking space for one use be included in the calculation of the parking
required for any other use.
      (4)   On-street parking provides credit for adjacent on-street spaces.
      (5)   Packed parking provides more efficient surface parking through the
reduction of maneuvering area on a lot when an attendant is used to park
vehicles.
      (6)   Remote parking allows an exception to the requirement that all
parking be provided on the lot occupied by the main use.
      (7)   Tandem parking provides for cars to be more efficiently parked by
stacking one behind the other.
   (b)   General Standards.
      (1)   Special parking may account for 100 percent of the parking required
for any use.
      (2)   Special parking may not be located in a residential district,
except that civic and place of worship uses may provide parking in residential
districts on the same lot where these uses are located. Nonresidential uses in
residential districts may also use special parking, provided that the special
parking is not located in a residential district.
      (3)   Special parking must comply with all codes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations of the city and may not create safety hazards.
   (c)   Joint Parking.
      (1)   Uses abutting one another may physically connect their parking
areas at the lot line to create connecting drive aisles, provided a mutual
access easement accept- able to the city has been executed. The agreement must
ensure that maneuvering space for required parking spaces in both parking areas
is preserved. See Section
51A-4.328.
      (2)   The use of joint parking does not by itself authorize a reduction
in the number of required spaces.
   (d)   Shared Parking.
      (1)   Uses sharing parking must have either mutually exclusive or
compatibly overlapping hours of operation. The building official shall
determine whether the hours of operation are compatibly overlapping on a case-
by-case basis through the use of the ULI Shared Parking Model (latest edition).
      (2)   The building official shall use the ULI Shared Parking Model,
assuming the national averages provided in the accompanying manual.
Modification of the weekday or weekend employee/customer or resident/visitor
parking ratios, captive market percentages for visitors and employees, drive
percentages for visitors and employees, monthly or time of day adjustment
factors, or any other model assumptions are permitted only through the parking
special exception process.
      (3)   The building official is expressly authorized to apply the
reductions of Section
51A-13.403, “Parking Reductions,” prior to running the ULI Shared Parking
Model.
   (e)   On-Street Parking.
      (1)   A parking space located on a public street may be included in the
calculation of parking requirements if it is adjacent to the building site
where the use is located.
      (2)   Each on-street parking space may only be counted for one use,
except that an on-street parking space may be used to reduce the combined total
parking requirement of a mixed use project.
      (3)   An on-street parking space that is not available to the public at
all times of the day may only be counted as a partial parking space in
proportion to the amount of time that it is available. For example, a parking
space that is available to the public only eight hours per day will be counted
as one-third of a parking space (8 ÷ 24 = 1/3). The total of the limited-
availability parking spaces will be counted to the nearest whole number, with
one-half counted as an additional space.
   (f)   Packed Parking.
      (1)   The passenger loading and unloading area for packed parking must
have adequate means of ingress to and egress from a street or an alley. The
building official shall only consider alley access in satisfaction of this
requirement when alley access is permitted by this article.
      (2)   All maneuvering, parking, and loading for packed parking must be
accomplished on private property.
      (3)   The area of each packed parking space must be no less than 145
square feet.
      (4)   An access lane that is no less than 24 feet wide must be provided
through the packed parking area.
      (5)   An attendant must be provided to park vehicles during all business
hours of the main use. A valet parking license may also be required. See
Division 3, “Valet Park- ing Services,” of Article VI of Chapter 43 of the
Dallas City Code.
      (6)   A sign must be prominently displayed at all entrances of a packed
parking lot.
         (A)   Each sign must state:
            (i)   that all or a portion of the lot is restricted to packed
parking serving the main use;
            (ii)   that an attendant must be provided during all business hours
of the main use;
            (iii)   the business hours of the main use;
            (iv)   a phone number specified by the building official to be used
for reporting violations of this division;
            (v)   the phone number of the valet licensee; and
            (vi)   the issuance number of the valet license.
         (B)   Each sign must be constructed of weather resistant material.
         (C)   Each sign must be no less than 30 inches wide and 24 inches
long.
         (D)   Each sign must contain clearly legible letters in a color that
contrasts with the background material of the sign.
   (g)   Remote Parking.
      (1)   Remote parking must be located within a walking distance of 300
feet from the use served by the remote parking unless an extension of walking
distance is approved by the building official.
      (2)   The building official shall extend the walking distance for remote
parking to no more than 600 feet unless the extension would:
         (A)   significantly discourage patrons of the use from using the
remote parking;
         (B)   unreasonably endanger the safety of persons or property; or
         (C)   not otherwise be in the public interest.
      (3)   A license is required to authorize an extension of walking distance
beyond 600 feet. The building official must require that either a shuttle or an
attendant be provided by the applicant as a condition to approval of an
extension of the walking distance for remote parking beyond 600 feet.
         (A)   If a shuttle is required, it must:
            (i)   transport patrons between the main use and the remote parking
lot;
            (ii)   be adequately staffed during all hours of operation of the
main use; and
            (iii)   have adequate seating capacity to accommodate patrons
expected to use the remote parking.
         (B)   If an attendant is required, the attendant shall drive vehicles
of patrons between the main use and the remote parking lot. A valet parking
license may also be required. See Division 3, “Valet Parking Services,” of
Article VI of Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code.
         (C)   The building official may not authorize remote parking to be
located beyond a walking distance of 2,640 feet from the main use.
      (4)   A sign must be prominently displayed at all entrances of a remote
parking lot and at all entrances of a parking lot providing on-site parking for
the main use. Each sign must:
         (A)   illustrate or describe the location of the remote parking in
relation to the main use;
         (B)   be constructed of weather resistant material;
         (C)   be no less than 30 inches wide and 24 inches long; and
         (D)   contain clearly legible letters in a color that contrasts with
the back- ground material of the sign.
   (h)   Tandem Parking.
      (1)   Tandem parking is allowed for:
         (A)   single-family living;
         (B)   multifamily living; and
         (C)   the residential component of a mixed-use project.
      (2)   Two parking spaces in tandem must have a combined minimum dimension
of nine feet in width by 34 feet in length.
      (3)   Up to 85 percent of the total parking spaces provided for
residential projects may incorporate tandem parking.
      (4)   For residential projects, both parking spaces in tandem must be
assigned to the same dwelling unit.
      (5)   Tandem parking may not be used to provide guest parking.
SEC. 51A-13.405.   DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Parking Handbook Applies.
      All off-street parking spaces and areas must comply with the guidelines
estab- lished in the city of Dallas, Off-Street Parking and Driveways Handbook
(latest edition). The director shall keep a true and correct copy of the
handbook on file for public inspection upon request.
   (b)   Location of Parking.
      Parking must comply with the parking setback standards as set forth for
each development type in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types.”
   (c)   Dimensional Standards.
      Except as provided in this division, each off-street parking space must
be provided in accordance with the dimensional standards as set out in Section
51A-4.301(d)(1) and the Off-Street Parking and Driveways Handbook (latest
edition).
   (d)   Parking Surface.
      Permeable paving such as pervious asphalt or concrete is permitted.
   (e)   Residential Alley Access Restrictions.
      Residential alley restrictions in Section
51A-4.301(h), “Residential Alley Access Restrictions for Nonresidential Uses,”
apply in the WMU, WR and RTN districts.
SEC. 51A-13.406.    PARKING LOT LIGHTING.
All parking lot lighting must meet the standards of Section
51A-13.601, “Site Light- ing.”
SEC. 51A-13.407.   REQUIRED STACKING SPACES.
The required number of stacking spaces in Division 51A-4.200 apply to each use,
and the design requirements of Section
51A-4.304(c) apply to any stacking spaces provided.
SEC. 51A-13.408.   SURFACE PARKING SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING.
   (a)   Screening Required.
      (1)   Off-street surface parking must be screened in the following
instances:
         (A)   Where the parking area serves a nonresidential use contiguous
with a residential use or vacant lot in an A, A(A), R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH
(A), CH, MF, MF(A), MH, MH(A), or RTN district.
         (B)   Where the parking area serves a multifamily use contiguous with
a single-family or duplex use or a vacant lot in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH
(A), CH, or RTN district.
      (2)   If an alley separates a parking area from another use, the use is
considered contiguous to the parking area. If a street separates a parking area
from another use, the use is not considered contiguous to the parking area.
   (b)   Screening Standards.
      (1)   Required screening for off-street parking must be a brick, stone,
concrete masonry, stucco, or concrete wall that is not less than six feet in
height. No wall may have more than 10 square inches of open area for each
square foot of surface area, and may contain a maximum of two openings or gates
for vehicular access (although openings or gates for pedestrian access are
acceptable).
      (2)   Either one large canopy tree or two large non-canopy trees are
required along any parking lot screening for every 50 linear feet of the
screening wall, with trees spaced no less than 25 feet apart.
   (c)   Surface Parking Landscaping.
      (1)   Parking spaces in a surface parking lot may not be more than 60
feet from a large canopy tree planted in a median or island.
      (2)   Each tree must have a caliper of at least two inches and may not be
planted closer than four feet to the paved portion of the parking lot.
      (3)   A median or island in a surface parking lot must be a minimum of
125 square feet in area.
      (4)   Where no building lies between the sidewalk and a surface parking
lot, a perimeter buffer around the parking lot is required. (See also Section
51A-13.503(f), “Parking Buffer (ST-6).”) The perimeter buffer must consist of:
         (A)   a brick, stone, concrete masonry, stucco, or concrete wall that
is not less than 30 inches in height. No wall may have more than 10 square
inches of open area for each square foot of surface area, and may contain a
maximum of two openings or gates for vehicular access (although openings or
gates for pedestrian access are acceptable); or
         (B)   a planting strip not less than five feet in depth, planted with
landscape materials that will form a continuous, evergreen hedge of not less
than 30 inches in height. Landscape materials must be no less than 24 inches in
height at time of plant- ing, and must be maintained at no greater than 48
inches in height.
   (d)   Maintenance of Landscaping and Screening.
      The owner of off-street parking must maintain required landscaping and
screening in compliance with the requirements of this section.
SEC. 51A-13.409.    PARKING SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Exceptions Allowed.
      The following exceptions are allowed in addition to any permitted
reductions authorized in this division.
      (1)   Parking Design.
         (A)   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to the
parking design standards of this division if the board of adjustment
determines, after a public hearing, that the special exception will not
adversely affect neighboring property.
         (B)   In determining whether to grant a special exception, the board
of adjustment shall consider the following factors:
            (i)   Hours of use for the parking area.
            (ii)   Size and configuration of the lot on which the parking area
is located.
      (2)   Parking Demand.
         (A)   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to
authorize a reduction in the number of parking spaces required under this
division if the board of adjustment finds, after a public hearing, that the
parking demand generated by the use does not warrant the number of parking
spaces required, and the special exception would not create a traffic hazard or
increase traffic congestion on adjacent or nearby streets.
         (B)   The maximum reduction authorized by this paragraph is 25 percent
or one space, whichever is greater.
         (C)   In determining whether to grant a special exception for reduced
parking demand, the board of adjustment shall consider the following factors:
            (i)   The extent to which the parking spaces provided will be
remote, shared, or packed parking.
            (ii)   The parking demand and trip generation characteristics of
all uses for which the special exception is requested.
            (iii)   The current and probable future capacities of adjacent and
nearby streets based on the city’s thoroughfare plan.
            (iv)   The availability of public transit and the likelihood of its
use.
            (v)   The feasibility of parking mitigation measures and the
likelihood of their effectiveness.
         (D)   In granting a special exception for reduced parking demand, the
board of adjustment shall specify the use or uses to which the special
exception applies. A special exception granted by the board of adjustment for a
particular use automatically and immediately terminates if that use is changed
to a new use or discontinued.
         (E)   The board of adjustment may not grant a special exception for
reduced parking demand to reduce the number of parking spaces required in an
ordinance granting or amending a specific use permit.
      (3)   ULI Shared Parking Model Factors.
         The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to allow
modification of the weekday or weekend employee/customer or resident/visitor
parking ratios, captive market percentages for visitors and employees, drive
percentages for visitors and employees, monthly or time of day adjustment
factors, or any other model assumptions of the ULI shared parking model. The
board of adjustment must find that the alternative model assumptions are more
appropriate given the specific location or characteristics of the proposed mix
of uses.
      (4)   Tree Preservation.
         (A)   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to
authorize a reduction in the number of parking spaces required under this
division if the board of adjustment finds, after a public hearing, that the
reduction will result in the preservation of an existing protected tree.
         (B)   The preserved tree must be protected from vehicular traffic
through the use of concrete curbs, wheel stops, or other permanent barriers.
         (C)   The reduction authorized by this paragraph is equal to the
number of existing protected trees preserved, except that the maximum reduction
authorized by this paragraph is 10 percent or one space, whichever is greater.
No reduction may be granted under this paragraph for the preservation of any
tree for which a parking reduc- tion has been obtained under Section
51A-13.403(i), “Tree Preservation.”
      (5)   Stacking Spaces.
         (A)   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to
authorize a reduction in the number of stacking spaces required if the board of
adjustment finds, after a public hearing, that the stacking demand generated by
the use does not warrant the number of stacking spaces required, and the
special exception would not create a traffic hazard or increase traffic
congestion on adjacent and nearby streets.
         (B)   The maximum reduction authorized by this paragraph is two spaces
for each of the first two drive-through windows, or 25 percent of the total
number of required spaces, whichever is greater.
         (C)   In determining whether to grant a special exception, the board
of adjustment shall consider the following factors:
            (i)   The stacking demand and trip generation characteristics of
all uses for which the special exception is requested.
            (ii)   The current and probable future capacities of adjacent and
nearby streets based on the city’s thoroughfare plan.
         (D)   In granting a special exception, the board of adjustment shall
specify the use or uses to which the special exception applies. A special
exception granted by the board of adjustment for a particular use automatically
and immediately terminates if that use is changed to a new use or discontinued.
         (E)   The board of adjustment may not grant a special exception to
reduce the number of stacking spaces required in an ordinance granting or
amending a specific use permit.
   (b)   Restrictions or Conditions.
      In granting a special exception under this section, the board of
adjustment may:
      (A)   establish a termination date for the special exception;
      (B)   provide for the reassessment of conditions after a specified period
of time;
      (C)   impose restrictions on access to or from the subject property; or
      (D)   impose any other reasonable condition necessary to improve traffic
safety, lessen congestion on the streets, or ensure adequate parking.
SEC. 51A-13.410.    PARKING MANAGEMENT OVERLAY (-PM).
   (a)   General Provisions.
      (1)   A Parking Management (-PM) overlay may only be established within a
WMU or WR district, or within a WMU or WR district and a contiguous MU
district, or within a WMU or WR district and a contiguous planned development
district for MU district uses.
      (2)   The establishment or amendment of a -PM overlay is a change in
zoning district classification and must follow the procedures set out in
Section
51A-4.701.
   (b)   Establishing a -PM overlay.
      (1)   The applicant must submit a site plan that includes:
         (A)   a map and the legal description of the property within the
proposed district;
         (B)   the location of existing and proposed parking spaces within the
proposed district, including any on-street parking spaces;
         (C)   all uses the proposed district will serve;
         (D)   any parking reduction or parking special exception granted
within the boundaries of the -PM overlay;
         (E)   the method of ingress and egress to each parking area;
         (F)   screening, lighting, and landscaping of each parking area;
         (G)   the entity responsible for managing the required parking within
the proposed overlay, limited to the board of a public improvement district
(PID), tax increment financing reinvestment zone (TIF), or parking authority,
the city, or other govern- mental entity established under Texas law; and
         (H)   any other information the director determines is necessary for a
complete review of the proposed overlay.
      (2)   In establishing a -PM overlay, the city council may impose
conditions to ensure adequate parking and efficient management of parking
within the overlay.
   (c)   Meeting Parking Standards.
      For purposes of meeting parking standards, the entire area within the -PM
over- lay shall be considered one lot. In order to measure compliance for a
site plan or certifi- cate of occupancy, the applicant must provide a table
demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this division.
SEC. 51A-13.411.   OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (a)   Off-Street Loading Not Required.
      Off-street loading is not required for any use.
   (b)   Location and Design Standards.
      If off-street loading is provided, it must meet the following standards.
      (A)   Ingress to and egress from off-street loading spaces must have at
least the same vertical height clearance as the off-street loading space.
      (B)   Each off-street loading space must be designed with a reasonable
means of vehicular access from the street or alley in a manner which will least
interfere with traffic movement.
      (C)   Each off-street loading space must be independently accessible so
that no loading space blocks another loading space.
      (D)   Trash removal facilities and other structures must not block a
loading space. The design of the ingress, egress, and maneuvering area must be
approved by the director.
      (E)   Off-street loading must be located behind the parking setback.
(Am. Ord. 30889, passed 6-13-18)
SEC. 51A-13.412.    NONCONFORMING PARKING.
   (a)   A use that is nonconforming as to parking may be expanded only if the
parking spaces required to serve the additional area are provided.
   (b)   A use that is nonconforming as to parking may be changed to another
allowed use requiring more parking if parking spaces for the additional demand
are provided.
   (c)   A use that is nonconforming as to parking may be changed to another
allowed use that requires less parking.
   (d)   Additional required parking for a nonconforming site must be
calculated based on the difference between the required parking in Section
51A-13.402 for the prior use and the required parking for the new use.
Additional spaces must be made available to accommodate this difference. These
additional spaces may be provided through the use of special parking.
Division 51A-13.500.
Minor Streets and Streetscapes.
SEC. 51A-13.501.   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9383.png]
   (a)   Planting Zone.
      (1)   The planting zone is the area nearest to the curb within the public
right-of-way.
      (2)   Street trees must be planted in the planting zone in accordance
with the applicable street cross-section (see Section
51A-13.502, “New Minor Streets,” and Section
51A-13.503, “Existing Streets”).
      (3)   One large canopy tree must be planted every 40 feet on center, on
average. All street trees must have a minimum caliper of three inches at the
time of installation.
      (4)   Where utilities exist or are proposed, two small trees may replace
a required large canopy tree except where a mixed-use shopfront or single-story
shopfront is proposed or required. If the replacement small trees conflict with
utilities and cannot be planted within the planting zoen, the replacement small
trees must be planted within the door yard, but no closer than five feet from
the building facade. Replacement small trees must be planted as evenly spaced
as possible considering utility conflicts.
      (5)   The planting zone may be hardscaped with tree grates or landscaped
with a tree lawn.
      (6)   The planting zone must remain clear of obstacles at all times
except as provided for in Section
51A-13.501(d), “Encroachments.”
   (b)   Sidewalk Zone.
      (1)   The sidewalk zone is the area between the planting zone and the
front property line or right-of-way easement within the public right-of-way.
      (2)   The sidewalk zone must remain clear of obstacles at all times and
must be constructed to meet all city and ADA specifications.
   (c)   Door Yard Zone.
      (1)   The door yard is the area between the sidewalk zone and the front
building facade.
      (2)   Except in an -SH overlay, the door yard may be hardscaped or
landscaped. In a -SH overlay, the door yard must be hardscaped.
      (3)   The door yard must remain clear of obstacles at all times except as
specifically provided for in Section
51A-13.501(d), “Encroachments.”
   (d)   Encroachments.
      (1)   Planting Zone.
         The following encroachments are permitted in the planting zone subject
to approval of a license for use of public right-way issued in accordance with
Article VI of Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code.
         (i)   Benches, trash receptacles, newspaper racks, and bicycle racks.
         (ii)   Utility boxes, meters, man hole covers, regulatory signs, and
fire suppression equipment.
         (iii)   Pedestrian lighting.
         (iv)   Landscaping, sidewalk, trees, tree grates, and planters.
      (2)   Sidewalk Zone.
         Except as permitted in Section
51A-13.503(g), “Nonconforming Streetscapes,” no encroachments are permitted
over or in the sidewalk zone.
      (3)   Door Yard Zone.
         The following encroachments are permitted in the door yard.
         (i)   Galleries, awnings, balconies, stoops, and front porches in
accordance with Section
51A-13.305, “Building Elements.”
         (ii)   Outdoor seating areas.
         (iii)   A maximum three-foot-high fence.
         (iv)   Outdoor display in accordance with Section
51A-13.602, “Outdoor Storage and Display.”
         (v)   Signs in accordance with Section
51A-13.603, “Signs.”
         (vi)   Benches, trash receptacles, public art, water features, bicycle
racks, and bollards.
         (vii)   Pedestrian lighting.
         (viii)   Utility boxes, meters, man hole covers, and fire suppression
equipment.
         (ix)   Landscaping, sidewalks, trees, tree grates, and planters.
   (e)   Easements.
      (1)   The sidewalk zone, planting zone, and on-street parking area may be
provided on private property provided the sidewalk zone, planting zone, and on-
street parking area are located within an easement permanently dedicated to the
city.
      (2)   The dedicated easement must provide the city with perpetual access
to allow for customary public use, including but not limited to, the provision
of public signs, street lighting, parking meters, and public utilities.
      (3)   The easement cannot be used for underground structures of any kind
except those associated with underground utilities.
   (f)   Pedestrian Amenities.
      (1)   Applicability.
         The following pedestrian amenities apply in the WMU and WR districts.
      (2)   Location.
         Pedestrian amenities must be provided within the door yard or planting
zone.
      (3)   Required Amenities.
         The following pedestrian amenities are required:
         (i)   Benches at one per 300 feet of frontage on at least one primary
street.
         (ii)   Trash receptacles at one per 300 feet of frontage on at least
one primary street.
         (iii)   Bicycle parking at one five-bicycle rack per 300 feet of
frontage on at least one primary street.
      (4)   Optional Amenities.
         (A)   In General.
            A minimum of two of the pedestrian amenities or enhancements listed
in this subparagraph are required to obtain a two percent parking reduction.
         (B)   Galleries, Arcades, and Awnings.
            Galleries, arcades, or awnings with a minimum length of 25 feet per
100 feet of building facade must be provided along the frontage in accordance
with Section
51A-13.305, “Building Elements.”
         (C)   Pedestrian Passage.
            A mid-block pedestrian passage, available at all times to the
general public, must be provided and constructed in accordance with Section
51A-13.502(b)(7), “Pedestrian Passage.”
         (D)   Public Open Space.
            An additional two percent of net land area must be provided as
public open space in accordance with Section
51A-13.304(k), “Open Space Lot,” either on- or off- site (within a walking
distance of 1,320 feet). To obtain this credit, the dedication of public open
space must be accepted by the city of Dallas.
         (E)   Building Materials.
            (i)   At least 85 percent of the exterior finish of all buildings
(not including windows and doors) must be masonry. For purposes of this
paragraph, masonry materials include stone, cementitious simulated stone,
brick, portland cement stucco, and cementitious siding.
            (ii)   The use of no more than 15 percent of the following
materials may be used on the exterior finish of a building:
               (aa)   Pre-cast masonry (for trim and cornice elements only).
               (bb)   Glass fiber reinforced fiber concrete and fiberglass
reinforced plastic (for trim elements only).
               (cc)   Metal (for beam lintels, trim elements, and ornamentation
only).
               (dd)   Split-faced concrete masonry unit (only for piers and
foundation walls).
               (ee)   Glass block (no closer than 30 inches to building
corners).
               (ff)   Fabric for awnings.
         (F)   Public Art.
            Public art (including water features), approved in writing by the
director of cultural affairs or the cultural affairs commission, must be
provided.
         (G)   Pedestrian Lighting.
            Pedestrian lighting (free-standing or wall-mounted) must be
provided at one per 75 feet of frontage.
         (H)   Underground Utilities.
            All utilities must be provided underground.
      (5)   Maintenance.
         All pedestrian amenities must be maintained by the owner of the lot;
if there is more than one owner, all owners are jointly and severally liable
for maintenance.
   (g)   No Waiver Permitted.
      No waiver of the minor street or streetscape provisions of this division
is allowed through the subdivision process.
(Am. Ord. 29827, passed 8-15-15; Am. Ord. 30889, passed 6-13-18)
SEC. 51A-13.502.    NEW MINOR STREETS.
   (a)   Block and Street Standards.
      (1)   Except as provided in this subsection, in WR and WMU districts, no
blockface may be greater than 500 feet in length without an alley, street, or
pedestrian passage providing through-access to another alley, street, or
pedestrian passage. If an alley, street, or pedestrian passage cannot connect
to another alley, street, or pedestrian passage because one does not exist,
through-access must be provided by an alley, street, or pedestrian passage to
the rear property line.
      (2)   An individual lot with less than 100 feet of street frontage is
exempt from the requirements in Paragraph (1) above.
      (3)   The building official may issue a waiver to the requirement in
Paragraph (1) above if building official finds that the spirit and intent of
this subsection has been met and:
         (A)   the property shares a property line with a cemetery, Dallas Area
Rapid Transit right-of-way, a railroad, a levee, or a natural feature such as
floodplain, escarpment, waterways, or similar features; or
         (B)   the location and size of an existing building prevents the
property from being developed in accordance with Paragraph (1) above.
   (b)   Street Cross-Sections.
      (1)   General.
         Alternative on-street parking configuration other than those shown
(including reverse angle parking) and travel lane increases, up to 10 percent,
may be approved by the director of transportation and public works.
      (2)   New Streets.
         The following requirements apply to the construction of new streets
within a WMU, WR, or RTN district. All streets must be two-way and be
constructed with a maxi- mum design speed of 35 mph.
         (A)   Parallel Parking (MS-1A).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9385.png]
         (B)   Angle (60°) Parking (MS-1B).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9387.png]
      (3)   Residential Streets.
         The following requirements apply to the construction of new
residential streets within a RTN district. All streets must be two-way and be
constructed with a maxi- mum design speed of 30 mph. When RTN applies to either
side of a street and the other side of the street is in a WMU or WR district,
both sides of the street must use the RTN cross-section.
         (A)   Parallel Parking (MS-2A).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9389.png]
         (B)   Yield with Parallel Parking (MS-2B).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9391.png]
      (4)   Service Street (MS-3A).
         (A)   The following requirements apply to the construction of new
service streets within a WMU and WR district.
         (B)   All service streets must be two-way and be constructed with a
maximum design speed of 30 mph.
         (C)   A hedge or low wall not less than 30 inches in height at the
time of installation must be provided within the parking setback area to screen
the edge of the vehicular use area or parking structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9393.png]
      (5)   Alley.
         The following requirements apply to the construction of new alleys
within a WMU, WR, and RTN district. When a residential use abuts both sides of
an alley, the cross-section for a residential alley (MS-4B) is required,
otherwise the cross-section for a commercial alley (MS-4A) is required.
         (A)   Commercial Alley (MS-4A).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9395.png]
         (B)   Residential Alley (MS-4B).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9397.png]
      (6)   Shared Access Area.
         The following requirements apply to the construction of a shared
access area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9399.png]
      (7)   Pedestrian Passage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9768.png]
   The following requirements apply to the construction of a pedestrian
passage. Except as provided in this paragraph, the passage must connect from a
street a pedestrian passage, an alley, or another street. If a pedestrian
passage, alley, or another street does not exist, the pedestrian passage must
connect to a rear property line. Required building side setbacks may be used to
accommodate the pedestrian passage. If located on private property, a
pedestrian passage must be accessible to the public, dedicated as an easement,
and must be maintained by the property owner.
   (c)   Bump-Outs Required.
      (1)   Except for MS-2B and MS-3A streets, all streets must include bump-
outs at intersections to shorten the distance that pedestrians are required to
cross. No bump-outs are required on alleys.
      (2)   The width and depth of the bump-out will be determined by the
director of transportation and public works by balancing the needs for
vehicular access with those of pedestrian accessibility.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9403.png]
   (d)   Modification of Standards.
   Modifications to the street standards may be allowed by the director of
transportation and public works where necessary to address specific conditions.
The modifications must be the minimum necessary to address specific conditions,
while preserving the integrity of the street and minimizing impacts on the
pedestrian experience, and are limited to the following:
      (A)   adding turn lanes to respond to critical traffic needs;
      (B)   adding medians when such medians enhance pedestrian safety, or
address critical traffic needs;
      (C)   prohibiting on-street parking during peak periods;
      (D)   adding or deleting lanes adjacent to public open spaces to enhance
access or encourage pedestrian usage; or
      (E)   eliminating bump-outs when adding needed turn lanes or prohibiting
on-street parking during peak hours to respond to critical traffic needs.
(Am. Ord. 29827, passed 8-15-15; Am. Ord. 32864, passed 9-18-24)
SEC. 51A-13.503.    EXISTING STREETS.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   The streetscape requirements of this section apply to all new
development and to the addition of any floor area or pervious cover to the
site.
      (2)   Where the proposed addition of floor area or pervious cover is
associated with only one specific tenant space, only the portion of the
streetscape associated with that tenant space must be constructed.
      (3)   These standards apply to the maximum extent feasible on streets
regulated by the Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT), as determined by
TXDOT.
   (b)   Mixed Use Streetscape (ST-1).
   The following streetscape standard applies to property within a WMU or WR
district that abuts an existing street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9405.png]
   (c)   Indented Parking.
      (1)   In General.
         (A)   The following streetscape standards may apply to property within
a WMU, WR, or RTN district that abuts an existing thoroughfare.
         (B)   Alternative angles other than those shown (including reverse
angle) may be approved by the director of transportation and public works.
         (C)   When indented parking is used, the front setback area and
parking setback, as set forth in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types,” may be adjusted to accommodate the parking as
specified below. Trees along a multi-way boulevard are considered street trees
and are not counted as site trees.
      (2)   Indented Parking (ST-2).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9407.png]
   (d)   Multi-Way Boulevards.
      (1)   In General.
         (A)   The following streetscape standards may apply to property within
a WMU or WR district when the property abuts an existing thoroughfare or a
street on which on-street or indented parking is prohibited by the city.
         (B)   Alternative angles other than shown (including reverse angle)
may be approved by the director of transportation and public works.
         (C)   When a multi-way boulevard streetscape is used, the front
setback area and parking setback, as set forth in Section
51A-13.304, “Development Types,” may be adjusted to accommodate the multi-way
zone as specified below. Trees along a multi- way boulevard are considered
street trees and are not counted as site trees.
      (2)   Parallel Parking (ST-3).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9409.png]
      (3)   Angle (60°) Parking (ST-4).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9411.png]
   (e)   Residential Streetscape (ST-5).
      The following streetscape standards apply to property within a RTN
district that abuts an existing street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9413.png]
   (f)   Parking Buffer (ST-6).
      (1)   The following streetscape standards apply when a parking lot abuts
a public street (not including an alley).
      (2)   A hedge or low wall at least 30 inches in height at the time of
installation must be provided within the parking setback area to screen the
edge of the vehicular use area/parking structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9415.png]
   (g)   Nonconforming Streetscapes.
      (1)   Reductions.
         (A)   If a streetscape along an existing street is constrained by an
existing building, the building official may modify the streetscape standards
to the minimum extent necessary to accommodate the existing area between the
face of the building and back of curb.
         (B)   The standards shall be modified in the following order:
            (i)   Reduce the door yard as necessary.
            (ii)   Reduce or eliminate the planting zone.
            (iii)   If necessary, replace large canopy trees with small trees
that are more appropriate for the reduced area. If the planting zone is
eliminated, create a bump-out to provide for tree planting.
            (iv)   Reduce the sidewalk to the minimum width to accommodate ADA
accessibility.
      (2)   Encroachments.
         If a streetscape along an existing street is constrained by an
existing building, the following encroachments may be permitted over the
sidewalk subject to approval of a license for use of public right-way issued in
accordance with Article VI of Chapter 43 of the Dallas City Code.
         (i)   Awnings, balconies, stoops, and front porches in accordance with
Section
51A-13.305, “Building Elements.”
         (ii)   Outdoor display in accordance with Section
51A-13.602, “Outdoor Storage and Display.”
         (iii)   Signs in accordance with Section
51A-13.603, “Signs.”
(Am. Ord. 32864, passed 9-18-24)
Division 51A-13.600.
Site Development Regulations.
SEC. 51A-13.601.    SITE LIGHTING.
   (a)   Prohibited Light Sources.
      The following light fixtures and sources may not be used if the direct
light emit- ted is visible from adjacent areas:
      (A)   Low-pressure sodium and mercury vapor light sources.
      (B)   Cobra-head-type fixtures having dished or drop lenses or refractors
which house other than incandescent sources.
      (C)   Searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam fixtures.
   (b)   Lighting Design Requirements.
      (1)   In General.
         Outdoor lighting must primarily be used to provide safety, accent key
architectural elements, or emphasize public art or landscape features. All
lighting fixtures must meet the requirements of this section.
      (2)   Fixture (Luminaire).
         (A)   The light source must be concealed and must not be visible from
any public right-of-way or adjacent properties.
         (B)   In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of
light spillage into the night sky and onto adjacent property, all lighting
fixtures must be full cutoff fixtures.
         (C)   Fixtures must be mounted in such a manner that the cone of light
is contained on-site and does not cross any property line of the site.
         (D)   Lighting fixtures may not exceed 30 feet in height above the
parking.
         (E)   Lighting fixtures may not be less than nine feet or more than 15
feet in height above the sidewalk in pedestrian areas. All light fixtures
located within 50 feet of a residential district may not extend more than 15
feet in height.
      (3)   Light Source (Lamp).
         (A)   Only incandescent, fluorescent, metal halide, or color-corrected
high-pressure sodium may be used.
         (B)   The same light source type must be used for the same or similar
types of lighting throughout the development.
   (c)   Specific Lighting Standards.
      (1)   Security Lighting.
         (A)   Building-mounted security light fixtures such as wall packs may
not project above the roof line of the building and must be shielded.
         (B)   No security fixtures may face residential uses.
         (C)   Security fixtures may not be substituted for parking area or
walkway lighting and are restricted to loading, storage, service, and similar
locations.
      (2)   Accent Lighting.
         Only lighting used to accent architectural elements, landscaping, or
art may be directed upward, provided that the fixture is located, aimed, or
shielded to minimize light spill into the night sky.
      (3)   Canopy Area Lighting.
         A canopy area over fuel sales, automated teller machines, or similar
installations must have a recessed lens cover flush with the bottom surface of
the canopy that provides a cutoff or shielded light distribution.
      (4)   Entrances and Exits.
         To ensure the safety of persons and the security of the building,
lighting is required for all entrances and exits to buildings containing
nonresidential uses and open to the general public or to multifamily
residential uses.
      (5)   Parking Area Lighting.
         The provisions of Section
51A-4.301(e) apply to all off-street parking areas except as expressly modified
in this section.
      (6)   Excessive Illumination.
         (A)   Lighting that substantially interferes with the use or enjoyment
of any other property is prohibited.
         (B)   Lighting may not be oriented so as to direct glare or excessive
illumination onto streets in a manner that may distract or interfere with the
vision of drivers.
SEC. 51A-13.602.    OUTDOOR STORAGE DISPLAY.
   (a)   Outdoor Display.
      (1)   Outdoor display is the outdoor display of products actively
available for sale. The outdoor location of soft drink or similar vending
machines is considered outdoor display.
      (2)   Outdoor display is permitted in association with any permitted
nonresidential use in a WMU or WR district in accordance with the following
provisions:
         (A)   Outdoor display may only be located within the door yard.
         (B)   Outdoor display may occupy no more than 30 percent of the
horizontal length of the building facade.
         (C)   Outdoor display must be removed and placed inside a fully-
enclosed building at the end of each business day.
   (b)   Outdoor Storage.
      (1)   Outdoor storage is the overnight storage of products or materials
outside of a building.
      (2)   Outdoor storage includes merchandise or material in boxes, in
crates, on pallets, or in shipping containers.
      (3)   Outdoor storage includes the overnight outdoor storage of vehicles
awaiting repair, RV’s and boats, shopping carts, garden supplies, building
supplies, plants, fleet vehicles, and other similar merchandise, material,
vehicles, or equipment.
      (4)   Outdoor storage also includes salvage yards, vehicle storage yards,
and overnight outdoor storage of shipping containers, lumber, pipe, steel, junk
and other similar merchandise, material, or equipment.
      (5)   Outdoor storage is not permitted in the WMU, WR, or RTN districts.
SEC. 51A-13.603.    SIGNS.
   (a)   Definitions.
      The sign definitions of Section
51A-7.102 apply, with the following additions:
      (A)   ARCADE SIGN means an attached sign suspended below an arcade,
gallery, or awning.
      (B)   AWNING SIGN means any sign on the sides or top of an awning
(excluding awnings over gas pumps).
   (b)   All Districts.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, the provisions of Division 51A-
7.200, “Provisions for All Zoning Districts,” apply.
      (2)   The use of neon is permitted, except in the RTN district.
      (3)   No portion of a sign other than the words themselves may be
illuminated by back-lighting (for example, channel letters may be back lit).
      (4)   No sign may be illuminated by an independent, external light source
(such as an external floodlight).
   (c)   WMU Districts.
      (1)   In General.
         The WMU districts are considered business zoning districts for
purposes of regulating signs.
      (2)   Detached Signs.
         (A)   Except as provided in this paragraph, the provisions of Section
51A-7.304, “Detached Signs,” apply.
         (B)   Except for expressway signs, all signs must be monument signs.
The maximum height of a monument sign is six feet.
         (C)   The maximum height of a monument sign is six feet.
         (D)   The maximum effective area of a monument sign is 20 square feet.
      (3)   Attached Signs.
         (A)   Arcade Signs.
            (i)   No arcade sign may exceed six square feet in effective area.
            (ii)   The minimum linear distance between any two arcade signs is
15 feet.
            (iii)   An arcade sign must be at least 10 feet above the sidewalk.
            (iv)   No arcade sign may project above the arcade, gallery, or
awning to which it is attached.
            (v)   Arcade signs may only identify the premise or occupant of the
premise and provide an address.
         (B)   Awning Signs.
            (i)   The maximum size of an awning sign is 18 square feet.
            (ii)   The maximum combined effective area for all awning signs on
a building facade is 150 square feet.
            (iii)   No signs are permitted on awnings located above the second
story.
   (d)   WR and RTN Districts.
      (1)   In General.
         WR and RTN districts are considered non-business zoning districts for
purposes of regulating signs.
      (2)   Detached Signs.
         (A)   Except as provided in this paragraph, the provisions of Section
51A-7.403, “Detached Signs,” apply.
         (B)   All signs must be monument signs.
         (C)   The maximum height of a monument sign is six feet.
         (D)   The maximum effective area of a monument sign is 20 square feet.
         (E)   For the purpose of this subsection, MONUMENT SIGN means a
detached sign applied directly to a ground-level support structure (instead of
a pole sup- port) with no separation between the sign and the ground, or
mounted on a fence.
      (3)   Attached Signs.
         (A)   In General.
            Except as provided in this subsection, the provisions of Section
51A-7.404, “Attached Signs,” apply.
         (B)   All Attached Signs.
            (i)   No attached sign on the ground story may exceed 10 percent of
the total area of the ground-story building facade.
            (ii)   The total effective area of all attached signs on upper
stories may not exceed five percent of the total area of the ground-story
building facade.
         (C)   Arcade Signs.
            (i)   No arcade sign may exceed six square feet in effective area.
            (ii)   The minimum linear distance between any two arcade signs is
15 feet.
            (iii)   No arcade sign may be lower than 10 feet above the
sidewalk.
            (iv)   No arcade sign may project above the arcade, gallery, or
awning to which it is attached.
            (v)   Arcade signs may only identify the premise or occupant of the
premise and provide an address.
         (D)   Awning signs.
            (i)   No awning sign may exceed six square feet in effective area.
            (ii)   The maximum combined effective area for all awning signs on
a building facade is 150 square feet.
            (iii)   No sign is permitted on an awning which is located above
the second story.
SEC. 51A-13.604.   DUMPSTERS.
   (a)   RTN District.
      No dumpsters are permitted for residential uses in the RTN district.
Division 51A-13.700.
Administration.
SEC. 51A-13.701.   APPLICATION FOR ZONING.
   (a)   Any change in zoning district classification must follow the zoning
amendment procedure in 51A-4.701.
   (b)   There are two options for application of these form districts:
      (1)   change in zoning district classification to an WMU, WR, or RTN
district; or
      (2)   creation of a planned form district.
SEC. 51A-13.702.   PLANNED FORM DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose.
      The purpose of the planned form district is to provide additional
certainty in the development of a form district through the adoption of a
regulating plan that specifies the location and type of streets, open spaces,
and development types.
   (b)   Conformity to Article XIII.
      The regulating plan must comply with the requirements of Article XIII.
Unlike a planned development district established under Article IV, an
ordinance adopting a planned form district may not waive or modify the
standards of Article XIII.
   (c)   Regulating Plan.
      (1)   An ordinance establishing a planned form district must include a
regulating plan for the entire proposed area with the following elements:
         (A)   District Boundaries.
         (B)   Specific location of existing overlays, if any. For purposes of
this provision, existing overlay means an overlay adopted before or on the date
of passage of the planned form district ordinance.
         (C)   Specific location and dimensions of existing thoroughfares and
general location and dimensions of proposed thoroughfares, if any. If a
proposed thor- oughfare differs from the thoroughfare plan, an amendment to the
thoroughfare plan is required.
         (D)   Specific location and dimensions of existing minor streets and
general location and dimension of proposed minor streets, if any.
         (E)   Specific location and dimensions of existing service streets and
general location and dimension of proposed service streets, if any.
         (F)   Specific location of any existing public open space, if any,
including any off-site open space used for credit, and general location of any
proposed open space.
         (G)   Specific location of any existing rail transit station and
general location of any proposed rail transit station.
         (H)   Streetscape standards for all streets not considered minor
streets, if city council determines them necessary.
         (I)   A chart describing the proportion of development types within
the district.
         (J)   Any additional elements determined by the city council to be
necessary.
      (2)   A regulating plan is not a site plan, as required for all
development (see Section
51A-13.703, “Site Plan Review”).
   (d)   Modification of a Regulating Plan.
      Any change to a regulating plan is a change in zoning district
classification and must follow the zoning amendment procedure in Section
51A-4.701.
   (e)   Compliance with Regulating Plan.
      The requirements of the regulating plan are conditions that must be
complied with before a certificate of occupancy may be granted.
SEC. 51A-13.703.   SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (a)   Site Plan Required.
      (1)   Except as provided in Paragraph (2), all development must receive
site plan approval by the building official in accordance with Section
51A-4.803 before issu- ance of a building permit. A certificate of occupancy
will not be issued unless all aspects of the development fully conform to the
approved site plan.
      (2)   A site plan is not required if the permit is only needed for:
         (A)   restoration of a building that has been damaged or destroyed by
fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the public enemy, or accident of
any kind; or
         (B)   construction work that does not change the use or increase the
existing building height, floor area ratio, or nonpermeable coverage of the
lot.
   (b)   Additional Ssite Plan Requirements.
      The following site plan elements are required in addition to any
requirements in Section
51A-4.803.
      (A)   Designated primary, side, and service streets.
      (B)   Development types designated on specific lots.
      (C)   Location and description of pedestrian amenities.
      (D)   Location and specifications of minor and existing streets.
      (E)   Location and specifications of open space.
      (F)   Location of all setback lines.
      (G)   Building elevations showing compliance with building facade
requirements.
      (H)   Location and specifications of landscaping.
      (I)   Locations and specifications of site lighting, outdoor storage and
display, and signs.
   (c)   Primary Street Designation.
      (1)   In this section:
         (A)   CONSIDERATION means a measured comparison of a blockface to the
adjacent blockfaces at each of its endpoints.
         (B)   CORRIDOR means the blockfaces on the same side of the street as
the subject blockface separated by a street, alley, or other right-of-way.
      (2)   The street designation for each lot frontage is determined by the
classification of the subject blockface. The classification of each blockface
must be determined by the following method:
         (A)   The longest blockface in each consideration is designated as a
primary street.
         (B)   If a blockface fails to be designated as a primary street after
all considerations, then that blockface is designated as a side street.
         (C)   If the longest blockface is equal in length to another blockface
in the same consideration, then both blockfaces are primary streets.
         (D)   If all blockfaces are equal in length, then the street
designation is determined by the following rule:
            (i)   If a block contains an alley, any blockface parallel to the
alley will be designated as a primary street and any blockface not parallel to
the alley will be designated as a side street.
            (ii)   If there is no alley, then the subject blockface will match
the street designation of the corridor.
            (iii)   If the corridor consists of multiple street designations,
then the subject blockface must match the street designation of the blockface
across the street.
            (iv)   If the blockface across the street is unable to be
identified through this process, then the subject blockface will be classified
as a side street.
   (d)   Service Street Designation.
      (1)   The building official shall determine whether a service street is
appropriate based on the criteria contained in this subsection.
      (2)   The applicant must control the land along an entire block face of a
service street, and the service street must be designated from one street
intersection to another street intersection.
      (3)   A site with a service street must have at least two frontages and
one frontage must be a primary street.
      (4)   Only one service street may be designated abutting any block.
   (e)   Multiple Development Types on a Single Lot or Parcel.
      (1)   Calculation of Lot Coverage.
         (A)   Where multiple development types are located on a single
building site, the calculation of lot coverage is based on the proportion of
total coverage required for each development type in relation to the proposed
building footprints.
         (B)   As an example, a building site with one proposed mixed use
shopfront building (allowed 100 percent coverage) with a lot coverage of 10,000
square feet and two proposed general commercial buildings (allowed 80 percent
coverage) with a com- bined lot coverage of 20,000 square feet would have a lot
coverage of 86 percent.
 
10,000 SF x 1.00 + 20,000 SF x 0.80 = 86% Lot Coverage
30,000 SF          30,000 SF
 
         (C)   Where the lot coverage for all proposed development types is the
same, no calculation is necessary.
      (2)   Calculation of Required Frontage.
         (A)   In order to ensure the pedestrian frontage remains as consistent
as possible, if multiple development types are located on a single building
site, the building official shall calculate required street frontage on a
building-by-building basis.
         (B)   As an example, a site with a mixed use shopfront building with
180 linear feet of street frontage (required 90 percent street frontage) must
be located on an artificial lot with a width no greater than 200 feet. A
proposed general commercial building with 200 linear feet of street frontage
(required 70 percent street frontage) must be located on an artificial lot with
a width no greater than 286 feet in width.
   (f)   Consistency With Regulating Plan.
      The building official shall determine that the site plan is consistent
with any adopted regulating plan prior to approval.
   (g)   Site Plan Modifications and Waivers.
      The building official may authorize minor modifications to approved site
plans and waive the requirement of a site plan for minor construction or site
improvements (for example: limited parking lot modifications, accessory
structures, fences, and similar projects) provided that:
      (A)   the basic relationship of the development to adjacent property is
not affected;
      (B)   there is no conflict with the requirements of this article; and
      (C)   the fundamental character of the development as a whole is not
changed.
(Am. Ord. 31470, passed 2-24-20)
CHAPTER 51
FORMER DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE
ORDINANCE NO. 10962, AS AMENDED.
(Ord. 24637)
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Sec.
51-1.101.      Reserved.
Sec.
51-1.102.      Applicability and purpose.
Sec.
51-1.103.      Enforcement.
Sec.
51-1.104.      Certificate of occupancy.
Sec.
51-1.104.1.      Applications.
Sec.
51-1.105.      Fees.
Sec.
51-1.105.1.      Fee exemptions and refunds.
Sec.
51-1.106.      Notification signs required to be obtained and posted by
applicant.
Sec.
51-1.107.      Special exception for the handicapped.
Sec.
51-1.108.      Comprehensive plan.
Sec.
51-1.109.      Apportionment of exactions.
ARTICLE II.
INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
Sec.
51-2.101.      Interpretations.
Sec.
51-2.102.      Definitions.
ARTICLE III.
DECISIONMAKING AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES.
ARTICLE IV.
ZONING REGULATIONS.
Division 51-4.100.
Establishment of Zoning Districts.
Sec.
51-4.101.      Zoning districts established.
Sec.
51-4.102.      Purpose of zoning districts.
Sec.
51-4.103.      Zoning district map.
Sec.
51-4.104.      Zoning district boundaries.
Division 51-4.200.
Use Regulations.
Sec.
51-4.201.      Residential uses.
         (1)   Single-family.
         (1.1)   Handicapped group dwelling unit.
         (2)   Duplex.
         (3)   Multiple-family.
         (3.1)   Group residential facility.
         (4)   Reserved.
         (5)   Reserved.
         (6)   Manufactured home park, manufactured home subdivision, and
campground.
         (7)   Retirement housing.
Sec.
51-4.202.      Utility and service uses.
         (1)   Utility or government installation other than listed.
         (2)   Local utilities.
         (3)   Electrical substation.
         (4)   Electrical energy generating plant.
         (5)   Radio, television, or microwave tower.
         (6)   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
         (7)   Sewage pumping station.
         (8)   Sewage treatment plant.
         (9)   Telephone exchange, switching, and transmitting equipment.
         (10)   Water reservoir, well, or pumping station.
         (11)   Water treatment plant.
         (12)   Tower/antenna for cellular communication.
Sec.
51-4.203.      Transportation uses.
         (1)   Airport or landing field.
         (2)   STOL (short takeoff or landing) port.
         (3)   Passenger bus station and terminal.
         (4)   Transit passenger shelter.
         (5)   Helicopter base.
         (6)   Heliport.
         (7)   Helistop.
         (8)   Motor freight hauling and storage.
         (9)   Railroad freight terminal.
         (10)   Railroad passenger station.
         (11)   Railroad team track.
         (12)   Railroad yard, roundhouse, or shops.
Sec.
51-4.204.      Community service uses.
         (1)   Post office.
         (2)   Community, welfare, or health center.
         (3)   Foster home.
         (4)   Child-care facility.
         (5)   Halfway house.
         (6)   Adult day care facility.
         (7)   Reserved.
Sec.
51-4.205.      Medical uses.
         (1)   Hospital.
         (2)   Reserved.
         (3)   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions.
         (4)   Reserved.
         (5)   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
         (6)   Medical or scientific laboratory.
         (7)   Optical shop.
         (8)   Medical appliance fitting and sales.
         (9)   Ambulance service.
Sec.
51-4.206.      Religious uses.
         (1)   Church.
         (2)   Rectory.
         (3)   Convent or monastery.
         (4)   Cemetery or mausoleum.
         (5)   Reserved.
Sec.
51-4.207.      Educational uses.
         (1)   Public or private school.
         (2)   Reserved.
         (3)   Business school.
         (4)   Technical school.
         (5)   College, university, or seminary.
         (6)   College fraternity or sorority house.
         (7)   College dormitory.
         (8)   Library, art gallery, or museum.
Sec.
51-4.208.      Recreation and entertainment uses.
         (1)   Public park or playground.
         (2)   Game court center.
         (3)   Private recreation club or area.
         (4)   Public golf course.
         (5)   Country club with private membership.
         (6)   Inside commercial amusement.
         (7)   Outside commercial amusement.
         (8)   Theatre.
         (9)   Drive-in theatre.
         (10)   Rodeo.
         (11)   Fairgrounds.
         (12)   Carnival or circus (temporary).
         (13)   Wax museum.
Sec.
51-4.209.      Bar and restaurant uses.
         (1)   Alcoholic beverage establishments.
         (2)   Drive-in restaurant.
         (3)   Restaurant without drive-in service.
         (4)   Reserved.
         (5)   Private club.
         (6)   Catering service.
Sec.
51-4.210.      Professional, personal service, and custom crafts uses.
         (1)   Office.
         (2)   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (3)   Bank or savings and loan office, with or without drive-in
window.
         (4)   Trade center.
         (5)   Barber and beauty shop.
         (6)   Mortuary or funeral home.
         (7)   Health studio.
         (8)   Custom cleaning shop.
         (9)   Commercial cleaning shop.
         (10)   Self-service laundry or dry cleaning.
         (11)   Commercial laundry or dry cleaning.
         (12)   Laundry or cleaning pickup and receiving station.
         (13)   Key shop.
         (14)   Shoe repair.
         (15)   Tailor, custom sewing, and millinery.
         (16)   Taxidermist.
         (17)   Travel bureau.
         (18)   Broadcasting or recording studio.
         (19)   Instructional arts studio.
         (20)   Handcrafted art work studio.
         (21)   Handcrafted bookbinding.
         (22)   Photography studio.
         (23)   Safe deposit boxes.
         (24)   Commercial wedding chapel.
         (25)   Alternative financial establishment.
Sec.
51-4.211.      Retail uses.
         (1)   Retail stores other than listed.
         (2)   Antique shop.
         (3)   Retail food store.
         (4)   Bakery or confectionery shop.
         (5)   Book and stationery store.
         (6)   Camera shop.
         (7)   Cigar, tobacco, and candy store.
         (8)   Clothing store.
         (9)   Drug store.
         (10)   Liquor store.
         (11)   Florist store.
         (12)   Feed store.
         (13)   Pet shop.
         (14)   Furniture store.
         (15)   Second hand store.
         (16)   Pawn shop.
         (17)   Hardware or sporting goods store.
         (18)   Home improvement center.
         (19)   Hobby and art supplies store.
         (20)   Paint and wallpaper store.
         (21)   Swimming pool sales and supply.
         (22)   Outside sales.
         (23)   Convenience store with drive-through.
         (23)   Paraphernalia shop.
Sec.
51-4.212.      Motor vehicle related uses.
         (1)   Automobile or motorcycle display, sales, and service (inside
display).
         (2)   Automobile or motorcycle display, sales, and service (outside
display)
         (3)   Auto auction.
         (4)   Auto glass, muffler, or seat cover shop.
         (5)   Auto parts sales (inside only).
         (6)   Auto parts sales (outside display).
         (7)   Auto repair garage (inside).
         (8)   Auto repair garage (outside).
         (9)   Auto painting or body rebuilding shop (inside).
         (10)   Auto painting or body rebuilding shop (outside).
         (11)   Car wash.
         (12)   Steam cleaning of vehicles and machinery.
         (13)   Service station.
         (14)   Engine or motor repair shop.
         (15)   Bus or truck repair/parking garage.
         (16)   Drag strip, go-cart track, or commercial racing.
         (17)   Surface parking.
         (18)   Commercial parking lot or garage.
Sec.
51-4.213.      Commercial uses.
         (1)   Appliance fix-it shop.
         (2)   Custom furniture construction, repair, or upholstery shop.
         (3)   Building repair and maintenance shop.
         (4)   Plumbing, electrical, air conditioning, and heating shops.
         (5)   Lumber, brick, or building materials sales yard.
         (6)   Machinery sales and services.
         (7)   Machine or welding shop.
         (8)   Tool and equipment rental (inside display only).
         (9)   Tool and equipment rental (with outside display).
         (10)   Petroleum products storage and wholesale.
         (11)   Monument sales yard.
         (12)   Mining.
         (13)   Sand, gravel, or earth sales and storage.
         (14)   Job printing, lithographer, printing, or blueprinting plant.
         (15)   Duplication shop.
         (16)   Custom print shop.
         (17)   Gummed label printing.
         (18)   Venetian blind or window shade repair, assembly, and sales.
         (19)   Gas drilling and production.
         (20)   Computer service center.
         (21)   Custom commercial engraving.
         (22)   Garden shop, plant sales, or greenhouse.
         (23)   Diamond and precious stone sales (wholesale only).
         (24)   Design or decorative center.
         (25)   Attached non-premise sign.
         (26)   Detached non-premise sign.
         (27)   Labor hall.
         (28)   Gas pipeline compressor station.
Sec.
51-4.214.      Storage and waste disposal uses.
         (1)   Warehouse.
         (2)   Contractor’s maintenance yard.
         (3)   Building mover’s, temporary storage yard.
         (4)   Open storage.
         (5)   Outside salvage or reclamation.
         (6)   Metal processing facility.
         (7)   Inside salvage and reclamation.
         (8)   Refuse transfer station.
         (9)   Sanitary landfill.
         (10)   Aluminum collection center.
         (11)   Mini-warehouse.
         (12)   Office/showroom warehouse.
Sec.
51-4.215.      Animal related uses.
         (1)   Farm or ranch.
         (2)   Veterinarian’s office.
         (3)   Animal clinic without outside runs.
         (4)   Animal clinic with outside runs.
         (5)   Kennel with outside run.
         (6)   Animal pound.
         (7)   Commercial stable.
         (8)   Zoo.
         (9)   Hatchery and breeding operation.
         (10)   Livestock auction pens or sheds.
         (11)   Slaughterhouse.
Sec.
51-4.216.      Industrial and manufacturing uses.
         (1)   Industrial uses other than listed.
         (2)   Permanent concrete or asphalt batching or recycling plant.
         (3)   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant.
         (4)   U-cart concrete system.
         (5)   Fiberglass swimming pool fabricator.
         (6)   Light fabrication and assembly.
         (7)   Clothing manufacturing.
         (8)   Bedspread, drapes, and headboard manufacturing.
         (9)   Manufacturing laboratory.
         (10)   Artificial marble manufacturing.
         (11)   Corrugated cardboard box fabrication.
         (12)   Tread rubber manufacturing plant.
         (13)   Metal smelting and plating.
         (14)   Rendering plant.
         (15)   Alcoholic beverage manufacturing.
Sec.
51-4.216.1.      Lodging uses.
         (1)   Extended stay hotel or motel.
         (2)   Lodging or boarding house.
         (3)   Hotel and motel.
         (4)   Overnight general purpose shelter.
Sec.
51-4.217.      Accessory uses.
         (1)   Game court (private).
         (2)   Swimming pool (private).
         (3)   Private stable.
         (4)   Home occupation.
         (5)   Occasional sales (garage sales).
         (6)   Community center (private).
         (7)   Amateur communication tower.
         (8)   Private street or alley.
         (9)   Open storage.
         (10)   Day home.
         (11)   Pedestrian skybridges.
         (12)   Accessory helistop.
         (13)   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
         (14)   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
         (15)   Accessory outside sales.
         (16)   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (17)   General waste incinerator.
         (18)   Accessory electric vehicle charging station.
         (20)   Temporary inclement weather shelter.
Use Charts
Sec.
51-4.218.      Limited uses.
Sec.
51-4.218.1      Retail-related uses.
Sec.
51-4.219.      Specific use permit.
Sec.
51-4.220.      Classification of new uses.
Sec.
51-4.221.      Sexually oriented businesses.
Division 51-4.300.
Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations.
Sec.
51-4.301.      Off-street parking regulations.
Sec.
51-4.302.      Parking district regulations.
Sec.
51-4.303.      Off-street loading regulations.
Sec.
51-4.304.      Off-street stacking space regulations.
Sec.
51-4.305.      Handicapped parking regulations.
Sec.
51-4.306.      Off-street parking in the central business district.
Sec.
51-4.307.      Nonconformity as to parking or unloading regulations.
Sec.
51-4.308.      Reserved.
Sec.
51-4.309.      Reserved.
Division 51-4.310.
Off-street Parking Reductions.
Division 51-4.320.
Special Parking Regulations.
Division 51-4.330.
Bicycle Parking Regulations.
Division 51-4.340.
Mechanized Parking.
Division 51-4.400.
Yard, Lot, and Space Regulations.
Sec.
51-4.401.      Minimum front yard.
Sec.
51-4.402.      Minimum side yard.
Sec.
51-4.403.      Minimum rear yard.
Sec.
51-4.404.      Minimum lot area for residential use.
Sec.
51-4.405.      Minimum lot width for residential use.
Sec.
51-4.406.      Minimum lot depth for residential use.
Sec.
51-4.407.      Maximum lot coverage.
Sec.
51-4.408.      Maximum building height.
Sec.
51-4.409.      Maximum floor area ratio.
Sec.
51-4.410.      Schedule of yard, lot, and space regulations.
Sec.
51-4.411.      Maximum densities for residential uses.
Sec.
51-4.412.      Shared access development.
Division 51-4.500.
Overlay and Conservation District Regulations.
Sec.
51-4.501.      Historic overlay district.
Sec.
51-4.502.      Institutional overlay district.
Sec.
51-4.503.      D and D-1 liquor control overlay districts.
Sec.
51-4.504.      Demolition delay overlay district.
Sec.
51-4.505.      Conservation districts.
Sec.
51-4.506.      Modified delta overlay district.
Sec.
51-4.507.      Neighborhood stabilization overlay.
Sec.
51-4.508.      Turtle Creek environmental corridor.
Sec. 51-4.509.       Accessory dwelling unit overlay.
Division 51-4.600.
District Regulations of Special Applicability.
Sec.
51-4.601.      Creation of a building site.
Sec.
51-4.602.      Fence, screening, and visual obstruction regulations.
Sec.
51-4.603.      Use of a conveyance as a building.
Sec.
51-4.604.      Restrictions on access through a lot.
Sec.
51-4.605.      Design standards.
Division 51-4.700.
Zoning Procedures.
Division 51-4.800.
Development Impact Review.
Sec.
51-4.801.      Purpose.
Sec.
51-4.802.      Definitions.
Sec.
51-4.803.      Site plan review.
ARTICLE V.
FLOOD PLAIN AND ESCARPMENT ZONE REGULATIONS.
ARTICLE VI.
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
Sec.
51-6.101.      Definitions applicable to the environmental performance
standards.
Sec.
51-6.102.      Noise regulations.
Sec.
51-6.103.      Toxic and noxious matter.
Sec.
51-6.104.      Glare.
Sec.
51-6.105.      Vibration.
Sec.
51-6.106.      Odors, smoke, particulate matter, and other air contaminants.
Sec.
51-6.107.      Nonconformance with the environmental performance standards.
Sec.
51-6.108.      Municipal setting designation ordinance.
ARTICLE VII.
SIGN REGULATIONS.
ARTICLE VIII.
PLAT REGULATIONS.
ARTICLE IX.
THOROUGHFARES.
Division 51-9.100.
Thoroughfare Plan Amendments.
Sec.
51-9.101.      Thoroughfare plan defined.
Sec.
51-9.102.      Thoroughfare plan amendment process.
Division 51-9.200.
Approval of Alignment of Thoroughfares.
Sec.
51-9.201.      Procedures for establishment of thoroughfare alignment.
Sec.
51-9.202.      Procedure for approval of state or county thoroughfare
improvements.
Division 51-9.300.
Street Naming and Name Change Process.
Division 51-9.400.
Four-Way/All-Way Stop Controls at Residential Intersections.
ARTICLE X.
LANDSCAPE AND TREE PRESERVATION REGULATIONS.
ARTICLE XI.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION TAX EXEMPTIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES FOR
HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
ARTICLE XII.
GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(Ord. 21044)
SEC. 51-1.101.   Reserved. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 24637)
SEC. 51-1.102.   APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   At any time prior to March 1, 1987, an applicant for a change in
zoning district classification or boundary may voluntarily elect to proceed
under either this chapter or Chapter 51A. Any request for a change in zoning
district classification or boundary that is formally initiated on or after
March 1, 1987 must be made under Chapter 51A.
      (2)   This chapter continues to apply to all property in the city that
retains one of the base zoning classifications listed in Section
51-4.101.
      (3)   Chapter 51A (and not this chapter) automatically applies to all
property that is annexed into the city on or after March 1, 1987.
   (b)   Purpose.
      (1)   In general. The regulations in this chapter have been established
in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city in order to:
         (A)   ensure safe and efficient circulation of all modes of
transportation, prioritizing transit and active transportation modes;
         (B)   secure safety from fire, flooding, and other dangers;
         (C)   provide adequate light and air;
         (D)   prevent the overcrowding of land;
         (E)   avoid undue concentration of population;
         (F)   facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements;
         (G)   promote the character of areas of the city;
         (H)   limit the uses in areas of the city that are peculiarly suitable
for particular uses;
         (I)   conserve the value of buildings; and
         (J)   encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
      (2)   Compliance with FHAA. This paragraph incorporates by reference the
language of Paragraph (2), “Compliance with FHAA,” of Subsection (b),
“Purpose,” of Section 51A-1.102, “Applicability and Purpose,” of Article I,
“General Provisions,” of CHAPTER 51A of the Dallas City Code, as that paragraph
exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 19455; 21044;
26140; 33112)
SEC. 51-1.103.   ENFORCEMENT.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-1.103 of
Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 18001; 19963;
20236; 26286)
SEC. 51-1.104.   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   This section incorporates by reference the language in Section 51A-1.104 of
Chapter 51A of the Dallas Development Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 21735;
22204; 24439; 26579)
SEC. 51-1.104.1.   APPLICATIONS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-1.104.1
of Chapter 51A of the Dallas Development Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 21633;
26536)
SEC. 51-1.105.   FEES.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-1.105 of
CHAPTER 51A, “DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE: ORDINANCE NO. 19455, AS AMENDED,” of the
Dallas City Code, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the
future. (Ord. Nos. 17158; 17388; 18177; 18411; 18554; 18876; 18922; 18942;
19080; 19300; 19358; 19373; 19481; 19557; 19832; 20073; 20093; 20132; 20926;
21751; 22004; 24843; 25097)
SEC. 51-1.105.1.   FEE EXEMPTIONS AND REFUNDS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-1.105.1
of Chapter 51A of the Dallas Development Code, as amended. (Ord. 26924)
SEC. 51-1.106.   NOTIFICATION SIGNS REQUIRED TO BE OBTAINED AND POSTED BY
APPLICANT.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-1.106 of
CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF THE DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE,” as that section exists
today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 18177; 19872; 19963;
20926; 22389)
SEC. 51-1.107.   SPECIAL EXCEPTION FOR THE HANDICAPPED.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-1.107,
“Handicapped Special Exception,” of Article I, “General Provisions,” of CHAPTER
51A of the Dallas City Code, as that section exists today and as it may be
amended in the future. (Ord. 26140)
SEC. 51-1.108.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-1.108 of
Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended. (Ord. 26371)
SEC. 51-1.109.   APPORTIONMENT OF EXACTIONS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-1.109 of
Chapter 51A of the Dallas Development Code, as amended. (Ord. 26530)
ARTICLE II.
INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
SEC. 51-2.101.   INTERPRETATIONS.
   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following rules apply in
interpreting this chapter:
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
      (2)   Words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural
include the singular.
      (3)   The word “building” includes the word “structure,” and the word
“structure” includes the word “building.”
      (4)   The word “lot” includes the words “building sites,” “site,” “plot,”
or “tract.”
      (5)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
      (6)   If there is a conflict, the text of this chapter controls over the
charts or any other graphic display in this chapter.
SEC. 51-2.102.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
      (1)   “A” DISTRICT means the agricultural district established under this
chapter.
      (2)   “A(A)” DISTRICT means the agricultural district established under
Chapter 51A.
      (2.1)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE means a structure located on the same lot as
the main building that is subordinate in floor area, location, and purpose to
the main building and used for a permitted accessory use.
      (3)   ACCESSORY USES means those uses defined in Section
51-4.217.
      (4)   AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT means the A district established under this
chapter.
      (5)   AIRPORT HAZARD means any structure, tree, sign, vehicle, or use of
land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at an airport, or is otherwise hazardous to the landing
or taking off of aircraft.
      (6)   ALLEY means a right-of-way which provides secondary access to
adjacent property.
      (7)   BASEMENT means any level of a building where more than one half of
the vertical distance between floor and ceiling is below grade.
      (7.1)   BATHROOM means any room used for personal hygiene and containing
a shower or bathtub, or containing a toilet and sink.
      (8)   BEDROOM means any room in a dwelling unit other than a kitchen,
dining room, living room, bathroom, or closet. Additional dining rooms and
living rooms, and all dens, game rooms, sunrooms, and other similar rooms are
considered bedrooms.
      (8.1)   BICYCLE PARKING means space reserved for the secured standing or
storage of bicycles, with vertical elements available to support a bicycle in
every space and includes short-term and long-term bicycle parking.
      (8.2)   BICYCLE PARKING, LONG-TERM means bicycle parking for use
exceeding four hours and enclosed within a structure designed for increased
security from theft and vandalism, such as locked bicycle storage rooms,
bicycle check-in systems, and bicycle lockers.
      (8.3)    BICYCLE PARKING, SHORT-TERM means unenclosed bicycle parking for
use for four hours or less.
      (9)   BLOCK means: an area bounded by streets on all sides.
      (9.1)   BLOCKFACE means:
         (A)   the distance along one side of a street between the two nearest
intersecting streets;
         (B)   where a street deadends, the distance along one side of a street
between the nearest intersecting street and the end of the deadend street; or
         (C)   where a street centerline contains a change of direction 90
degrees or more, the distance along one side of a street between either the
nearest intersecting street or the deadend and the point determining the angle
of the change of direction.
      (10)   BOARD means the board of adjustment.
      (10.1)   BREEZEWAY means an unenclosed passage connecting two buildings
or portions of a building.
      (11)   BUILDING means a structure for the support or shelter of any use
or occupancy.
      (12)   BUILDING LINE means a line marking the minimum distance a building
may be erected from a street, alley, or lot line. (Also called the “setback
line.”)
      (13)   BUILDING OFFICIAL means the person designated by the city manager
as the building official of the city or the building official’s authorized
representative.
      (14)   BUILDING SITE means property that meets the requirements of
Section
51-4.601.
      (15)   “CA-1” DISTRICT means the CA-1 district established under this
chapter.
      (16)   “CA-1(A)” DISTRICT means the CA-1(A) district established under
Chapter 51A.
      (17)   “CA-2” DISTRICT means the CA-2 district established under this
chapter.
      (18)   “CA-2(A)” DISTRICT means the CA-2(A) district established under
Chapter 51A.
      (19)   CENTER LINE means a line running midway between the bounding
right-of-way lines of a street or alley. Where the bounding right-of-way lines
are irregular, the center line shall be determined by the director of
transportation and public works.
      (20)   CENTRAL AREA DISTRICTS means the CA-1 and CA-2 districts
established under this chapter.
      (21)   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT means the area of the city within
Woodall Rodgers Freeway, Central Expressway (elevated bypass), R. L. Thorton
Freeway, and Stemmons Freeway.
      (22)   “CH” DISTRICT means the clustered housing (CH) district
established under Chapter 51A.
      (23)   CITY COUNCIL means the governing body of the city.
      (23.1)   Reserved.
      (23.2)   Reserved.
      (24)   COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS means the NS, SC, GR, LC, and HC districts
established under this chapter.
      (25)   COMMISSION or CITY PLAN COMMISSION means the city plan and zoning
commission.
      (26)   COVERAGE means the percentage of lot area covered by a roof,
floor, or other structure, except that roof eaves up to 24 inches and other
ordinary building projections up to 12 inches are excluded.
      (27)   “CR” DISTRICT means the community retail (CR) district established
under Chapter 51A.
      (28)   “CS” DISTRICT means the commercial service (CS) district
established under Chapter 51A.
      (29)   “D” District means the duplex district established under this
chapter.
      (30)   “D(A)” DISTRICT means the duplex district established under
Chapter 51A.
      (31)   DENSITY means the ratio of dwelling units to lot area.
      (32)   DEPARTMENT means department of development services. The
department of development services was formerly named the department of
sustainable development and construction, the department of planning and
development, the department of urban design, and the city plan department. Any
reference to these departments is a reference to the department of development
services.
      (33)   DIRECTOR means the director of the department of development
services or his representative.
      (34)   DUPLEX DISTRICT means the D district established under this
chapter.
      (35)   DWELLING UNIT means one or more rooms designed to be a single
housekeeping unit to accommodate one family and containing one or more
kitchens, one or more bathrooms, and one or more bedrooms.
      (36)   EAVES means the lowest border of a roof, including any overhang.
      (36.1)   EXACTION means, for purposes of Section
51-1.109 and Texas Local Government Code Section 212.904, dedications, fees, or
construction costs for municipal infrastructure additions or improvements that
the city requires a developer to bear a portion of as a condition for approval
of a property development project.
      (37)   FAMILY means a family as defined in Section 51A-2.102,
“Definitions,” of Article II, “Interpretations and Definitions,” of CHAPTER 51A
of the Dallas City Code, as that paragraph exists today and as it may be
amended in the future.
      (38)   FENCE means a structure that provides a physical barrier.
      (39)   FLOOR AREA means the total square feet of floor space in a
building measured to the outside faces of exterior walls or to the omitted wall
lines, whichever produces the larger area, excluding the following:
         (A)   Area used solely for off-street parking.
         (B)   Area between an omitted wall line and the structural wall when
the area is used solely for foot or vehicular traffic or landscaping.
         (C)   Area of a private balcony that is not accessible to the public
and does not provide a means of ingress or egress.
         (D)   Area of a breezeway or an unenclosed stairway located within the
first three stories, excluding any basement, of a residential use.
      (40)   FLOOR AREA RATIO means the ratio of floor area to lot area.
      (41)   FRONTAGE means the length of property along one side of a street
between property or lease boundary lines.
      (42)   FRONT YARD means that portion of a lot which abuts a street and
extends across the width of the lot between the street and the setback line.
      (43)   “GO” DISTRICTS means the general office (GO) matrix districts
established under this chapter.
      (44)   “GO(A)” DISTRICT means the general office [GO(A)] district
established under Chapter 51A.
      (45)   GRADE means the average of the finished ground surface elevations
measured at the highest and lowest exterior corners of a structure. For
purposes of this definition, FINISHED GROUND SURFACE ELEVATION means the ground
surface elevation of the building site before any construction or as altered in
accordance with grading plans approved by the building official. Finished
ground surface elevation does not include:
         (A)   fill material not necessary to make the site developable;
         (B)   berms; or
         (C)   landscape features.
      (46)   HEIGHT means the vertical distance measured from grade to:
         (A)   for a structure with a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the midpoint
of the vertical dimension between the lowest eaves and the highest ridge of the
structure;
         (B)   for a structure with a dome roof, the midpoint of the vertical
dimension of the dome; and
         (C)   for any other structure, the highest point of the structure.
      (47)   HISTORIC LANDMARK means any building, land, area, or district of
historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural importance or value,
which the city council determines shall be protected, enhanced, and preserved
in the interest of the culture, prosperity, education, and welfare of the
people.
      (48)   HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, constructed on or
after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in
the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more
in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
      (49)   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS means I-1, I-2, and I-3 districts.
      (50)   INNER COURT means an open space bounded on all sides by the walls
of a building.
      (51)   INSTITUTIONAL USES means community service uses, religious uses,
educational uses, and medical uses except the medical clinic, medical or
scientific laboratory, optical shop, medical appliance fitting and sales, and
ambulance service uses.
      (52)   INTERIOR LOT LINE means a lot line not adjacent to a street or
alley.
      (53)   KITCHEN means any room or area used for cooking or preparing food
and containing one or more ovens, stoves, hot plates, or microwave ovens; one
or more refrigerators; and one or more sinks. This definition does not include
outdoor cooking facilities.
      (54)   LANDING AREA means the area of an airport used for the landing,
takeoff, or taxiing of aircraft.
      (55)   LANDSCAPE AUTHORITY means:
         (A)   a landscape architect licensed or registered by the state; or
         (B)   a professional horticulturist or nurseryman.
      (56)   LEGAL HEIGHT means the maximum building height allowed under
Federal Aviation Administration regulations or any other ordinance or
regulation in effect, whichever is most restrictive.
      (56.1)   “LI” DISTRICT means the light industrial district established
under Chapter 51A.
      (57)   LIMITED USE means a use restricted under Section
51-4.218.
      (58)   “LO” DISTRICTS means the limited office (LO) matrix districts
established under this chapter.
      (59)   “LO-1” DISTRICT means the LO-1 district established under Chapter
51A.
      (60)   “LO-2” DISTRICT means the LO-2 district established under Chapter
51A.
      (60.1)   “LO-3” DISTRICT means the LO-3 district established under
Chapter 51A.
      (60.2)   “LO(A)” DISTRICT means the LO-1, LO-2, and LO-3 districts
established under Chapter 51A.
      (60.3)   LODGING USE means any use listed in Section
51-4.216.1.
      (61)   LOT means a building site that fronts on a public or private
street, except that in the case of a planned development district, the building
site may front on an access easement, and in the case of a shared access
development, the building site may front on a shared access area.
      (62)   LOT AREA means the total square feet contained within lot lines.
      (63)   LOT DEPTH means the average distance between the front and rear
lot lines.
      (64)   LOT LINE means a property line bounding a lot, excluding any
street or alley dedicated in fee simple.
      (65)   LOT WIDTH means the distance between side lot lines measured along
the front setback line.
      (66)   MAIN BUILDING means a building on a lot intended for occupancy by
the main use.
      (67)   MAIN USE means any use listed in Sections
51-4.201 through
51-4.216.
      (67.1)   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE means a street designated as a principal or
minor arterial in the city’s thoroughfare plan.
      (67.2)   MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and which is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. In this chapter, the term “manufactured home” includes, but is not
limited to, HUD-code manufactured homes and mobile homes.
      (67.3)   MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT means the MH district established
under this chapter.
      (68)   “MF” DISTRICTS means the MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, and MF-4 districts
established under this chapter (also called multiple-family districts).
      (69)   “MF(A)” DISTRICT means the MF-1(A), MF-2(A), MF-3(A), MF-4(A)
districts established under Chapter 51A.
      (70)   “MH” DISTRICT means the manufactured home [MH] district
established under this chapter.
      (71)   “MH(A)” DISTRICT means the manufactured home [MH(A)] district
established under Chapter 51A.
      (71.1)   MINOR STREET means a street not designated in the city’s
thoroughfare plan.
      (72)   “MO” DISTRICTS means the mid-range office (MO) matrix districts
established under this chapter.
      (72.1)   “MO(A)” DISTRICTS means the MO-1 and MO-2 districts under
Chapter 51A.
      (73)   “MO-1” DISTRICT means the MO-1 district established under Chapter
51A.
      (74)   “MO-2” DISTRICT means the MO-2 district established under Chapter
51A.
      (74.1)   MOBILE HOME means a structure that was constructed before June
15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode,
is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
      (75)   MOBILITY AND STREET SERVICES means public works or transportation.
Any reference to mobility and street services is a reference to public works or
transportation.
      (76)   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICTS means the MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, and MF-
4 districts established under this chapter (also called “MF” districts).
      (77)   “NO” DISTRICTS means the neighborhood office (NO) matrix districts
established under this chapter.
      (78)   “NO(A)” DISTRICT means the NO(A) district established under
Chapter 51A.
      (79)   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE means a structure which does not conform
to the regulations (other than the use regulations) of this chapter, but which
was lawfully constructed under the regulations in force at the time of
construction.
      (80)   NONCONFORMING USE means a use that does not conform to the use
regulations of this chapter, but was lawfully established under the regulations
in force at the beginning of operation and has been in regular use since that
time.
      (81)   NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS means the O-1, O-2, NO, LO, MO, GO, NS,
GR, LC, HC, CA-1, CA-2, I-1, I-2, and I-3 districts established under this
chapter.
      (82)   NONRESIDENTIAL USE means any use listed in Sections
51-4.202 through
51-4.216.1.
      (83)   “NS” DISTRICT means the neighborhood service (NS) district
established under this chapter.
      (84)   “NS(A)” DISTRICT means the neighborhood service [NS(A)] district
established under Chapter 51A.
      (85)   OCCUPANCY means the purpose for which a building or land is used.
      (86)   OFFICE DISTRICTS means the O-1, O-2, NO, LO, MO, and GO districts
established under this chapter.
      (86.1)   OFF-STREET PARKING means parking spaces provided for a motor
vehicle that are not located on a public right-of-way or private street. Off-
street parking does not include bicycle parking spaces.
      (87)   OMITTED WALL LINE means a line on the ground determined by a
vertical plane from:
         (A)   the overhang or outermost projection of a structure; or
         (B)   the outer edge of the roof of a structure without walls; or
         (C)   two feet inside the eave line of a structure with roof eaves.
      (88)   OPEN SPACE means an area that is unobstructed to the sky and
contains no structures except for ordinary projections of cornices and eaves.
      (89)   OPENINGS FOR LIGHT OR AIR means any windows, window walls, or
glass panels in an exterior wall of a building, excluding doors used for
access.
      (90)   OUTER COURT means an open space bounded on all sides except one by
the walls of a building, and opening upon a street, alley, or a permanent open
space.
      (91)   OUTSIDE DISPLAY means the placement of a commodity outside for a
period of time less than 24 hours.
      (91.1)   OVERSIZED MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor vehicle:
         (A)   that is more than 22 feet from end to end, more than eight feet
at its widest point, or more than nine feet from the ground to its highest
point; or
         (B)   with two or more rear axles such as trucks, truck tractors, and
similar vehicles; or
         (C)   designed to transport more than 15 passengers including the
driver.
      (91.2)   OVERSIZED TRAILER means any trailer or semi-trailer that is more
than 20 feet from end to end, more than eight feet at its widest point, or more
than nine feet from the ground to its highest point, excluding boat and
recreational vehicle trailers.
      (92)   “P” DISTRICT means the parking (P) district established under this
chapter.
      (93)   “P(A)” DISTRICT means the parking [P(A)] district established
under Chapter 51A.
      (94)   PARKING means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
Parking does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle when commodities
or passengers are being loaded or unloaded.
      (95)   PARKING BAY WIDTH means the width of one or two rows of parking
stalls and the access aisle between them.
      (96)   PARKING DISTRICT means the P district established under this
chapter.
      (97)   PARTY WALL means a wall built on an interior lot line used as a
common support for buildings on both lots.
      (98)   PERSON means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, or political subdivision.
      (99)   PRIVATE STREET means a private street as defined in Section
51-4.217.
      (100)   QUASI-PUBLIC AGENCY means an institution obtaining more than 51
percent of its funds from tax revenue.
      (101)   “R” DISTRICTS means the R-1ac, R-1/2ac, R-16, R-13, R-10, R-7.5,
and R-5 districts established under this chapter (also called “single-family
districts”).
      (102)   “R(A)” DISTRICTS means the R-1ac(A), R-1/2ac(A), R-16(A), R-13
(A), R-10(A), R-7.5(A), and R-5(A) districts established under Chapter 51A.
      (103)   REAR YARD means that portion of a lot between two side lot lines
that does not abut a street and that extends across the width of the lot
between the rear setback line and the rear lot line.
      (104)   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS means the R-1, R-1/2, R-16, R-13, R-10, R-
7.5, R-5, TH-1, TH-2, TH-3, TH-4, D, MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, MF-4, MH, and A
districts established under this chapter.
      (104.1)   RESIDENTIAL USE means any use listed in Section
51-4.201.
      (105)   RIDGE means the line of intersection at the top between the
opposite slopes or sides of a roof.
      (106)   RIGHT-OF-WAY means an area dedicated to public use for pedestrian
and vehicular movement.
      (107)   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE means the dividing line between a right-of-way
and an adjacent lot.
      (108)   “RR” DISTRICT means the regional retail (RR) district established
under Chapter 51A.
      (109)   SCREENING means a structure that provides a visual barrier.
      (109.1)   SECONDARY THROUGHFARE means a street designated as a community
or residential collector in the city’s thoroughfare plan.
      (110)   SETBACK LINE means a line marking the minimum distance a building
may be erected from a street, alley, or lot line. (Also called the “building
line.”)
      (110.1)   SHARED ACCESS DEVELOPMENT means a development that meets all of
the requirements of Section 51A-4.411 of the Dallas City Code, as that section
exists today and as it may be amended in the future.
      (111)   SIDE YARD means:
         (A)   that portion of a lot extending from the front setback line to
the rear setback line between the side setback line and the side lot line; or
         (B)   that portion of a lot which is between a lot line and a setback
line but is not a front or rear yard.
      (112)   SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICTS means the R-1ac, R-1/2ac, R-16, R-13, R-
10, R-7.5, and R-5 districts established under this chapter (also called “R”
districts).
      (113)   SITE AREA means that portion of a building site occupied by a use
and not covered by a building or structure. For purposes of determining
required off-street parking, site area does not include that area occupied by
off-street parking, landscaped areas, and open space not used for storage or
sales.
      (114)   STACK OR STACKING SPACE means a space for one motor vehicle to
line up in while waiting to enter or use a parking lot, garage, drive-in, or
drive-through facility.
      (115)   STORY means:
         (A)   that portion of a building between any two successive floors or
between the top floor and the ceiling above it; and
         (B)   as a measurement term, a maximum vertical distance of 12 feet
between any two successive floors or between the top floor and the ceiling
above it.
      (116)   STREET means a right-of-way which provides primary access to
adjacent property.
      (116.1)   STREET SERVICES means public works. Any reference to street
services is a reference to public works.
      (117)   STRUCTURE means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or
building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite manner.
      (118)   SUP means “specific use permit” (See Section
51-4.219).
      (119)   “TH” DISTRICTS means the TH-1, TH-2, TH-3, and TH-4 districts
established under this chapter (also called “townhouse districts”).
      (120)   “TH(A)” DISTRICTS means the TH-1(A), TH-2(A), and TH-3(A)
districts established under Chapter 51A.
      (121)   TOWNHOUSE DISTRICTS means the TH-1, TH-2, TH-3, and TH-
4 districts established under this chapter.
      (121.1)   TRAILER means a vehicle without motive power that is designed
or used to carry property or passengers, and is drawn by, or partially rests
on, a motor vehicle.
      (122)   TRANSIENT STAND means a site for the placing and use of a
manufactured home, recreational vehicle, or tent.
      (123)   ZONING DISTRICT means a classification assigned to a particular
area of the city within which zoning regulations are uniform.
      (124)   ZONING DISTRICT MAP means the official map upon which the zoning
districts of the city are delineated. (Ord. Nos. 16805; 17226; 17393; 17654;
18481; 18849; 19455; 19786; 20272; 20360; 20361; 20383; 20673; 21186; 24731;
24843; 25977; 26140; 26530; 27334, 27404; 28072; 28073; 29128; 30239; 30654;
30932; 32002; 32864; 32907; 33112)
ARTICLE III.
DECISIONMAKING AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES.
   This article incorporates by reference the language of Article III of
Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as that article exists today and as it may
be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 17226; 17243; 17393; 18968; 19062; 19268;
19455; 19499; 20926; 24163; 24843)
ARTICLE IV.
ZONING REGULATIONS.
Division 51-4.100
Establishment of Zoning Districts.
SEC. 51-4.101.   ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, the city is divided into
the following districts:
      (1)   Residential districts.
         (A)   R-1   Single-family district 1 acre.
         (B)   R-1/2   Single-family district 1/2 acre.
         (C)   R-16   Single-family district 16,000 square feet.
         (D)   R-13   Single-family district 13,000 square feet.
         (E)   R-10   Single-family district 10,000 square feet.
         (F)   R-7.5   Single-family district 7,500 square feet.
         (G)   R-5   Single-family district 5,000 square feet.
         (H)   D   Duplex district.
         (I)   TH-1   Townhouse district 1.
         (J)   TH-2   Townhouse district 2.
         (K)   TH-3   Townhouse district 3.
         (L)   TH-4   Townhouse district 4.
         (M)   MF-1   Multiple-family district 1.
         (N)   MF-2   Multiple-family district 2.
         (O)   MF-3   Multiple-family district 3.
         (P)   MF-4   Multiple-family district 4.
         (Q)   MH   Manufactured home district.
         (R)   A   Agricultural district.
      (2)   Nonresidential districts.
         (A)   O-1   Office district 1.
         (B)   O-2   Office district 2.
         (C)   NO   Neighborhood office matrix districts.
         (D)   LO   Limited office matrix districts.
         (E)   MO   Mid-range office matrix districts.
         (F)   GO   General office matrix districts.
         (G)   NS   Neighborhood service district.
         (H)   SC   Shopping center district.
         (I)   GR   General retail district.
         (J)   LC   Light commercial district.
         (K)   HC   Heavy commercial district.
         (L)   CA-1   Central area district 1.
         (M)   CA-2   Central area district 2.
         (N)   I-1   Industrial district 1.
         (O)   I-2   Industrial district 2.
         (P)   I-3   Industrial district 3.
      (3)   Special purpose districts.
         (A)   PD   Planned development districts.
         (B)   P   Parking district.
      (4)   Overlay districts.
         (A)   H suffix   Historic landmark overlay district.
         (B)   ID suffix   Institutional overlay district.
         (C)   D suffix   D liquor control overlay district.
         (D)   D-1 suffix   D-1 liquor control overlay district.
         (E)   CP suffix   Core pedestrian precinct overlay district.
         (F)   SP suffix   Secondary pedestrian precinct overlay district.
         (G)   AF suffix   Airport flight path overlay district.
         (H)   MD suffix   Modified delta overlay district.
         (I)   NSO suffix   Neighborhood stabilization overlay district.
         (J)   TC suffix   Turtle Creek environmental corridor overlay
district. (Ord. Nos. 16959; 18849; 19063; 20360; 27404)
SEC. 51-4.102.   PURPOSE OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Residential districts.
      (1)   R-1 and R-1/2 Single-Family Districts. There exists in certain
parts of the city large areas of single-family residential development on
estate type lots of one-half acre to one acre or more in area. This development
has been supplied with utilities and other public services based upon an estate
type density. To conserve the character and value of buildings and building
sites existing in these areas and to provide for the gradual expansion of this
residential development in accordance with the need and a comprehensive plan
for various types of residential districts, the R-1 and R-1/2 districts are
provided. These districts are intended to be composed of single-family
dwellings together with public, denominational, and private schools, churches,
and public park areas to serve the area. The sections designated in the R-1 and
R-1/2 districts are limited in area and are not intended to be subject to major
alteration by future amendment except at the fringe of the districts where
minor adjustments may become appropriate to permit the reasonable development
of vacant tracts or gradual transition from other districts.
      (2)   R-16, R-13, and R-10 Single-Family Districts. Single-family
residential development has taken place on intermediate sized lots in portions
of the city in recent years. In order to protect and encourage the continued
development of intermediate density with single-family residences in
appropriate areas of the city, the R-16, R-13, and R-10 districts are provided.
In addition to single-family residences, it is intended that churches, public,
denominational, and private schools, and public parks necessary to serve and
complement the intermediate density development be permitted. The areas placed
in the R-16, R-13, or R-10 districts are generally limited in area and are not
intended to be subject to major alteration by future amendment except where
changed conditions might justify the action or where minor adjustments in the
boundary of a district may be appropriate to secure a reasonable development of
the land.
      (3)   R-7.5 Single-Family District. This district comprises a major
portion of the existing single-family dwelling development of the city and is
considered to be the proper zoning classification for large areas of the
undeveloped land remaining in the city appropriate for single-family dwelling
use. This district is intended to be composed of single-family dwellings
together with public, denominational, and private schools, churches, and public
parks essential to create basic neighborhood units. Limited portions of these
neighborhood units may consist of denser residential zoning classifications
which are shown on the zoning district map or which later may be created by
amendments to the map.
      (4)   R-5 Single-Family District. This classification creates a single-
family dwelling district which is appropriate in area requirements of moderate
value single-family housing development and which, at the same time, provides a
reasonable standard of light, air, and similar living amenities. It is intended
that the R-5 classification be added by amendment in specific areas where
higher density single-family residence development in shown to be appropriate
because of existing development and the adequacy of utilities and where
redevelopment of substandard areas at increased single-family density is
appropriate.
      (5)   D Duplex District. Duplex dwellings have long been a recognized
form of housing in the city. In order to provide standards which will protect
and encourage the various types of duplex dwellings existing in the city, a
duplex dwelling district with minimum area requirements is provided.
      (6)   TH-1, TH-2, TH-3, and TH-4 Townhouse Districts. This classification
creates districts that are being recognized as a form of housing in the city,
and provide standards which will protect and encourage various types of single-
family dwellings in the city. The TH districts are also established in an
effort to provide a more dense single-family residential character by providing
minimum standards for lot area, yards, lot coverage, and lot frontage.
      (7)   MF-1 and MF-2 Multiple-Family Districts. These districts are
composed mainly of areas containing mixtures of single-family, duplex, and
multiple-family dwellings and certain uniformly developed multiple-family
dwelling sections. The MF-1 and MF-2 districts are medium density districts and
are located in certain areas close into the center of the city and at various
outlying locations. The area regulations are designed to protect the
residential character and to prevent the overcrowding of the land in the MF-
1 and MF-2 districts by providing minimum standards for building spacing,
yards, off-street parking, and coverage. All commercial and office uses are
prohibited in the MF-1 and MF-2 districts. It is anticipated that additional
areas may be designated in the MF-1 or MF-2 district from time to time in the
future where the change is appropriate and access and utility services can
reasonably accommodate these medium density dwellings.
      (8)   MF-3 and MF-4 Multiple-Family Districts. There has been constructed
in several parts of the city in recent years, a number of multiple story
apartment buildings. To provide appropriate standards for this dense form of
housing, two specific districts have been provided. The MF-3 district is
designed to accommodate high-rise apartment buildings outside the central area
where greater open space and higher off-street parking standards are
appropriate. Certain limited service uses such as a restaurant or barber or
beauty shop are permitted in the MF-3 district when they are totally contained
within the building. Provisions are made for yards, building spacing, and a
maximum floor area ratio to assure that high-rise buildings located in the MF-
3 district are compatible with adjacent lower buildings and to prevent the
overcrowding of land. It is anticipated and intended that the MF-3 district
will be expanded and some new areas created from time to time. Both MF-3 and
MF-4 districts are high density dwelling districts. The MF-4 district is
designated and intended to be used in and near the central business area and is
not intended to be used in the outlying parts of the city. High densities are
permitted in the MF-4 district and combinations of business and apartment uses
are also permitted. Specific standards for light, air, and building bulk are
prescribed for the district.
      (9)   MH Manufactured Home District. The manufactured home is recognized
as a specific form of housing for which accommodations should be provided. To
provide appropriate standards for density, spacing, and use, a separate
district is created and designated for the specific purpose of providing at
appropriate locations, area for the development of manufactured home parks,
courts, or subdivisions. In certain commercial and industrial districts, a
manufactured home development may be provided for by amending the zoning
district map, where these projects are appropriate by approval of a specific
use permit. The standards for commercial manufactured home development for
transient occupancy differ from those of a manufactured home subdivision where
more or less permanent occupancy is anticipated.
      (10)   A Agricultural District. There exists in certain fringe areas of
the city, land which is presently used for agricultural purposes and to which
urban services are not yet available. These lands should appropriately continue
to be used for agricultural purposes until needed for urban purposes in
conformity with the orderly growth of the city. The uses permitted in the A
district are intended to accommodate normal farming, ranching, and gardening
activities. It is anticipated that all of the A district area will be changed
to other urban zoning categories as the area within the corporate limits of
Dallas becomes fully developed. Newly annexed territory will be temporarily
zoned as A district until permanent zoning is established.
   (b)   Nonresidential districts.
      (1)   O-1 and O-2 Office Districts. The financial, professional, and
managerial dominance of Dallas as a regional center has made office use a
distinct and separate form of land use. In order to provide a zoning district
which would protect and encourage a high standard of office development the
office districts are included as separate zoning classifications. The area
standards provided in the O-1 and O-2 districts anticipate that office uses
will be located in close proximity to apartments and other residential uses.
Yards, signs, building bulk, and off-street parking regulations are provided to
assure that office uses will be compatible with adjacent residential districts.
Where office buildings higher than 36 feet are anticipated or constructed,
greater setbacks are required in order to protect the light and air to adjacent
properties. Limited retail and service uses related to the operation of an
office building such as a tobacco shop, barber shop, or restaurant are
permitted in the O-2 district, but only when such uses are contained within the
main building and are arranged to serve the building occupants and not the
general public.
      (2)   NO Neighborhood Office Matrix Districts. These districts represent
a group of uses that is restricted to office uses which predominantly serve
neighborhood or community needs. They are, therefore, compatible with and are
intended for location adjacent to single-family, duplex, and townhouse
neighborhoods. These districts are designed to preserve the environmental
quality of neighborhood areas. Site development regulations include maximum
heights consistent with low density residential areas, site coverage, and
“overlook” controls above the first story, which minimize residential privacy
intrusion.
      (3)   LO Limited Office Matrix Districts. These districts represent a
group of uses that is restricted to office uses which predominantly serve
neighborhood or community needs. In addition, certain limited service uses are
allowed where they are contained primarily within the building and primarily
serve the occupants of the building and not the general public. These districts
are designed to be located in the area of low and medium density residential
development or area where traffic generation is an issue.
      (4)   MO Mid-Range Office Matrix Districts. These districts represent a
group of uses that is restricted to office and limited service uses, which
serve the building occupants. These districts are intended to serve both
community and city-wide needs, and should be located adjacent to higher density
residential and low and medium density office, retail, commercial, and light
industrial districts. In addition to office uses, certain complimentary retail
uses are permitted in these districts in order to meet the day-to-day retail
needs of area residents and office patrons. A specific use permit is required
for most retail uses in these districts.
      (5)   GO General Office Matrix Districts. These districts represent a
group of uses which would accommodate sophisticated office developments and may
include certain complementary retail and residential uses as a minor component
of such developments. These districts are intended to serve city-wide needs and
should be located near higher density zoning districts, especially where the
potential trip generation allowed by this group will have a minimal effect on
low density communities.
      (6)   NS Neighborhood Service District. The NS district is a limited
retail category intended for use near neighborhood area for the purpose of
supplying day-to-day retail needs of the residents such as food, drugs, and
personal services. The NS district occurs often at limited corner locations in
existing developments and is intended for small service areas in new
development plans.
      (7)   SC Shopping Center District. The SC district provides a uniform set
of standards for modern shopping center development including requirements for
screening, off-street parking, and building setbacks. Inasmuch as the SC
district is found in close proximity to residential development, building
setback and screening requirements are included to achieve a compatible
relationship between the retail development and the adjacent residential areas
which are intended to be served. It is anticipated that from time to time,
additional SC districts will be applied to the district map where retail
service is required to serve developing residential communities.
      (8)   GR General Retail District. The GR district is applied to the strip
retail areas which, because of the nature of development, are not appropriate
for inclusion in the SC district. The uses specified in the GR district include
most types of retail activity except for certain open-type displays such as
used car lots and heavy machinery sales which are not compatible with the
retail shopping function intended in the GR district. It is not anticipated
that the strip retail area zoned as GR districts will be subject to any major
expansion. It is anticipated that in some situations a future change to a
commercial or office classification might be appropriate to permit the
transition of strip retail areas which are no longer in demand for retail use
to other productive forms of land use.
      (9)   LC Light Commercial District. Part of the existing strip business
development consists of uses related to the automobile, including drive-in or
curb service eating places, used car lots, repair garages, amusements,
warehouses, and repair and service uses such as custom woodworking shops,
upholstery shops, commercial amusements, and plumbing shops. These uses are
generally not compatible with retail shopping areas and tend to obstruct and
interfere with the shopping function. To accommodate these uses, the LC
district is provided. Generally, this district is located along major arteries
where strip business development exists.
      (10)   HC Heavy Commercial District. The sale, service, display, and
storage of certain commodities is by its nature not compatible with many other
sales and display operations. Building material yards, contractor yards, open
storage and repair of heavy machinery and welding or machine shops are examples
of such heavy uses. In order to establish areas where these heavy sales,
service, display, and storage uses could be located, the HC district is
provided.
      (11)   CA-1 and CA-2 Central Area Districts. These districts are provided
to accommodate existing development in the central area of the city, to
encourage the most appropriate future use of land, and to prevent the increase
of street congestion. The requirements of both districts are similar except for
the requirements for apartment development. Both districts require off-street
parking and loading although the construction of parking facilities for 50 cars
or less is exempted in CA-1. The CA-1 district covers the area within the
central freeway loop and a portion of the business development along Jefferson
Boulevard. The CA-2 district is found in several areas outside the central
expressway loop and in the border areas of the Jefferson Boulevard business
section.
      (12)   I-1, I-2, and I-3 Industrial Districts. Industrial development
represents a substantial part of the economic base of Dallas. The rapidly
changing variety of industry found in Dallas and the development of modern
technology make it appropriate and desirable to provide for standards of
industrial performance rather than to attempt to categorize industrial uses by
name. Performance standards covering noise, smoke, particulate matter, and
other air contaminants, odorous matter, fire and explosive hazard, glare, and
vibration are specified for each of the three industrial districts and noise,
odor, and glare standards are made applicable to all districts.
         (A)   The I-1 district permits basically the same uses and has the
same performance standards as the I-2 district. The I-1 district area
provisions are applicable to the modern industrial district developments. The
district is provided to encourage and protect high standards for industrial
district development.
         (B)   The I-1 district requirements include front yard setbacks and
building spacing standards not appropriate in the I-2 district. The I-
2 district standards are based upon the close-in light industrial development
where little or no front yard setback or building space has been provided. In
order to protect existing development and to encourage the most appropriate use
of land in the future, the I-1 and I-2 districts are provided.
         (C)   The I-3 district has more liberal performance standards than the
two industrial districts, I-1 and I-2, and is considered a heavy industrial
district. Most industrial uses are permitted in the I-3 district. The provision
of an adequate site area and a technical operation which meets the standards
for noise, smoke and contaminants, odor, fire and explosive hazard, glare, and
vibration at the bounding property line of the site will enable almost any
industrial operation to be located in the I-3 district.
         (D)   All types of housing development other than for caretakers or
watchmen are excluded from the I-3 district, and only apartment development is
permitted in the I-1 and I-2 districts. This requirement is intended to protect
the industrial land of the city from the adverse effects of unregulated
residential encroachment, and to facilitate adequate provision of
transportation, schools, parks, and other public requirements, provided that
all single-family residential dwellings existing in the I-1 and I-2 districts
at the time of the passage of the 1965 ordinance, may be used and alterations,
repairs, additions, and accessories thereto may be erected the same as is
allowed for a single-family dwelling in a residential district (R-5 or R-7.5)
but no new dwellings may be erected therein.
   (c)   Special purpose districts.
      (1)   PD Planned Development District. In order to provide flexibility in
the planning and development of projects with combinations of uses and of
specific physical designs such as office centers, combination apartment and
retail centers, shopping centers, medical centers with office and housing
elements, special industrial districts, housing developments and other similar
developments, a PD district is provided. This district is intended to be
applied to the district map as an amendment to the zoning ordinance. Certain
maximum and minimum standards are specified for various use categories and
certain standards such as for yards, coverage, and building spacing are to be
determined by the design. Specific development conditions and development
schedules can be enforced with respect to a PD district and failure to adhere
to a development schedule can be the basis of removing all or part of a PD
district from the zoning district map. The purposes of the PD district are to
achieve flexibility and variety in the physical development pattern of the
city, to encourage a more efficient use of open space, and to encourage the
appropriate use of land. It is intended that cognizance be taken of surrounding
property and that proper protection be given to it in locating and approving
any PD district.
      (2)   P Parking District. The provision of off-street parking for motor
vehicles in connection with all types of use is essential to the reduction of
congestion in the streets and to the encouragement of the most appropriate use
of land. Numerous strip retail and commercial areas exist in Dallas which do
not provide adequate off-street parking space. The P district provides a zoning
classification limited to surface parking use and intended for use behind,
across the street from, or adjacent and incidental to apartment, retail,
commercial, institutional, office, or industrial uses where the provision of
off-street parking is essential to protection of existing development and
conducive to the most appropriate use of land. The P district is intended to be
applied to the zoning district map by amendment where property ownership,
physical arrangement, and proper access make the change appropriate. In many
instances, a P district may be less than one acre in area.
   (d)   Overlay zoning districts.
      (1)   H Historic Landmark Overlay District. Any zoning district
designation appearing on the zoning district map may be followed by the suffix
“H” indicating a subdistrict. A historic landmark may be any building, area,
land, or district of historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural
importance or value which merits protection, enhancement, and preservation in
the interest of the culture, prosperity, education, and welfare of the people.
The “H” designation applies to those premises, lots, or tracts designated
through procedures set forth in this chapter. Additional uses may be permitted
in any specific “H” overlay district. The “H” suffix does not affect the legal
use of the property except as provided in the ordinance establishing the
overlay district.
      (2)   ID Institutional Overlay District. Any zoning district appearing on
the zoning district map may be followed by the suffix “ID” indicating an
institutional overlay district. The purpose of this overlay district is to
promote cultural, educational, medical, and other institutions, enhance their
benefit to the community, and protect adjacent property.
      (3)   D and D-1 Liquor Control Overlay Districts. The purpose of the
liquor control overlay district is to protect residential neighborhoods by
establishing certain areas of the city where uses that sell or serve alcoholic
beverages in the city are either prohibited or permitted by specific use permit
only. The D overlay district designates an area where uses that sell or serve
alcoholic beverages are prohibited. The D-1 overlay district designates an area
where uses that sell or serve alcoholic beverages are permitted by specific use
permit only. These districts are established pursuant to the powers conferred
upon the city under Articles 1011a et seq., Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, to
designate areas where uses that sell or serve alcoholic beverages may be
located.
      (4)   MD Modified Delta Overlay District. The purpose of this district is
to discontinue the application of the delta theory in areas of the city where
there is no need to encourage redevelopment and adoptive reuse of existing
structures and where continued application of this theory will create traffic
congestion and public safety problems.
      (5)   CP Core Pedestrian Precinct Overlay District. An area in the CA-
1 district with requirements for special sidewalk and pedestrian facilities.
      (6)   SP Secondary Pedestrian Precinct Overlay District. An area in the
CA-1 district with requirements for special sidewalk and pedestrian facilities.
      (7)   Reserved.
      (8)   NSO Neighborhood Stabilization Overlay District. The purpose of the
neighborhood stabilization overlay district is to preserve single-family
neighborhoods by imposing neighborhood-specific yard, lot, and space
regulations that reflect the existing character of the neighborhood. The
neighborhood stabilization overlay district does not prevent construction of
new single-family structures or the renovation, remodeling, repair, or
expansion of existing single-family structures, but, rather, ensures that new
single-family structures are compatible with existing single-family structures.
      (9)   TC Turtle Creek Environmental Corridor Overlay District. Any zoning
district appearing on the zoning map may be followed by the suffix “TC”
indicating the Turtle Creek environmental corridor overlay district. The
purpose of this overlay district is to protect and preserve the environmentally
sensitive Turtle Creek area located along Turtle Creek Parkway, Lee Park, and
Reverchon Park from Wycliff Avenue to Maple Avenue. This overlay preserves the
open space of those lands directly bordering the Turtle Creek Parkway Corridor
through the authorization of decreased minimum setbacks and the transfer of
development rights. (Ord. Nos. 16959; 18040; 18849; 19063; 20360; 27404; 28072)
SEC. 51-4.103.   ZONING DISTRICT MAP.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.103 of
Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 20729; 28072)
SEC. 51-4.104.   ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (a)   When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on
the official zoning map, the following rules apply:
      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys are construed to follow those center lines.
      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
are construed as following those lot lines.
      (3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits are
construed as following city limits.
      (4)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines are construed as
following the established center line of a railroad right-of-way. If no center
line is established, the boundary is midway between the railroad right-of-way
lines.
      (5)   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines are construed to
follow shore lines. If the shore line changes, the boundaries are construed as
moving with the actual shore line.
      (6)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water are construed to
follow those center lines. The center line is interpreted as being midway
between the shore lines of the body of water. If the center line changes, the
boundaries are construed as moving with the center line.
      (7)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of the features
described in Subsections (a)(1) through (a)(6) are construed as being parallel
to or extensions of the features.
      (8)   Boundaries indicated as dividing a lot or tract are construed to be
located as shown on the zoning district map.
   (b)   Distances not specifically indicated on a zoning district map are
determined by the scale of the map.
   (c)   Whenever a street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official
action of the city council, the zoning district line adjoining each side of the
street, alley, or other public way automatically extends to the center line of
the vacated street, alley, or public way.
   (d)   When there is a question as to the boundary of a tract and that
question cannot be resolved by the application of Subsections (a) through (c),
the board of adjustment shall determine the boundary by interpreting the
official zoning district map and ordinances amending the map.
   (e)   When there is a question as to whether or how a tract is zoned and
that question cannot be resolved by the application of this section, the tract
is temporarily classified as an agricultural district, and the tract is subject
to the same regulations as provided for annexed territory temporarily zoned.
Division 51-4.200
Use Regulations.
SEC. 51-4.201.   RESIDENTIAL USES.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   In an GO district, single-family, duplex, and multiple-family uses
must be a component of an office building and comprise no more than five
percent of the total floor area of the building.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, a facility
that meets all of the requirements of Article 1011n, V.T.C.A., may locate in
any residential zone or district in the city as a matter of right. Unless
otherwise directed by the city attorney, the building official and any other
city officer or employee charged with enforcement of this chapter shall
construe Article 1011n by substituting Congress’ definition of a handicapped
person in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as amended, for the state’s
definition of “disabled person” in that article.
   (b)   Specific residential uses. The following residential uses are subject
to the general provisions in Subsection (a) and the regulations below:
      (1)   Single-family.
         (A)   Definition: One dwelling unit located on a lot.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential districts except MH;
nonresidential districts except NO, LO, MO, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Except as provided in Section 51A-
4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each dwelling unit in R, D, and TH districts.
None in other districts.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Additional dwelling unit. The board of adjustment may grant a
special exception to authorize an additional dwelling unit in any district
when, in the opinion of the board, the additional dwelling unit will not:
               (aa)   be used as rental accommodations; or
               (bb)   adversely affect neighboring properties.
               (cc)   In granting a special exception under this subparagraph,
the board shall require the applicant to deed restrict the subject property to
prevent use of the additional dwelling unit as rental accommodations.
            (ii)   Accessory dwelling unit.
               (aa)   The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to
authorize a rentable accessory dwelling unit in any district when, in the
opinion of the board, the accessory dwelling unit will not adversely affect
neighboring properties.
               (bb)   If a minimum of one additional off-street parking space
is not provided, the board shall determine if that will create a traffic
hazard. The board may require an additional off-street parking space be
provided as a condition of granting this special exception.
               (cc)   In granting a special exception under this subparagraph,
the board shall require the applicant to:
                  (I)   deed restrict the subject Property to require owner-
occupancy on the premises; and
                  (II)   annually register the rental property with the city’s
single family non-owner occupied rental program.
            (iii)   Physically seperable. A dwelling unit must be physically
separable from contiguous dwelling units in the event of removal of a dwelling
unit.
            (iv)   Utility services. Each dwelling unit must have separate
utility services; however, general utility services on land owned and
maintained by a homeowner’s association is allowed.
            (v)   Party wall. Each party wall must be governed by a set of deed
restrictions, stipulating that if a dwelling unit is removed, the party wall
stays with the remaining dwelling unit.
            (vi)   Electrical service. In a single-family, duplex, or townhouse
district, a lot for a single-family use may be supplied by not more than one
electrical utility service, and metered by not more than one electrical meter.
The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to authorize more than
one electrical utility service or more than one electrical meter on a lot in a
single-family, duplex, or townhouse district when, in the opinion of the board,
the special exception will:
               (aa)   not be contrary to the public interest;
               (bb)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
               (cc)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in the
district where the building site is located.
            (vii)   Industrialized housing. In addition to any other applicable
regulations, industrialized housing must comply with the following additional
provisions. For purposes of this subparagraph, “industrialized housing” means
industrialized housing as defined by Section 1202.002 of the Texas Occupations
Code, as amended.
               (aa)   Industrialized housing must have all local permits and
licenses that are applicable to other single-family or duplex dwellings.
               (bb)   Industrialized housing must have a value equal to or
greater than the median taxable value of each single-family dwelling located
within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to
be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll of
the appraisal district. For purposes of this subparagraph, the “value” of the
industrialized housing means the taxable value of the industrialized housing
and the lot after installation of the industrialized housing.
               (cc)   Industrialized housing must have exterior siding,
roofing, roof-pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the
single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the
industrialized housing is proposed to be located. “Compatible” as used in this
subparagraph means similar in application, color, materials, pattern, quality,
shape, size, slope, and other characteristics; but does not necessarily mean
identical. The burden is on the property owner or applicant to supply proof of
compatibility. The property owner or applicant may appeal a decision of the
building official to deny a permit due to lack of compatibility to the board of
adjustment.
               (dd)   Industrialized housing must comply with municipal
aesthetic standards; yard, lot, and space regulations; subdivision regulations;
landscaping; and any other regulations applicable to single-family dwellings.
               (ee)   Industrialized housing must be securely fixed to a
permanent foundation.
               (ff)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed in a
historic overlay district unless the industrialized housing conforms to the
preservation criteria of the historic overlay district.
               (gg)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed in a
conservation district unless the industrialized housing conforms to the
conservation district regulations.
               (hh)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed unless it
complies with public deed restrictions for the property.
            (viii)   Except in the agricultural district, accessory structures
are subject to the following regulations:
               (aa)   Except as provided in this section, no person shall rent
an accessory structure. For purposes of this section, rent means the payment of
any form of consideration for the use of the accessory structure.
               (bb)   Except for accessory dwelling units, no person shall use
an advertisement, display, listing, or sign on or off the premises to advertise
the rental of an accessory structure.
               (cc)   The height of an accessory structure may not exceed the
height of the main building.
               (dd)   The floor area of any individual accessory structure on a
lot, excluding floor area used for parking, may not exceed 25 percent of the
floor area of the main building.
               (ee)   The total floor area of all accessory structures on a
lot, excluding floor area used for parking, may not exceed 50 percent of the
floor area of the main building.
               (ff)   Accessory structures must have exterior siding, roofing,
roof-pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the main
building. “Compatible” as used in this provision means similar in application,
color, materials, pattern, quality, shape, size, slope, and other
characteristics; but does not necessarily mean identical. The burden is on the
property owner or applicant to supply proof of compatibility. This provision
does not apply to accessory structures with a floor area of 200 square feet or
less.
      (1.1)   Handicapped group dwelling unit.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   DOMICILE means the legal, established, fixed, and permanent
place of residence of a person, as distinguished from a temporary and
transient, though actual, place of residence.
            (ii)   HANDICAPPED GROUP DWELLING UNIT means a single dwelling unit
that is the domicile of not more than eight handicapped persons who are not a
“family” as that term is defined in this chapter, and who are living together
as a single housekeeping unit. Up to two supervisory personnel may reside on
the premises, provided that the total number of residents, including
supervisory personnel, does not exceed eight.
            (iii)   HANDICAPPED PERSON means a handicapped person as defined in
the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as amended.
            (iv)   LICENSED means licensed by the Texas Department of Human
Services, or its successor.
         (B)   Districts permitted: When located at least 1,000 feet from group
residential facilities and all other licensed handicapped group dwelling units,
as defined in this chapter, by right in the following districts: Residential
districts except MH; non-residential districts except NO, LO, MO, and
industrial districts; otherwise, by SUP only in same districts. For purposes of
this provision, the distance between uses is measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, between the nearest
boundaries of the building sites on which the uses are located. (Note: The
spacing component of these use regulations is based, not on the handicapped
status of the residents, but on the non-family status of the groups.)
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Except as provided in Section 51A-
4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each dwelling unit. If an SUP is required for
this use, the off-street parking requirement may be established in the
ordinance granting the SUP. In determining this requirement, the city council
shall consider the nature of the proposed use and the degree to which the use
would create traffic hazards or congestion given the capacity of nearby
streets, the trip generation characteristics of the use, the availability of
public transit and the likelihood of its use, and the feasibility of traffic
mitigation measures.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No certificate of occupancy is required for this use.
            (ii)   This use liberalizes current restrictions on the number of
unrelated persons who may reside together in a dwelling unit in the city for
the exclusive benefit of handicapped persons seeking to permanently reside
together as a single housekeeping unit. Its purpose is to comply with the
substance and spirit of the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as
amended, which requires that reasonable accommodations be made in rules,
policies, and practices to permit persons with handicaps equal opportunity to
use and enjoy a dwelling. [See Section
51-1.102(b)(2).]
            (iii)   This use is exempt from payment of SUP application fees.
            (iv)   Any owner of property on which this use is located or
proposed to be located may require a letter from the director confirming that
no SUP is required for the use. No fee is required to apply for such a letter.
Application must be on a form furnished by the director. The director shall
issue the requested letter unless, within 30 days after submission of a
complete application, the director gives written notice to the applicant that
the use or proposed use will require an SUP. For purposes of this paragraph,
notice is given to the applicant by depositing the same properly addressed and
postage paid in the United States mail. The proper address for purposes of this
notice requirement is the address provided by the applicant on the application.
No SUP shall be required for uses that operate in justifiable reliance upon a
valid confirmation letter issued by the director.
            (v)   Any aggrieved person may appeal a decision of the director
that an SUP is required for this use. Such appeals shall be heard and decided
by the board of adjustment. An appeal to the board must be made within 15 days
after the director gives written notice that the SUP is required. Appeal is
made by filing a written notice of appeal on a form approved by the board. [See
Section 51A-4.703.] No fee is required to appeal the decision of the director
to the board.
            (vi)   If two or more facilities are within 1,000 feet of each
other and otherwise in permissible locations, the first one lawfully
established and continually operating thereafter is the conforming use. For
purposes of this subparagraph, “continually operating” means that the use has
not been discontinued for six months or more.
      (2)   Duplex.
         (A)   Definition: Two dwelling units located on a lot.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential districts except single-family,
MH, and A districts; nonresidential districts except NO, LO, MO, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Except as provided in Section 51A-
4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each dwelling unit in D and TH districts. None in
other districts.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Only one main building may be placed on a building site under
this use.
            (ii)   In a duplex district, a lot for a duplex use may be supplied
by not more than one electrical utility service, and metered by not more than
two electrical meters. The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to
authorize more than one electrical utility service or more than two electrical
meters on a lot in a duplex use in a duplex district when, in the opinion of
the board, the special exception will:
               (aa)   not be contrary to the public interest;
               (bb)   not adversely affect neighboring properties; and
               (cc)   not be used to conduct a use not permitted in the
district where the building site is located.
            (iii)   In addition to any other applicable regulations,
industrialized housing must comply with the following additional provisions.
For purposes of this subparagraph, “industrialized housing” means
industrialized housing as defined by Section 1202.002 of the Texas Occupations
Code, as amended.
               (aa)   Industrialized housing must have all local permits and
licenses that are applicable to other single-family or duplex dwellings.
               (bb)   Industrialized housing must have a value equal to or
greater than the median taxable value of each single-family dwelling located
within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to
be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll of
the appraisal district. For purposes of this subparagraph, the “value” of the
industrialized housing means the taxable value of the industrialized housing
and the lot after installation of the industrialized housing.
               (cc)   Industrialized housing must have exterior siding,
roofing, roof-pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the
single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the
industrialized housing is proposed to be located. “Compatible” as used in this
subparagraph means similar in application, color, materials, pattern, quality,
shape, size, slope, and other characteristics; but does not necessarily mean
identical. The burden is on the property owner or applicant to supply proof of
compatibility. The property owner or applicant may appeal a decision of the
building official to deny a permit due to lack of compatibility to the board of
adjustment.
               (dd)   Industrialized housing must comply with municipal
aesthetic standards; yard, lot, and space regulations; subdivision regulations;
landscaping; and any other regulations applicable to single-family dwellings.
               (ee)   Industrialized housing must be securely fixed to a
permanent foundation.
               (ff)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed in a
historic overlay district unless the industrialized housing conforms to the
preservation criteria of the historic overlay district.
               (gg)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed in a
conservation district unless the industrialized housing conforms to the
conservation district regulations.
               (hh)   Industrialized housing may not be constructed unless it
complies with public deed restrictions for the property.
      (3)   Multiple-family.
         (A)   Definition: Three or more dwelling units located on a lot.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Multiple-family, O-1, O-2, GO, commercial,
and central area districts: specific use permit required in I-1 and I-
2 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B):
               (aa)   None required for multiple-family developments with 20
units or less.
               (bb)   One half space per dwelling unit for multiple-family
developments with more than 20 but less than 200 dwelling units.
               (cc)   One space per dwelling unit for multiple-family
developments with 200 or more dwelling units.
               (dd)   No additional parking is required for accessory uses that
are limited principally to residents.
            (ii)    For multiple-family uses with more than 20 but less than
100 dwelling units, 10 percent of required parking spaces must be marked for
use by guests. For multiple-family uses with 100 or more dwelling units, 15
percent of required parking spaces must be marked for use by guests. All guest
parking must be clearly marked at the driveway entrance or walking gate.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: For multiple-family uses of 150 or
more dwelling units, one off-street loading space of adequate size to
accommodate a typical moving or delivery van is required and must be located
outside of a fence or gate. For all multiple-family uses, the following must be
identified at the time of permitting:
            (i)    areas of anticipated loading and unloading;
            (ii)    relevant building components used for loading and unloading
such as freight elevators and freight entrances; and
            (iii)    areas designated for short-term pick-up and drop-off.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Uses that are customarily incidental to the multiple-family
use and that include an employee’s washroom, a manager’s office, laundry room,
swimming pool, and game courts are permitted. The game courts, laundry room,
and swimming pool must be for the exclusive use of the residents and their
guests. No exterior advertising of the accessory uses is permitted.
            (ii)   The minimum space between exterior walls of a multiple-
family dwelling must be 10 feet between the walls if only one wall has an
opening for light and air and 20 feet if both walls have an opening for light
and air. This provision applies to multiple-family buildings with a common roof
or freestanding, multiple-family buildings. This provision does not apply to
walls located entirely within a dwelling unit.
            (iii)   For multiple-family dwellings over 36 feet in height, an
outer court that has on its perimeter exterior walls that have openings for
access, light, or air, must have a minimum width equal to the depth of the
court, up to a maximum required width of 100 feet.
            (iv)   For multiple-family dwellings over 36 feet in height, an
inner court that has one or more walls with openings for access, light, or air
must have a minimum dimension in length and in width equal to the height of the
building enclosing the inner court, up to a maximum required width and length
of 100 feet.
      (3.1)   Group residential facility.
         (A)   Definition: An interim or permanent residential facility (as
opposed to a lodging or medical treatment facility) that provides room and
board to a group of persons who are not a “family” as that term is defined in
this chapter, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for
the services it offers. This use does not include:
            (i)   facilities that negotiate sleeping arrangements on a daily
basis;
            (ii)   dwelling units occupied exclusively by families (Note:
Dwelling units occupied exclusively by families are considered to be single-
family, duplex, or multiple-family uses, as the case may be); or
            (iii)   any other use specifically defined in this chapter.
         (B)   Districts permitted: When located at least 1,000 feet from all
other group residential facilities and licensed handicapped group dwelling
units (as defined in this chapter), by right in multiple-family and central
area districts; otherwise by SUP only in the same districts. For purposes of
this provision, the term “licensed” means licensed by the Texas Department of
Human Services, or its successor, and the distance between uses is measured in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, between
the nearest boundaries of the building sites on which the uses are located.
(Note: The spacing component of these use regulations is based, not on the
handicapped status of the residents, but on the non-family status of the
groups. [See Section 51A-1.102(b)(2).])
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The use is subject to the following density restrictions:
 
ZONING DISTRICT MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS MAXIMUM NO. OF BEDS* PER NET
CLASSIFICATION  OR SUITES* PER NET ACRE       ACRE
TH-1            35                            70
TH-2 and TH-3   40                            80
MF-1            50                            100
MF-2            60                            120
MF-3            90                            180
MF-4            160                           320
 
 
*For purposes of this subparagraph, the term “suite” means one or more rooms
designed to accommodate one family, containing living, sanitary, and sleeping
facilities, but not containing a kitchen; and the term “bed” means a piece of
furniture, mat, cushion, or other device on or in which one may lie and sleep.
            (ii)   This use must comply with statutory licensing requirements,
if any.
            (iii)   This use may include dwelling units or suites that are
exclusively restricted to visitors or members of the staff.
      (4)   Reserved.
      (5)   Reserved.
      (6)   Manufactured home park, manufactured home subdivision, and
campground.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A manufactured home park is a unified development of
transient stands arranged on a lot under single ownership.
            (ii)   A manufactured home subdivision is a plat designed
specifically for manufactured home development.
            (iii)   A campground is a lot used to accommodate recreation
vehicles, tents, or manufactured homes on a rental basis for temporary camping
purposes.
         (B)   Districts permitted: MH.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The owner of a manufactured home park must have a site plan
approved by the commission before the building official may issue a building
permit for the manufactured home park. The site plan must include the
dimensions, bearings, and street frontage of the property; the location of
buildings, structures, lots, stands, and uses; the method of ingress and
egress; off-street parking and loading arrangements; screening, lighting, and
landscaping, if appropriate; and any other information the director determines
necessary for a complete review of the proposed development.
            (ii)   The owner of a manufactured home subdivision must have a
plat approved by the commission and filed in the county records before the
building official may issue a building permit for the manufactured home
subdivision.
            (iii)   One caretaker’s dwelling unit and one office is permitted
under this use.
            (iv)   No carport, garage, storage building, office, or caretaker’s
dwelling, laundry house, or other permitted structure under this use may be
located closer than 50 feet to a manufactured home district boundary line.
            (v)   The owner under this use must provide and maintain a
permanent steel chain link fence or its equivalent. The fence must be at least
five feet in height and must completely surround the rear and all sides of this
use that are not exposed to a dedicated street.
            (vi)   Open playground space must be provided under this use at a
ratio of 500 square feet of open space for each of the first 20 lots or
transient stands provided, and at a ratio of 250 square feet for all additional
lots or transient stands.
            (vii)   This use must comply with the requirements of Chapter 47 of
this code.
      (7)   Retirement housing.
         (A)   Definition: A residential facility principally designed for
persons 55 years of age or older. This use does not include a convalescent or
nursing home, which is defined as a separate main use in Section
51-4.205(3).
         (B)   Districts permitted: Multiple-family and central area districts;
specific use permit required in townhouse districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 None
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In these regulations:
               (aa)   ELDERLY RESIDENT means a resident that is 55 years of age
or older.
               (bb)   SUITE means one or more rooms designed to accommodate one
family containing living, sanitary, and sleeping facilities, but not containing
a kitchen.
            (ii)   In townhouse and multiple-family districts, this use is
subject to the following density restrictions:
ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS OR SUITES PER NET
                               ACRE
ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS OR SUITES PER NET
                               ACRE
TH-1                           25
TH-2 and TH-3                  35
TH-4                           40
MF-1                           45
MF-2                           55
MF-3                           90
MF-4                           160
 
            (iii)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraphs (iv) and (v),
each occupied dwelling unit or suite must have at least one elderly resident.
Failure to comply with this provision shall result in the facility being
reclassified as another use.
            (iv)   One dwelling unit or suite may be designated as a caretaker
unit whose occupants are not subject to the age restriction in Subparagraph
(iii).
            (v)   Those persons legally residing with an elderly resident at
the facility may continue to reside at the facility for a period not to exceed
one year if the elderly resident dies or moves out for medical reasons. The
board may grant a special exception to authorize an extension of the length of
time a person may continue to reside at the facility if the board finds, after
a public hearing, that literal enforcement of this provision would result in an
unnecessary personal hardship. In determining whether an unnecessary personal
hardship would result, the board shall consider the following factors:
               (aa)   The physical limitations of the resident, if any.
               (bb)   Any economic constraints which would make it difficult
for the resident to relocate.
               (cc)   Whether the resident is dependent on support services or
special amenities provided by the retirement housing project.
               (dd)   Whether there are any alternative housing or market
constraints which would impair the ability to relocate.
            (vi)   No use with exterior advertising or signs may be considered
accessory to this use. (Ord. Nos. 16801; 16806; 16913; 17552; 17811; 18849;
19700; 19912; 20038; 20360; 21044; 25435; 25486; 25977; 26140; 27404; 28803;
30890; 30930; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.202.   UTILITY AND SERVICE USES.
   Utility and service uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Utility or government installation other than listed.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A “utility other than listed” is a public or private facility
certificated, franchised, licensed, or operated by the city as a utility and
that is not specifically covered by the use regulations in this chapter.
            (ii)   A “government installation other than listed” is an
installation owned or leased by a governmental agency and that is not
specifically covered by the use regulations in this chapter. Typical such
government installations include city hall, a courthouse, or an elevated
storage reservoir.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts; specific use permit required in residential, NS, and
office districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The specific use permit requirement for this use does not
apply to a building, other structure, or land under the control,
administration, or jurisdiction of a state or federal agency.
      (2)   Local utilities.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   UTILITY SERVICES means air pollution monitoring stations,
antennas, cables, dishes, distribution lines, drainage lines, generating
facilities, nodes and hubs, pipes, poles, pumping stations, receivers and
senders, repeating or regenerating devices, storm water facilities, switching
stations, substations, tanks, transmission lines, water wells, wires, or
similar equipment operated by a municipality, a transit authority, or a
certificated, franchised, or licensed utility company providing cable
television, electrical, gas, internet, storm sewer, telecommunications,
telegraph, telephone, water, or wastewater service to the public.
            (ii)   COMMUNICATIONS EXCHANGE FACILITY means a facility for the
centralized placement of communications equipment used to store, house, and
route voice and data transmissions among communications companies.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Utility services: Residential and nonresidential districts;
specific use permit (SUP) required in residential districts if the above-grade
facilities exceed 300 square feet in floor area or structure footprint per lot,
except that no SUP is required for below-grade facilities, distribution lines,
transmission lines, and supporting structures; RAR is required if this use is
more than 150 square feet in floor area or more than 10 feet in height, except
that no RAR is required for below-grade facilities, distribution lines,
transmission lines, and supporting structures. In this subparagraph, “structure
footprint” means the ground area defined by vertical planes extending downward
from the outermost projection of the structure.
            (ii)   Communications exchange facility: O-2, LO, MO, GO, GR, LC,
HC, central area, and industrial districts; SC if this use does not exceed
50,000 square feet of floor area, otherwise prohibited in SC; nonresidential
planned development districts that allow local utilities; and residential
planned development districts only if specifically listed as a permitted use,
otherwise prohibited in residential planned development districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
            (i)   Utility services: None.
            (ii)   Communications exchange facility:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 None
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Utility services:
               (aa)   Aboveground storage tanks are not permitted under this
use, except accessory aboveground storage tanks to emergency generators. The
capacity of accessory aboveground storage tanks may not exceed 11,000 gallons
in nonresidential districts and 3,500 gallons in residential districts.
               (bb)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraph (E)(i)(dd),
in residential districts, if this use is over seven feet in height, screening
that complies with Section
51-4.602(b) must be constructed and maintained along the side and rear of the
use.
               (cc)   Except as otherwise provided in Subparagraph (E)(i)(dd),
if this use is over seven feet in height, a perimeter landscape buffer strip
that complies with Section 51A-10.125 must be provided.
               (dd)   Distribution lines, transmission lines, and supporting
structures are exempt from the requirements of Subparagraphs (E)(i)(bb) and (E)
(i)(cc).
               (ee)   No landscape regulations apply to this use except as
expressly provided in these additional provisions.
               (ff)   This use is not subject to compliance proceedings under
Section
51-4.704.
            (ii)   Communications exchange facility:
               (aa)   Section
51-4.408(a)(1), which exempts structures for utility uses from certain height
restrictions, does not apply to this use.
               (bb)   Aboveground storage tanks are not permitted under this
use, except accessory aboveground storage tanks to emergency generators. Unless
located within an enclosed structure or completely screened from adjacent
street right-of-way and all other properties by solid screening, the capacity
of accessory aboveground storage tanks may not exceed 11,000 gallons in
nonresidential districts and 3,500 gallons in residential districts.
      (3)   Electrical substation.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for transforming electricity for
distribution to individual customers.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Nonresidential districts except O-1;
specific use permit required in residential, O-1, and NO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (4)   Electrical energy generating plant.
         (A)   Definition: A facility franchised by the city that generates
electricity from mechanical power produced by gas, coal, or nuclear fission.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC and industrial districts; specific use
permit required in an agricultural district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (5)   Radio, television, or microwave tower.
         (A)   Definition: A structure supporting antennae that transmit or
receive any portion of the electromagnetic spectrum.
         (B)   Districts permitted: O-2, NO, LO, MO, GO, SC, GR, LC, HC,
central area, and industrial districts; specific use permit required in
residential, O-1, and NS districts; specific use permit required in NO
districts if this use exceeds 30 feet in height and in LO and MO districts if
this use exceeds 60 feet in height.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (6)   Commercial radio or television transmitting station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for transmission of commercial
programming by radio or television within the commercial band of the
electromagnetic spectrum.
         (B)   Districts permitted: O-2, MO, GO, commercial, central area, and
industrial districts; specific use permit required in LO and agricultural
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (7)   Sewage pumping station.
         (A)   Definitions: A facility for pumping sewage.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential districts and nonresidential
districts except O-1.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (8)   Sewage treatment plant.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for receiving and treating sewage from
the city sanitary sewer system.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-3 district; specific use permit required
in A, O-2, commercial, central area, I-1, and I-2 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (9)   Telephone exchange, switching, and transmitting equipment.
         (A)   Definition: Non-attended telephone switching or transmitting
service.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential and nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Business office facilities, storage, or repair shops or yards
are not permitted under this use.
      (10)   Water reservoir, well, or pumping station.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A water reservoir is a facility for the ground storage and
transmission of water for use by the city water system.
            (ii)   A well is a facility for the ground storage and transmission
of water.
            (iii)   A pumping station is a facility for transporting water,
including pumps, piping, valves, and controls.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential and nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:   
            (i)   Elevated water storage reservoirs are not permitted under
this use.
      (11)   Water treatment plant.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for purifying, supplying, and
distributing city water, including a system of reservoirs, channels, mains, and
purifying equipment.
         (B)   District permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts; specific use permit required in A, O-1, O-2, and NS districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (12)   Tower/antenna for cellular communication.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   Mounted cellular antenna means a cellular antenna that is
attached to an existing structure, that complies with the requirements of
Subparagraph (E)(i), and that is part of a cellular system authorized by the
Federal Communications Commission. An auxiliary building housing electronic and
communication equipment is permitted as part of this use.
            (ii)   Monopole cellular tower means a single pole structure that
supports a platform and cellular antennas, that complies with the requirements
of Subparagraphs (E)(ii) and (iii), and that is part of a cellular system
authorized by the Federal Communications Commission. An auxiliary building
housing electronic and communication equipment is permitted as part of this
use.
            (iii)   Other cellular communication tower/antenna means any
cellular communication tower or antenna that is part of a cellular system
authorized by the Federal Communications Commission, but that is not covered by
the definitions contained in Subparagraphs (A)(i) and (A)(ii). An auxiliary
building housing electronic and communication equipment is permitted as part of
this use.
            (iv)   Platform means that portion of a monopole cellular tower
that is located on top of the pole and that supports directional, transmitting,
and receiving antennas.
            (v)   Temporary cellular unit means any cellular communication
structure, vehicle, trailer mounted apparatus, or device that is part of a
system authorized by the Federal Communications Commission that is used to
temporarily provide service where an existing tower/antenna for cellular
communication is not operable for one or more of the following reasons:
               (aa)   The existing tower/antenna for cellular communication use
is damaged or destroyed other than by the intentional act of the owner or
agent; or
               (bb)   A demolition or construction permit has been issued on a
building site that requires the removal of existing mounted cellular antenna,
monopole cellular tower, or other cellular communication tower/antenna.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Mounted cellular antennas: By right in A, single-family,
duplex, townhouse, MF-1, MF-2, and MH districts when attached to an existing
structure that is currently occupied or was last occupied by a nonresidential
use.
            (ii)   Mounted cellular antennas: By right in MF-3, MF-4, and all
nonresidential districts when attached to any existing structure.
            (iii)   Monopole cellular towers: By right in LC, HC, industrial,
and central area districts with RAR required in LC, HC, and industrial
districts. By right in O-2, LO, MO, and GO districts if the height of the tower
does not exceed the maximum height for structures in that district as provided
in the height regulations of Section
51-4.408, with RAR required in the same districts; otherwise by SUP only. By
right in the GR district if the height of the tower does not exceed 65 feet,
with RAR required; otherwise by SUP only. By right in the SC district if the
height of the tower does not exceed 80 feet, with RAR required; otherwise by
SUP only. By SUP only in all residential, NO, O-2, and NS districts. The impact
of the tower height on an adjacent residential district must be considered in
the SUP process.
            (iv)   Other cellular communication towers/antennas are permitted
as follows: O-2, NO, LO, MO, GO, SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts; SUP required in residential, O-1, and NS districts; specific use
permit in NO districts if this use exceeds 30 feet in height and in LO and MO
districts if this use exceeds 60 feet in height.
            (v)   Temporary cellular unit is permitted by right in all
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Mounted cellular antennas may not exceed 12 feet above the
structure to which they are attached. Whip antennas are excluded from this
calculation.
            (ii)   The pole portion of a monopole cellular tower may not exceed
42 inches in diameter. Microwave dishes or similar devices up to three feet in
diameter may be mounted on the pole portion of a monopole cellular tower. If
microwave dishes or similar devices on a monopole cellular tower are concealed
within a stealth tower, no maximum; otherwise, no more than two dishes or
similar devices may be placed on a monopole cellular tower.
            (iii)   The platform portion of a monopole cellular tower may not
have a horizontal cross sectional area greater than 196 square feet. The depth
of the platform may not exceed four feet, excluding any whip antenna. Only
antennas that are part of a cellular system authorized by the Federal
Communications Commissions are permitted on a platform.
            (iv)   The owner of a monopole or other tower for cellular
communication shall notify the building official when the tower is no longer
operating as part of a cellular system authorized by the Federal Communications
Commission. Within 12 months of the date the tower ceases to operate as part of
an authorized cellular system, the tower must either be removed from the site,
or a certificate of occupancy must be obtained to allow another permitted use
of the tower. If within 12 months the owner fails to remove the tower or obtain
proper authorization for use of the tower, the building official shall revoke
the certificate of occupancy for the tower and notify the city attorney to
pursue enforcement remedies.
            (v)   Mounted cellular antennas attached to utility structures are
exempt from the additional setback regulations in Sections
51-4.401,
51-4.402, and
51-4.403 in certain circumstances. [See Section
51-4.408(a)(1).]
            (vi)   Temporary cellular unit:
               (aa)   The building official shall issue a certificate of
occupancy for a period not to exceed one year. The building official may grant
up to two six-month extensions if a complete application for or amendment to a
specific use permit or planned development district has been filed with the
director or a building permit is issued for the replacement of the existing
tower/antenna for cellular communication.
               (bb)   A temporary cellular unit must be removed upon the
expiration of its certificate of occupancy or upon the completion or expiration
of a permit to construct a structure upon which to mount a permanent mounted
cellular antenna, a monopole cellular tower, or other cellular antenna,
whichever occurs first.
               (cc)   Except as provided in this provision, a temporary
cellular unit must comply with the yard, lot, and space regulations of the
district and may not exceed the height of the existing tower/antenna for
cellular communication use to be removed. Lightning rods atop a temporary
cellular unit are not included in height calculations. If a temporary cellular
unit collocates with existing operators on a single vertical temporary cellular
unit, the following regulations apply:
                  (I)   If the height of the existing mounted cellular antenna
to be removed is less than the maximum structure height of the district, the
maximum structure height may extend an additional ten feet in height for each
existing operator above one, not to exceed the maximum structure height of the
district.
                  (II)   If the height of the existing mounted cellular
antennas to be removed is equal to or exceeds the maximum structure height of
the district, the maximum height of the temporary cellular unit may not exceed
the height of the existing mounted cellular antennas to be removed.
            (vii)   The specific use permit regulations in Section 51A-4.219
apply to a tower/antenna for cellular communication except as modified in this
provision. The director shall send written notice of a public hearing on an
application for an SUP for a tower/antenna for cellular communication use to
all owners of real property lying within 500 feet of the building site as
defined in Section 51A-4.601 on which the tower/antenna for cellular
communication use will be located. If the site does not comply with Section
51A-4.601, the director shall send written notice of a public hearing on an
application for an SUP for a tower/antenna for cellular communication use to
all owners of real property lying within 500 feet of the boundaries of a lot on
a preliminary plat that is approved by the city plan commission upon which the
tower/antenna for cellular communication use is to be located.
            (viii)   An application for or an amendment to a specific use
permit or planned development district is not required for a modification to an
existing tower/antenna for cellular communication or its base station unless
the modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of the existing
tower/antenna for cellular communication or base station. A modification
substantially changes the physical dimensions of an existing tower/antenna for
cellular communication or its auxiliary building if it meets the criteria
listed in 47 C.F.R. §1.40001(b)(7), as amended. (Ord. Nos. 17444; 18849; 19808;
21000; 24543; 27404; 29984; 30890; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.203.   TRANSPORTATION USES.
   Transportation uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Airport or landing field.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the landing of fixed or rotary wing
aircraft.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential districts and nonresidential
districts except NO, LO, MO, and GO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A minimum of 60 acres is required for this use.
            (ii)   This use must be approved by the city aviation department.
            (iii)   This use is subject to the Federal Aviation
Administration’s rules and regulations.
      (2)   STOL (short takeoff or landing) port.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for takeoff and landing operations of
fixed wing aircraft designed to land on runways of 1,000 feet or less.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts; specific use permit required in an agricultural district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may include refueling equipment and passenger
shelters but may not include maintenance facilities.
            (ii)   This use must be approved by the city aviation department.
            (iii)   This use is subject to the Federal Aviation
Administration’s rules and regulations.
      (3)   Passenger bus station and terminal.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for passenger bus docking, passenger
loading, and unloading.
         (B)   Districts permitted: GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None. Areas of anticipated loading
and unloading must be identified at time of permitting.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (4)   Transit passenger shelter.
         (A)   Definition: A structure which affords protection from the
weather to persons who are waiting to board a publicly owned or franchised
transit vehicle.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential and nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A site plan must be submitted to and approved by the director
if the location of the proposed shelter structure will be on or within 20 feet
of a lot that is located in a single-family or duplex district and occupied by
a residential use. The site plan must show the area within a 50-foot radius of
the proposed shelter structure. No site plan is required if the lot is vacant
or exclusively occupied by one or more nonresidential uses.
            (ii)   The submission and review procedures for a site plan
required under Subparagraph (i) are the same as those required under Section
51-4.803 for a lot that has residential adjacency. For purposes of these
provisions, the term “lot” in Section
51-4.803 is construed to mean only that area for which a site plan is required.
            (iii)   In addition to the requirements of Section
51-4.803(e), upon the filing of a complete application for review of a site
plan required under Subparagraph (i), the director shall send written notice to
all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the area for which the
site plan is required.
            (iv)   A litter container of adequate size must be provided on the
site at all times.
            (v)   This use must be installed by public agencies.
            (vi)   In single-family and duplex districts, the shelter structure
must not occupy an area greater then 100 square feet.
            (vii)   This use is exempt from the front, side, and rear yard
requirements in this chapter, except that the shelter structure must be set
back at least five feet from the edge of the roadway.
            (viii)   No signs are permitted on the transit passenger shelter
site except for governmental signs, transit system logos, schedules, and route
information.
      (5)   Helicopter base.
         (A)   Definition: A landing and terminal facility for rotary wing
aircraft.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-2 and I-3 districts; specific use permit
required in A, HC, and I-1 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may include facilities for serving and repairing
rotary wing aircraft and must meet all requirements for those uses.
            (ii)   This use must be approved by the city aviation department.
            (iii)   This use is subject to the Federal Aviation
Administration’s rules and regulations.
      (6)   Heliport.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the regularly scheduled landing of
rotary wing aircraft.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-2 and I-3 districts; specific use permit
required in A, LC, HC, central area, and I-1 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use is limited to helicopters with a gross weight of
less than 12,500 pounds.
            (ii)   This use may not include fueling or servicing facilities.
            (iii)   This use must be approved by the city aviation department.
            (iv)   This use is subject to the Federal Aviation Administration’s
rules and regulations.
      (7)   Helistop.
         (A)   Definition: A landing pad for the occasional and infrequent use
by rotary wing aircraft.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-2 and I-3 districts; specific use permit
required in MF-3, MF-4, A, O-2, MO, GO, SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and I-
1 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use is limited to helicopters with a gross weight of
less than 6,000 pounds.
            (ii)   Regularly scheduled stops are not permitted under this use.
            (iii)   This use must be approved by the city aviation department.
      (8)   Motor freight hauling and storage.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for warehousing, transferring, or keeping
goods.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (9)   Railroad freight terminal.
         (A)   Definition: A facility on railroad premises for freight
classifying, docking, lighterage, and storage.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (10)   Railroad passenger station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the loading and discharging of train
passengers.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts; specific use permit required in LO, MO, and GO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (11)   Railroad team track.
         (A)   Definition: A siding for the spotting, unloading, and loading of
railroad cars.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A railroad team track must be accessible from a public
street.
      (12)   Railroad yard, roundhouse, or shops.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for storing, repairing, and making up
trains and railroad equipment.
         (B)   District permitted: Industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
(Ord. Nos. 18849; 20122; 27404; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.204.   COMMUNITY SERVICE USES.
   Community service uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Post office.
         (A)   Definition: A government facility for the transmission, sorting,
and local distribution of mail.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Nonresidential districts except O-1 and NO;
specific use permit required in MF-3, MF-4, O-1, and LO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use includes main branches, substation branches, and
neighborhood coin-operated self-service stations.
      (2)   Community, welfare, or health center.
         (A)   Definition: A community service facility where social,
recreational, welfare, health, or child-care service is provided by a public,
quasi-public, tax-exempt, church, or municipal agency.
         (B)   Districts permitted: MO, GO, commercial, central area, and
industrial districts; specific use permit required in O-2 and residential
districts except MH.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (3)   Foster home.
         (A)   Definition: A facility licensed by the state as a foster home
that provides room, board, ordinary care, and supervision to five or more
individuals under 18 years of age, who are not related by blood, marriage, or
adoption to the owner or operator of the facility.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Commercial and central area; specific use
permit required in residential, O-1, O-2, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (4)   Child or adult care facility.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that provides care, training, education,
custody, treatment, or supervision for persons of any age who are not related
by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility,
whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services
it offers. This use does not include:
            (i)   a facility that is operated in connection with a shopping
center, business, religious organization, or establishment where persons in
need of care are cared for during short periods while parents or persons
responsible for the persons in need of care are attending religious services,
shopping, or engaging in other activities on or near the premises, including
but not limited to retreats or classes for religious instruction;
            (ii)   a school or class for religious instruction that does not
last longer than two weeks and is conducted by a religious organization during
the summer months;
            (iii)   an educational facility accredited by the Texas Education
Agency or the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, or their successor
agencies, and that operates primarily for educational purposes in grades
kindergarten and above;
            (iv)   an educational facility that operates solely for educational
purposes in grades kindergarten through at least grade two, that does not
provide custodial care for more than one hour during the hours before or after
the customary school day, and that is a member of an organization that
promulgates, publishes, and requires compliance with health, safety, fire, and
sanitation standards equal to standards required by state, municipal, and
county codes;
            (v)   a kindergarten or preschool educational program that is
operated as part of a public school or a private school accredited by the Texas
Education Agency or its successor agency, that offers educational programs
through grade six, and does not provide custodial care during the hours before
or after the customary school day;
            (vi)   an educational facility that is integral to and inseparable
from its sponsoring religious organization or an educational facility both of
which do not provide custodial care for more than two hours maximum per day,
and that offers educational programs for children age five and above in one or
more of the following: kindergarten through at least grade three, elementary,
or secondary grades;
            (vii)   a day home as defined in Section
51-4.217; or
            (viii)   individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit
in which not more than four individuals are unrelated to the head of the
household by blood, marriage, or adoption.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   By right in agricultural commercial, multiple-family, MH,
office, industrial, general retail, and central area districts; specific use
permit required in residential, office, and industrial districts; limited use
in NO, LO, MO, and GO districts (specific use permit not required).
            (ii)   Except as provided in this romanette, by right in R, D, and
TH districts when the child or adult care facility is operated on property that
is operated, or was previously operated, by a religious organization, public or
private school, or recreation center. Otherwise, a specific use permit required
in R, D, and TH districts.
            (iii)   DIR required in industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
            (i)
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
            (ii)    Areas of anticipated passenger loading and unloading must
be identified at the time of permitting.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   When this use is located within a residential district,
outdoor activities are limited to the hours between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m.
            (ii)   The persons being cared for, trained, kept, treated, or
supervised under this use may not use the facility as a residence.
            (iii)   For property zoned as agricultural and multiple-family, the
board of adjustment may grant a special exception to the off-street parking
requirements contained in Section 51-4.301 when, in the opinion of the board,
the special exception will not adversely affect neighboring properties.
      (5)   Halfway house.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the housing, rehabilitation, and
training of persons on probation, parole, or early release from correctional
institutions, or other persons found guilty of criminal offenses.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in GR, LC, HC,
I-1, and central area districts. A halfway house may not be located in a
planned development district unless all of the requirements of this paragraph
are met.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None. Areas of anticipated loading
and unloading must be identified at time of permitting.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No more than 50 residents are permitted in a halfway house.
Halfway houses must be located at least 1000 feet from residential districts,
single-family, duplex, and multiple-family uses, public parks and recreational
facilities, child-care facilities, and public or private schools.
            (ii)   A halfway house may not be located within one mile from
another halfway house.
            (iii)   A specific use permit for a halfway house shall be issued
for a two year time period. Periodic review periods may be established as part
of the specific use permit.
            (iv)   The treatment of alcoholic, narcotic, or psychiatric
problems is allowed under this use if expressly permitted by the specific use
permit.
            (v)   This use shall comply with all applicable city, state, and
federal codes and regulations.
            (vi)   Halfway houses must be located within 1200 feet of mass
transit service.
            (vii)   A halfway house specific use permit application must
include evidence of meetings between the applicant and property owners within
the notification area. Evidence of meetings must include records reflecting the
dates of the meetings, the individuals or organizations involved, and the
issues discussed and resolved.
            (viii)   Signs identifying a use as a halfway house are not
permitted.
            (ix)   Halfway house premises must be properly maintained in good
condition at all times.
            (x)   A security plan must be submitted with an application for a
specific use permit for a halfway house. The security plan must demonstrate
compliance with the security requirements of state law. The director shall
furnish a copy of security plans for halfway houses to appropriate city,
county, and state agencies for their review before the commission’s
consideration of an application. Provisions addressing security must be
included in any ordinance granting a specific use permit for a halfway house. A
compliance report must be submitted to the director every two years after the
date of passage of an ordinance granting a specific use permit and with each
application for renewal of a specific use permit for a halfway house.
            (xi)   Measurements of distance under this paragraph are taken
radially. “Radial” measurement means a measurement taken along the shortest
distance between the nearest point of the building site of the halfway house
and the nearest point of the building site of another use, or of a zoning
district boundary.
      (6)   Reserved.
      (7)   Reserved. (Ord. Nos. 16802; 17329; 18014; 18849; 19059; 19064;
19455; 19931; 20845; 21044; 27404; 28803; 32659; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.205.   MEDICAL USES.
   Medical uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Hospital.
         (A)   Definition: An institution licensed by the state as a hospital
where sick or injured patients are given medical treatment.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, and central area districts;
specific use permit required in multiple-family, agricultural, O-1, O-2, MO,
GO, NS, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   Convalescent and nursing homes, hospice care, and related
institutions.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   This use includes both:
               (aa)   an establishment which furnishes (in single or multiple
facilities) food and shelter to five or more persons who are not related by
blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or proprietor of the establishment
and, in addition, provides minor treatment under the direction and supervision
of a physician, or services which meet some need beyond the basic provision of
food, shelter, and laundry; and
               (bb)   an establishment conducted by or for the adherence of any
well-recognized church or religious denomination for the purpose of providing
facilities for the care or treatment of the sick who depend exclusively upon
prayer or spiritual means for healing, without the use of any drug or material
remedy, provided safety, sanitary, and quarantine laws and regulations are
complied with.
            (ii)   This use does not include:
               (aa)   a hotel or similar place that furnishes only food and
lodging, or either, to its guests;
               (bb)   a hospital; or
               (cc)   an establishment that furnishes only baths and massages
in addition to food, shelter, and laundry.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Multiple-family and central area districts;
specific use permit required in agricultural and townhouse districts. In
multiple-family districts, a site plan must be submitted in accordance with the
requirements of Section
51-4.803, and the director shall review the plan for compliance with the
neighborhood protection standards in Subsection (f)(3) of that section.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In townhouse and multiple-family districts, this use is
subject to the following density restrictions:
ZONING DISTRICT MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS MAXIMUM NO. OF BEDS PER NET
CLASSIFICATION  OR SUITES* PER NET ACRE       ACRE
ZONING DISTRICT MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS MAXIMUM NO. OF BEDS PER NET
CLASSIFICATION  OR SUITES* PER NET ACRE       ACRE
TH-1            35                            70
TH-2 and TH-3   40                            80
TH-4            45                            90
MF-1            50                            100
MF-2            60                            120
MF-3            90                            180
MF-4            160                           320
 
*For purposes of this subparagraph, the term “suite” means one or more rooms
designed to accommodate one family, containing living, sanitary, and sleeping
facilities, but not containing a kitchen.
            (ii)   This use must comply with statutory licensing requirements,
if any.
            (iii)   This use may include dwelling units that are exclusively
restricted to visitors, patients, or members of the staff.
      (4)   Reserved.
      (5)   Medical clinic or ambulatory surgical center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for examining, consulting with, and
treating patients with medical, dental, or optical problems on an out-patient
basis.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Office, commercial, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Offices and laboratories are permitted as accessory uses.
      (6)   Medical or scientific laboratory.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for testing and analyzing medical or
scientific problems.
         (B)   Districts permitted: O-2, MO, GO, SC, GR, LC, HC, central area,
and industrial districts; specific use permit required in LO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), none.
            (ii)   One space for each 500 [300] square feet of floor area is
required only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (7)   Optical shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility providing optical items for the
correction of vision.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: O-2, commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (8)   Medical appliance fitting and sales.
         (A)   Definition: A facility specializing in the retail sale or rental
of special purpose devices related to medical treatment.
         (B)   Districts permitted: O-2, GO, SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts; specific use permit required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (9)   Ambulance service.
         (A)   Definition: A commercial facility for the housing, maintenance,
and dispatch of vehicles designed to transport sick or injured persons to
medical facilities.
         (B)   Districts permitted: GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)    Additional provision: Vehicles being serviced, or repaired must
be parked on site.
(Ord. Nos. 18849; 19065; 19806; 19912; 19913; 21044; 27404; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.206.   RELIGIOUS USES.
   Religious uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Church.
         (A)   Definition: A facility principally used for people to gather
together for public worship, religious training, or other religious activities.
This use does not include home study meetings or other religious activities
conducted in a privately occupied residence.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential and nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Number of spaces required.
               (aa)   Except as provided in this romanette, for churches with
20,000 square feet of floor area or less: none.
               (bb)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B) and this romanette, for churches with greater than 20,000
square feet of floor area, one space for each four fixed seats in the sanctuary
or auditorium. If fixed benches or pews are provided, each 18 inches of length
of the fixed bench or pew constitutes one fixed seat for purposes of this
paragraph. If portions of seating areas in the sanctuary or auditorium are not
equipped with fixed seats, benches, or pews, the parking requirement for those
portions is one space for each 28 square feet of floor area.
               (cc)   In an MD-1 Modified Delta Overlay in existence on May 14,
2025, one space per 333 square feet in floor area if a church has less than
5,000 square feet of floor area and is located in a shopping center with more
than 20,000 square feet in floor area, otherwise one space for each four fixed
seats in the sanctuary or auditorium. If fixed benches or pews are provided,
each 18 inches of length of the fixed bench or pew constitutes one fixed seat
for purposes of this paragraph. If portions of seating areas in the sanctuary
or auditorium are not equipped with fixed seats, benches, or pews, the parking
requirement for those portions is one space for each 28 square feet of floor
area.
            (ii)   Definitions. For purposes of this subsection, “remote
parking” means required off-street parking provided on a lot not occupied by
the main use. “Shared parking” means the use of the same off-street parking
stall to satisfy the off-street parking requirements for two or more uses.
            (iii)   Reconciliation with Section
51-4.301. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this subsection, the off-
street parking regulations in Section
51-4.301 apply to this use. In the event of a conflict between this subsection
and Section
51-4.301, this subsection controls.
            (iv)   Remote and shared parking. A church may use remote and/or
shared parking to satisfy up to 50 percent of its off-street parking
requirements, provided that the remote and/or shared parking is on a lot that
is:
               (aa)   dedicated to parking use by an instrument filed with the
building official and approved by the city attorney’s office;
               (bb)   located in a nonresidential or parking district, as these
districts are defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51A; and
               (cc)   located within 600 feet (including streets and alleys) of
the lot occupied by the church. The distance measured is the shortest distance
between the lots.
            (v)   Distance extension with shuttle service. A remote parking lot
for a church may be located up to one and one-half miles (including streets and
alleys) from the lot occupied by the church if a shuttle service is provided to
transport persons between the church and the remote parking lot. The shuttle
service must be approved by the director of transportation and public works.
            (vi)   Remote parking agreement. An agreement authorizing a church
to use remote parking may be based on a lease of the remote parking spaces if:
               (aa)   the lease is for a minimum term of three years; and
               (bb)   the agreement provides that both the owner of the lot
occupied by the church and the owner of the remote lot shall notify the city of
Dallas in writing if there is a breach of any provision of the lease, or if the
lease is modified or terminated.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A church may permit passengers of mass transportation and car
pools to park on the church parking lot.
            (ii)   The following structures, when located on top of a church
building, are excluded from the height measurement of the church building:
               (aa)   Belfries.
               (bb)   Bell towers.
               (cc)   Campaniles.
               (dd)   Carillons.
               (ee)   Crosses.
               (ff)   Cupolas.
               (gg)   Spires.
               (hh)   Steeples.
      (2)   Rectory.
         (A)   Definition: A dwelling unit for a minister, priest, or rabbi.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential and nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Same as that required for an
equivalent dwelling unit in the district in which the rectory is located.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A rectory located on a church site is part of the church and
is included in the calculations of all zoning requirements for the church.
            (ii)   A rectory not on the church site must comply with the
residential requirements of the district in which it is located.
      (3)   Convent or monastery.
         (A)   Definition: The living quarters or dwelling units for a
religious order or for the congregation of persons under religious vows.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Multiple-family, office, commercial, and
central area districts; specific use permit required in single-family, duplex,
TH, agricultural, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (4)   Cemetery or mausoleum.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A cemetery is a place designated for burial of the dead.
            (ii)   A mausoleum is a building with places for the entombment of
the dead.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in residential
and nonresidential districts except O-1, NO, LO, MO, and GO districts where use
is not permitted.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Cemeteries are subject to Chapter 11 of this code.
      (5)   Reserved. (Ord. Nos. 18849; 19058; 19305; 19455; 27404; 28803;
32864; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.207.   EDUCATIONAL USES.
   Educational uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Public or private school.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   OPEN-ENROLLMENT CHARTER SCHOOL means a public school that is
operated under a charter granted under Subchapter D of Chapter 12 of the Texas
Education Code.
            (ii)   PRIVATE SCHOOL means a school that a student may attend and
thereby be exempt from state law requirements of compulsory attendance at a
public school, and that exists apart from the student’s home.
            (iii)   PUBLIC SCHOOL means a kindergarten, elementary, or
secondary educational institution that is owned or operated by a local
independent school district, or operated under a charter granted under Chapter
12 of the Texas Education Code.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Public school other than an open-enrollment charter school:
Nonresidential districts; specific use permit required in residential
districts.
            (ii)   Open-enrollment charter school or private school: Specific
use permit required in residential and nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), nine and one-half spaces for each senior high school
classroom, otherwise none required.
            (iv)   If an SUP is required for this use, the off-street parking
requirement may be established in the ordinance granting the SUP.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use does not include business, commercial, trade, or
craft schools.
            (ii)   This use must comply with all applicable licensing
requirements.
            (iii)   If this use is nonconforming, the board of adjustment shall
not establish a compliance date for the use under Section
51-4.704(a)(1) unless the owners of more than 50 percent of the land within 200
feet of the lot containing the school file a written petition with the board
requesting that a compliance date be established. In computing the percentage
of land area under this subparagraph, the area of public right-of-way and city-
owned property is excluded. The area of the lots used or owned by the school or
by an entity affiliated with the school is also excluded from the computation.
            (iv)   This use, if nonconforming, may expand its total floor area
by up to 10 percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less, without obtaining
an SUP.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   Business school.
         (A)   Definition: A business enterprise offering instruction and
training in a service or the arts such as secretarial, barber, commercial
artist, computer software, and similar training.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Nonresidential districts except NO
districts; specific use permit required in NO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use does not include schools teaching trades or crafts.
      (4)   Technical school.
         (A)   Definition: A business enterprise offering instruction and
training in a trade such as welding, bricklaying, machinery operation, and
other similar trades or crafts.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), none.
            (ii)   One space per 500 square feet of classroom area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use located in a single family district. Any professional,
personal service, or custom crafts uses accessory to a technical school
providing services to patrons who are not students or school employees must be
parked to the appropriate professional, personal service, and custom crafts use
parking requirement.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (5)   College, university, or seminary.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A college or university is an accredited academic institution
of higher learning beyond the level of secondary school.
            (ii)   A seminary is an institution for the training of candidates
for the priesthood, ministry, or rabbinate.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Multiple-family, O-1, O-2, commercial, and
central area districts; specific use permit required in single-family, duplex,
TH, agricultural, NO, LO, MO, GO, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (6)   College fraternity or sorority house.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for housing a social or service
organization of college students.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Multiple-family, O-1, O-2, commercial, and
central area districts; specific use permit required in single-family, duplex,
TH, agricultural, NO, LO, MO, GO, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (7)   College dormitory.
         (A)   Definition: A college residence hall providing sleeping rooms.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Multiple-family, O-1, O-2, commercial, and
central area districts; specific use permit required in single-family, duplex,
TH, NO, LO, MO, GO, agricultural, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (8)   Library, art gallery, or museum.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment for the loan or display of books or
objects of art, science, or history.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Multiple-family, O-1, O-2, LO, MO, GO,
commercial, central area, and industrial districts; specific use permit
required in single-family, duplex, TH, NO, and agricultural districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use applies only to a library, art gallery, or museum
that is sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and open and available to
the general public. (Ord, Nos. 16802; 17912; 18849; 20159; 20360; 21044; 24271;
27404; 28096; 28803; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.208.   RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT USES.
   Recreation and entertainment uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Public park or playground.
         (A)   Definition: Land planned, developed, or used for active or
passive recreational use by the public that is owned or operated by a public
agency for those purposes.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential districts; nonresidential
districts except O-1.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (2)   Game court center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that contains a court for engaging in
tennis, handball, racquetball, or similar physical activities.
         (B)   Districts permitted: MO, GO, SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts; specific use permit required in LO and agricultural
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use is limited to game courts with a maximum of four
participants.
      (3)   Private recreation club or area.
         (A)   Definition: An area providing private recreational facilities
such as playgrounds, parks, swimming pools, and playing fields.
         (B)   Districts permitted: GO, SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts; specific use permit required in residential, O-1, O-2,
LO, NO, and NS districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (4)   Public golf course.
         (A)   Definition: A golf course open to the public.
         (B)   Districts permitted: NO, LO, MO, GO, GR, LC, HC, central area,
and industrial districts; specific use permit required in residential
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (5)   Country club with private membership.
         (A)   Definition: A private recreational club containing a golf course
and a club house that is available only to the country club membership and
their guests.
         (B)   Districts permitted: GO, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts; specific use permit required in LO, MO, and residential
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
            (i)   If the country club has a restaurant:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 5,000                                 NONE
5,000 to 25,000                            1
25,000 to 50,000                           2
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
            (ii)   If no restaurant: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may contain a private bar, dining room, a swimming
pool, and tennis courts and similar services and recreational facilities.
      (6)   Inside commercial amusement.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that offers entertainment or games of
skill to the general public for a fee and that is wholly enclosed in a
building, including but not limited to a bowling alley or billiard parlor.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts; specific use permit required in GO and agricultural
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), if an SUP is required for this use, the off-street parking
requirements may be established in the ordinance granting the SUP, otherwise
one space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
            (ii)   Delta credits, as defined in Section
51A-4.704(b)(4)(B), may not be used to meet the off-street parking requirement
for a dance hall. No special exception may be granted to the parking
requirements for a dance hall.
            (iii)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, no parking is
required for the restricted track area of a motor track and one space per
additional 200 square feet of floor area.
            (iv)   For a bowling alley: one space for each 200 square feet of
floor area dedicated to bowling lanes.”
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 5,000                                 NONE
5,000 to 25,000                            1
25,000 to 50,000                           2
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (7)   Outside commercial amusement.
         (A)   Definition: A facility offering entertainment or games of skill
to the general public for a fee where any portion of the activity takes place
outside, including, but not limited to a golf driving range, archery range, or
miniature golf course.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts; specific use permit required in A, SC, and GR districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), if an SUP is required for this use, the off-street parking
requirement may be established by the ordinance granting the SUP, otherwise o
[O]ne space for each 200 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (8)   Theatre.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for showing motion pictures or theatrical
performances to an audience inside an enclosed structure.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; specific use permit required in MF-3, MF-4, MO, and GO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (9)   Drive-in theatre.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for showing motion pictures outdoors
where the audience views the motion picture from automobiles or while seated
outside.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts;
specific use permit required in an agricultural district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (10)   Rodeo.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for public performances of rodeo events,
including, but not limited to bronco riding, calf roping, steer wrestling, and
Brahma bull riding.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts; specific use permit required in an agricultural district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (11)   Fairgrounds.
         (A)   Definition: An outside area where a fair, circus, or exhibition
is held.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts; specific use permit required in an agricultural district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (12)   Carnival or circus (temporary).
         (A)   Definition: A temporary traveling show or exhibition that has no
permanent structure or installation.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Special authorization by the building
official as approved in Resolution No. 65-1854.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (13)   Wax museum.
         (A)   Definition: A commercial enterprise that displays wax figures of
famous individuals and events for entertainment.
         (B)   District permitted: Commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; specific use permit required in O-2 and GO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
(Ord. Nos. 16802; 18849; 27183; 27404; 28803; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.209.   BAR AND RESTAURANT USES.
   Bar and restaurant uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Alcoholic beverage establishments.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)    BAR, LOUNGE, OR TAVERN means an establishment principally
for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises that
derives 75 percent or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly (three-month)
basis from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code, for on-premise consumption.
            (ii)   MICROBREWERY, MICRODISTILLERY, OR WINERY means an
establishment for the manufacture, blending, fermentation, processing, and
packaging of alcoholic beverages with a floor area of 10,000 square feet or
less that takes place wholly inside a building. A facility that only provides
tasting or retail sale of alcoholic beverages is not a microbrewery,
microdistillery, or winery use.
            (iii)   PRIVATE-CLUB BAR means an establishment holding a private
club permit under Chapter 32 or 33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code that
derives 35 percent or more of its gross revenue from the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption and that is located within a dry
area as defined in Title 6 (Local Option Elections) of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code. PRIVATE-CLUB BAR does not include a fraternal or veterans
organization, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, holding a
private club permit under Chapter 32 or 33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code. PRIVATE-CLUB BAR does not include the holder of a food and beverage
certificate, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Bar, lounge, or tavern and private club-bar. By SUP only in
SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, industrial, GO, MO, MF-3, and MF-4 districts.
            (ii)   Microbrewery, microdistillery, or winery. By right in
industrial districts with RAR required. By SUP only in SC, GR, LC, HC, and
central area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Bar, lounge, or tavern and private club-bar.
               (aa)   Except as provided in this subparagraph and Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 200 square feet of floor area used for retail
sales and seating. No parking is required for any other floor area.
               (bb)   No parking is required if the use is located in a
building with a floor area of 2,500 square feet or less. No parking is required
for floor area used for the manufacture of alcoholic beverages as an accessory
use to the bar, lounge, or tavern use.
            (ii)   Microbrewery, microdistillery, or winery.
               (aa)   Except as provided in this subparagraph and Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 200 square feet of floor area used for retail
sales and seating. No parking is required for any other floor area.
               (bb)   No parking is required if the use is located in a
building with a floor area of 2,500 square feet or less.
         (D)    Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 5,000                                 NONE
5,000 to 25,000                            1
25,000 to 50,000                           2
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)    Bar, lounge, or tavern and private club-bar.
               (aa)   Food may be prepared and served under this use.
               (bb)   Music, entertainment, or facilities for dancing may be
provided under this use.
               (cc)   The person owning or operating the use shall, upon
request, supply the building official with any records needed to document the
percentage of gross revenue for the previous 12-month period derived from the
sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption.
               (dd)   Unless the person owning or operating the use supplies
the building official with records to prove otherwise, an establishment holding
a private club permit under Chapter 32 or 33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code is presumed to derive 35 percent or more of its gross revenue from the
sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption.
            (ii)   Microbrewery, microdistillery, or winery.
               (aa)   Retail sales of alcoholic beverages and related items and
tastings or sampling are allowed in accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission regulations.
               (bb)   Except for loading, all activities must occur within a
building.
               (cc)   Silos and containers of spent grain are allowed as
outdoor storage. Containers of spent grain must be screened. All other outdoor
storage or repair is prohibited.
               (dd)   If an SUP is required, silos and outdoor storage areas
for spent grain must be shown on the site plan.
               (ee)   Drive-through facilities are prohibited.
               (ff)   This use is permitted as an accessory use if it is
customarily incidental to the main use and occupies no more than 40 percent of
the total floor area of the main use.
      (2)   Drive-in restaurant.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   An establishment principally for the sale and consumption of
food where food service is provided to customers in motor vehicles for
consumption on the premises.
            (ii)   An establishment principally for the sale and consumption of
food which has direct window service allowing customers in motor vehicles to
pick up food for off-premise consumption.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B) and this subparagraph, one space per 200 square feet of
floor area. See additional provisions [Subparagraph (E)] for off-street
stacking requirements. See Section
51-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
            (ii)   No parking is required for the floor area used for the
manufacture of alcoholic beverages as an accessory use to a drive-in
restaurant.
            (iii)   No parking is required if the use is located in a building
with a floor area of 2,500 square feet or less.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 5,000                                 NONE
5,000 to 25,000                            1
25,000 to 50,000                           2
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The total number of stacking spaces required for this use is
as follows:
 
NO. OF DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOWS         TOTAL NUMBER OF STACKING SPACES REQUIRED
1                                    6
2                                    4
Each additional drive-through window 4 additional
 
            (ii)   A remote order station, if any, must be set back at least 27
feet from all streets that allow direct access to the station.
      (3)   Restaurant without drive-in service.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment for the sale and service of food to
customers on the premises, but not in automobiles.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: Commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in MF-3, MF-4, O-2, LO*, MO, and GO districts; *specific
use permit required for a limited use in LO districts if:
               (aa)   the LO district is contiguous to a residential district;
and
               (bb)   the limited use is open past 9 p.m.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B) and this subparagraph, one space for each 200 square feet of
floor area.
            (ii)   As a limited or accessory use, none required.
            (iii)   No parking is required for the floor area used for the
manufacture of alcoholic beverages as an accessory use to a drive-in
restaurant.
            (iv)   No parking is required if the use is located in a building
with a floor area of 2,500 square feet or less.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 5,000                                 NONE
5,000 to 25,000                            1
25,000 to 50,000                           2
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (4)   Reserved.
      (5)   Private club.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment for the association of a group of
people for common purpose, interest, or pleasure.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: SC, GR, HC, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in MF-3, MF-4, O-2, LO*, MO, and GO districts; *specific
use permit required for a limited use in LO districts if:
               (aa)   the LO district is contiguous to a residential district;
and
               (bb)   the limited use is open past 9 p.m.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B) and this subparagraph, one space for each 200 square feet of
floor area used for retail sales and seating. No parking is required for any
other floor area.
            (ii)   No parking is required if the use is located in a building
with a floor area of 2,500 square feet or less.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 5,000                                 NONE
5,000 to 25,000                            1
25,000 to 50,000                           2
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Private club facilities must be available only to members and
their guests.
            (ii)   The private club may include a restaurant or bar, and tennis
courts, swimming pool, or similar recreational facilities.
            (iii)   An establishment that derives 75 percent or more of its
gross revenue on an annual basis from the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-
premise consumption may not be classified as a private club.
      (6)   Catering service.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment that serves and supplies food to be
consumed off premises.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B) and this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, one space per 500
square feet of floor area when contiguous to a property containing a single-
family or handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family
district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 5,000                                 NONE
5,000 to 25,000                            1
25,000 to 50,000                           2
Each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
(Ord. Nos. 16802; 18849; 21735; 22204; 22531; 22995; 26160; 27404; 28700;
33112)
SEC. 51-4.210.   PROFESSIONAL, PERSONAL SERVICE, AND CUSTOM CRAFTS USES.
   Professional, personal service, and custom crafts uses are subject to the
following regulations:
      (1)   Office.
         (A)   Definition: A place for the regular transaction of business.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Office, commercial, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Retail sales, transfer of manufactured goods, or the storage
of commodities is not permitted under this use.
      (2)   Temporary construction or sales office.
         (A)   Definition: A residential structure or other facility
temporarily used as a construction office, a model home for display purposes,
or a sales office in a residential subdivision.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential and nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A temporary construction or sales office must be located on a
platted lot within the subdivision or a site approved by the commission within
an area with an approved preliminary plat.
            (ii)   The building official shall issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a period of one year for a temporary construction or sales
office. The building official may grant up to four extensions of six months
each to the certificate of occupancy for a construction office if the builder
maintains active or continuous construction within the subdivision, and for a
sales office or model home for display purposes if a minimum of 10 lots in the
subdivision are unsold.
            (iii)   A temporary construction or sales office may not be located
in another subdivision or used for construction or sales in another
subdivision.
      (3)   Bank or savings and loan office, with or without drive-in window.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the extension of credit and the
custody, loan, or exchange of money. A bank or savings and loan office, with or
without drive-in window includes regulated lenders licensed in accordance with
Chapter 342 of the Texas Finance Code, but does not include such lenders that
also offer services as a credit access business under Chapter 393 of the Texas
Finance Code.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Office, commercial, central area, and
industrial districts; when the bank or savings and loan has one or more drive-
in windows, then:
            (i)   it is not permitted in NO districts; and
            (ii)   a specific use permit is required in O-1, LO, and NS
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None. See additional provisions
[Subparagraph (E)] for off-street stacking requirements.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Stacking spaces. The following off-street stacking
requirements apply to this use (See Section
51-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally):
               (aa)   The total number of stacking spaces required for teller
windows or stations is as follows:
 
NO. OF TELLER WINDOWS OR STATIONS TOTAL NUMBER OF STACKING SPACES REQUIRED
1                                 5
2                                 10
3                                 15
4                                 18
Each additional teller window or  3 additional
station
 
               (bb)   For purposes of Subparagraph (aa), the term “teller
window or station” means a location where customers in motor vehicles transact
business with an employee of the financial institution by deal drawer or
through the use of a pneumatic tube system or equivalent.
               (cc)   Each unmanned transaction station must have a minimum of
two stacking spaces. For purposes of this subparagraph, the term “unmanned
transaction station” means a location where customers in motor vehicles
transact business with a machine.
      (4)   Trade center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for exhibitions, trade shows, and
conventions.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must have a minimum floor area of 2,000,000 square
feet.
            (ii)   This use must have a site area of at least 100 acres. The
site area may be divided by streets other than a freeway. The area of the
dividing streets is not included in the computation of the site area.
            (iii)   No more than 40 percent of the floor area may be used for
retail sales.
      (5)   Barber and beauty shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility licensed by the state where haircutting,
hairdressing, shaving, trimming beards, facials, manicures, or related services
are performed.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in MF-3, MF-4, O-2, LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (6)   Mortuary or funeral home.
         (A)   Definition: A facility in which dead bodies are prepared for
burial or cremation or funeral services are conducted.
         (B)   Districts permitted: GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (7)   Health studio.
         (A)   Definition: A facility operated to promote physical fitness or
weight control and where manipulated massage or exercises are practiced upon
the human body with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic, or bathing
devices.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in MF-3, MF-4, O-2, LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use includes massage establishments and Turkish bath
houses.
            (ii)   This use does not include a facility operated under a
physician’s direction or where registered physical therapists treat only
patients recommended by a licensed physician.
      (8)   Custom cleaning shop.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment for the custom cleaning of
individual garments, fabrics, rugs, draperies, or other similar items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (9)   Commercial cleaning shop.
         (A)   Definition: A plant for cleaning garments, fabrics, rugs,
draperies, or other similar items on a commercial or bulk basis.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, I-2, and I-
3 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (10)   Self-service laundry or dry cleaning.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for washing or dry cleaning garments and
similar items where customers clean their own clothes.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in MF-3 and MF-4 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (11)   Commercial laundry or dry cleaning.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for laundering or dry cleaning garments
and similar items on a bulk basis.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling use located in a single family district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (12)   Laundry or cleaning pickup and receiving station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that receives and dispenses laundry and
dry cleaning that is processed in bulk by a commercial laundry or dry cleaning
shop located elsewhere.
         (B)   Districts permitted: O-2, GO, commercial, central area, and
industrial districts; limited use in MF-3, MF-4, O-1, NO, LO, and MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In O-1 and NO districts, this use may not occupy more than
1,000 square feet of floor area.
      (13)   Key shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the sale and duplication of keys.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (14)   Shoe repair.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the repair or reconditioning of
footwear, handbags, and other similar articles.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (15)   Tailor, custom sewing, and millinery.
         (A)   Definition: A facility to alter, repair, custom make, and
fashion apparel and millinery.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use does not include a factory for the production or
repair of apparel.
      (16)   Taxidermist.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for preparing, stuffing, and mounting the
skins of animals, birds, and fish.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (17)   Travel bureau.
         (A)   Definition: An agency engaging in the selling or arranging of
transportation, trips, or tours for individuals or groups.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in O-2, LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (18)   Broadcasting or recording studio.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A broadcasting studio is a facility for broadcasting live or
prerecorded programs by radio or television.
            (ii)   A recording studio is a facility for recording on records,
tapes, video tapes, or other suitable recording media.
         (B)   Districts permitted: O-2, MO, GO, SC, GR, LC, HC, central area,
and industrial districts; limited use in LO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A broadcasting or recording studio may perform activities
necessary for the recording, programming, and receiving of radio or television
signals.
            (ii)   A broadcasting or recording studio may not engage in the
mass production of records, video tapes, or other recorded media.
      (19)   Instructional arts studio.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the instructing, coaching, or
counseling in art, music, ceramics, drama, speech, dance, or similar personal
skills or arts.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: O-2, GO, commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; specific use permit required in MO districts.
            (ii)   As a limited use: LO and MO districts (no SUP required).
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (20)   Handcrafted art work studio.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for individuals to create art objects
such as needlework, hand weaving, leather goods, jewelry, ceramics, sculptures,
or other works of art.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use does not include a factory for the production of art
products.
      (21)   Handcrafted bookbinding.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for custom hand binding of books and
similar documents.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (22)   Photography studio.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for taking and processing pictures.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in O-2, LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use does not include a bulk photography processing
plant.
      (23)   Safe deposit boxes.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment offering storage areas which may be
used for the keeping of personal items, including but not limited to jewelry,
silverware, valuable metals, and stones.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Each storage area must not exceed 10 cubic feet in size.
      (24)   Commercial wedding chapel.
         (A)   Definition: A facility, not associated with a church, where a
wedding is performed for a profit.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may provide reception areas, but no alcoholic
beverages may be sold.
      (25)   Alternative financial establishment.
         (A)   Definitions: In this paragraph:
            (i)   ALTERNATIVE FINANCIAL ESTABLISHMENT means a car title loan
business or money services business. An alternative financial establishment
does not include state or federally chartered banks, community development
financial institutions, savings and loans, credit unions, or regulated lenders
licensed in accordance with Chapter 342 of the Texas Finance Code. If a
regulated lender licensed in accordance with Chapter 342 of the Texas Finance
Code also offers services as a credit access business under Chapter 393 of the
Texas Finance Code, that business is an alternative financial establishment.
            (ii)   CAR TITLE LOAN BUSINESS means an establishment that makes
small, short-term consumer loans secured by a title to a motor vehicle.
            (iii)   MONEY SERVICES BUSINESS means a business that provides or
assists a consumer in obtaining a payday cash advance, payroll advance, short-
term cash loan, short term cash advance, instant payday cash advance, short-
term money loan services, or similar services to individuals for a specified
fee.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in all nonresidential districts
except the NO, NS, and P districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No alternative financial establishment may be located within
1,500 feet, measured from property line to property line, of any other
alternative financial establishment.
            (ii)   No alternative financial establishment may be located within
300 feet, measured from property line to property line, from a lot in a
residential district.
            (iii)   An alternative financial establishment may only be a main
use that requires a specific use permit and a certificate of occupancy. An
alternative financial establishment may not be an accessory use within the
meaning of Section 51A-4.217. (Ord. Nos. 16802; 16872; 17092; 18849; 19061;
19928; 22995; 24439; 27404; 28214; 28803; 29589; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.211.   RETAIL USES.
      (1)   Retail stores other than listed.
         (A)   Definition: Any use not listed in this chapter that offers
consumer goods for inside retail sale.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: One space for each 200 square feet
of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   See Section
51-4.605 for design standards applicable to uses of 100,000 square feet or
more.
      (2)   Antique shop.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment for the retail sale of articles
such as glass, china, furniture, or similar furnishings and decorations that
have value and significance as a result of age, design, or sentiment.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Accessory open storage is permitted under this use only in a
district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
            (ii)   The accessory outside sale and display of furniture is
permitted if the furniture is:
               (aa)   customarily used outside; and
               (bb)   made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (iii)   The accessory outside sale and display of furniture, other
than the furniture described in Section
51-4.211(2)(E)(ii), is permitted only on Saturday and Sunday.
      (3)   Retail food store.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment for the display and retail sale of
foods and associated items.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in MF-3 and MF-4 districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   See Section
51-4.605 for design standards applicable to uses of 100,000 square feet or
more.
      (4)   Bakery or confectionery shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for preparing, cooking, baking, and the
retail sale of candy, baked goods, or other sweets.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Under this use, all goods baked or cooked on the premises
must be retailed on the same premises.
      (5)   Book and stationery store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of books, pamphlets,
papers, pens, ink, and associated items.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in MF-3, MF-4, LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (6)   Camera shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of cameras, film,
photographic paper, auxiliary lenses, photofinishing, photofinishing material,
projection equipment, and other photography-related items.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (7)   Cigar, tobacco, and candy store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of cigars,
cigarettes, pipe tobacco, candies, and other related items.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in MF-3, MF-4, O-2, LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (8)   Clothing store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of apparel.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (9)   Drug store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the preparing, preserving,
compounding, and the retail sale of drugs and medicines.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in MF-3, MF-4, O-2, LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may include the display and sale of other
merchandise such as cosmetics, notions, fountain sodas, nonalcoholic beverages,
and other similar items.
      (10)   Liquor store.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment principally for the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, for off-
premise consumption.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Commercial, central area, industrial, GO,
MO, MF-3, and MF-4 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions: If a use has drive-in or drive-through
service and has less than 10,000 square feet of floor area, the use shall be
classified as a convenience store with drive-through under Paragraph (23).
      (11)   Florist store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of cut or uncut
flowers and ornamental plants and associated items.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (12)   Feed store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of grain, prepared
feed, and forage for pets, livestock, and fowl.
         (B)   Districts permitted: GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The grinding, mixing, or commercial compounding of livestock
feed is not permitted under this use.
      (13)   Pet shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the display and retail sale of small
animals, fish, and birds as pets.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use does not include commercial boarding or medical
treatment of any animal, fish, or bird.
      (14)   Furniture store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the display and retail sale of new
furniture and appliances.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   See Section
51-4.605 for design standards applicable to uses of 100,000 square feet or
more.
            (ii)   The accessory outside sale and display of furniture is
permitted if the furniture is:
               (aa)   customarily used outside; and
               (bb)   made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (iii)   The accessory outside sale and display of furniture, other
than the furniture described in Section
51-4.211(14)(E)(ii), is permitted only on Saturday and Sunday.
      (15)   Second hand store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of used merchandise.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, I-2, and I-
3 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Accessory open storage is permitted under this use only in a
district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
            (ii)   The accessory outside sale and display of furniture is
permitted if the furniture is:
               (aa)   customarily used outside; and
               (bb)   made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (iii)   The accessory outside sale and display of furniture, other
than the furniture described in Section
51-4.211(15)(E)(ii), is permitted only on Saturday and Sunday.
      (16)   Pawn shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for loaning money on the security of
personal property and the sale of unclaimed property.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, I-2, and I-3 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
            (ii)   A pawnshop legally operating as a permitted use or a
nonconforming use on March 1, 1989, is entitled to relocate to another site in
the same zoning district or classification in which it is located on March 1,
1989, provided the relocation is completed before the first anniversary of the
date that the pawnshop ceased doing business at the previous location.
      (17)   Hardware or sporting goods store.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   A hardware store is a facility for the retail sale of items
such as cutlery, tools, utensils, screws, nails, and similar items.
            (ii)   A sporting goods store is a facility for the retail sale of
athletic equipment, clothing, and other sports related items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (18)   Home improvement center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of home, lawn, and
garden supplies.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   See Section
51-4.605 for design standards applicable to uses of 100,000 square feet or
more.
            (ii)   In all districts where this use is permitted, accessory
outside sales, display of merchandise, or storage may occupy up to 25 percent
of the lot.
      (19)   Hobby and art supplies store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of model kits, art
equipment and materials, and similar art and hobby supplies.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: Commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (20)   Paint and wallpaper store.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of paints, painting
equipment, and wallpaper.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Commercial, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (21)   Swimming pool sales and supply.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the display, retail sale, and service
of swimming pools and related supplies.
         (B)   Districts permitted: GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (22)   Outside sales.
         (A)   Definition: A site for the outside retail sale of general
merchandise or food.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Central area districts; specific use permit
required in industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 60,000                                1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, outside sales
is considered to be a separate main use if it occupies more than five percent
of the lot. Outside sales on less than five percent of the lot may qualify as
an accessory use if it is customarily incidental to a main use. See Section
51-4.217.
      (23)   Convenience store with drive-through.
         (A)   Definition: A business that is primarily engaged in the retail
sale of convenience goods, or both convenience goods and gasoline, that has
drive-in or drive-through service and has less than 10,000 square feet of floor
area. For purposes of this definition, CONVENIENCE GOODS means food, beverage,
household, personal care, and pharmaceutical items. A gasoline pump is not
considered a drive-in or drive-through service.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in SC, GR, LC,
HC, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A minimum of two stacking spaces must be provided. See
Section
51-4.304 for more information regarding off-street stacking spaces generally.
            (ii)   The accessory outside sale and display of furniture is
permitted if the furniture is:
               (aa)   customarily used outside; and
               (bb)   made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (iii)   The accessory outside sale and display of furniture, other
than the furniture described in Section
51-4.211(23)(E)(ii), is permitted only on Saturday and Sunday.
            (iv)   This use must comply with Chapter 12B, “Convenience Stores,”
of the Dallas City Code.
      (24)   Paraphernalia shop.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment that displays or offers for sale
any “illegal smoking paraphernalia” as that term is defined in Chapter 31 of
the Dallas City Code or any other smoking paraphernalia that is commonly used,
or commonly known to be used, for the inhalation of tobacco or illegal
substances. For purposes of this definition, rolling papers, tobacco
cigarettes, and tobacco cigars are not considered paraphernalia.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in SC, GR, LC, HC, I-1, I-2,
and I-3.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: One space.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,500 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of any other paraphernalia shop.
            (ii)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,000 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of a lot in a residential
district.
            (iii)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,000 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of a lot with a school.
            (iv)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,000 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of a lot with a child-care
facility.
            (v)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,000 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of a lot with a college,
university, or seminary.
            (vi)   A paraphernalia shop may not be located within 1,000 feet,
measured from property line to property line, of a lot with a church.
            (vii)   A paraphernalia shop may not have a drive-in or drive-
through or walk-up window.
            (viii)   The outside sale, display, or storage of products is
prohibited.
            (ix)   A paraphernalia shop may only be a main use that requires a
certificate of occupancy. A paraphernalia shop may not be an accessory use
within the meaning of Section
51-4.217. (Ord. Nos. 16802; 18849; 19581; 20242; 21735; 22204; 25785; 26746;
27404; 28079; 28803; 30477; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.212.   MOTOR VEHICLE RELATED USES.
      (1)   Automobile or motorcycle display, sales, and service (inside
display).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of motor vehicle
fuel, lubricating oils, and parts for use in motor vehicles and a facility for
the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel dispensed from electric vehicle supply
equipment (EVSE) excluding an accessory electric vehicle charging station.”
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
            (ii)   Vehicles being displayed, sold, serviced, or repaired must
be parked on site.
      (2)   Automobile or motorcycle display, sales, and service (outside
display).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the display, service, rental, or
retail sale of new or used automobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters,
recreational vehicles, and trailers, excluding overside motor vehicles and
oversize trailers, with outside display permitted.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Outside display and open storage of new or used vehicles for
sale are permitted under this use without visual screening.
            (ii)   New or used vehicles for sale may be displayed or stored in
the required front yard under this use.
            (iii)   Vehicles being displayed, sold, serviced, or repaired must
be parked on site.
      (3)   Auto auction.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the sale of automobiles to the
highest bidder.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in HC, central
area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (4)   Auto glass, muffler, or seat cover shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale, installation, or
replacement of auto glass, mufflers, or set covers.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   None.
            (ii)   Parking spaces that are used to repair motor vehicles and
located in a structure are not counted in determining the required parking.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (5)   Auto parts sales (inside only).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of auto parts, tools,
and related items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
      (6)   Auto parts sales (outside display).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of auto parts, tools,
and related items with outside display permitted.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in HC and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (7)   Auto repair garage (inside).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the repair of motor vehicles.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   None.
            (ii)   Parking spaces that are used to repair motor vehicles and
located in a structure are not counted in satisfying the required parking.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
            (ii)   Vehicles being serviced or repaired must be parked on site.
      (8)   Auto repair garage (outside).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the repair of motor vehicles with
outside repair or display permitted.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   None.
            (ii)   Parking spaces that are used to repair motor vehicles and
located in a structure are not counted in determining the required parking.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
            (ii)   Vehicles being serviced or repaired must be parked on site.
      (9)   Auto painting or body rebuilding shop (inside).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for restoring, painting, or refinishing
auto bodies.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Parking spaces that are used to repair motor vehicles and
located in a structure are not counted in determining the required parking.
            (iii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area, a minimum
of five spaces required, only when contiguous to a property containing a
single-family or handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family
district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
      (10)   Auto painting or body rebuilding shop (outside).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for restoring, painting, or refinishing
auto bodies, with outside display and repair permitted.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Parking spaces that are used to repair motor vehicles and
located in a structure are not counted in determining the required parking.
            (iii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area, a minimum
of five spaces required, only when contiguous to a property containing a
single-family or handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family
district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (11)   Car wash.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the washing or steam cleaning of
passenger vehicles. A car wash may be:
            (i)   a single unit type which has a single bay or a group of
single bays with each bay to accommodate one vehicle only; or
            (ii)   a tunnel unit type which allows washing of multiple vehicles
in a tandem arrangement while moving through the structure.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None. See the additional provisions
[Subparagraph (E)] for off-street stacking requirements.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Required off-street stacking: Three stacking spaces for each
bay in a single unit car wash; 25 spaces for each tunnel unit car wash.
            (ii)   Spaces used to wash motor vehicles and located in a
structure are not counted in determining the required stacking.
      (12)   Steam cleaning of vehicles and machinery.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for steam cleaning of vehicles and their
parts or other items of machinery.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   None.
            (ii)   Parking spaces that are used to repair motor vehicles and
located in a structure are not counted in determining the required parking.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional Provisions: Vehicles being serviced or repaired must
be parked on site.
      (13)   Service station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the retail sale of motor vehicle
fuel, lubricating oils, and parts for use in motor vehicles.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts; limited use in O-2, LO, MO, and GO districts; specific
use permit required in an NS district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   None.
            (ii)   Parking spaces that are used to repair motor vehicles and
located in a structure are not counted in determining the required parking.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Limited use regulations:
            (i)   This use is subject to the following limited use regulations
instead of the regulations contained in Section
51-4.218.
            (ii)   The service station use as a limited use must be secondary
to a main use, and may be available only to the owner and tenant of the main
building and not available to the general public.
            (iii)   The dispensing of motor vehicle fuel must be limited to one
pump for each main building.
            (iv)   The motor vehicle fuel pump and any sign relating to this
use must not be visible from the public street. No sign may be erected
indicating the availability of gasoline.
            (v)   All storage tanks for motor vehicle fuel must be located
underground.
         (F)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A gasoline service station pump island or station canopies
may be located 18 feet or more from a property line.
            (ii)   The rental of trailers that can be pulled by passenger
automobiles is permitted as an accessory use.
            (iii)   A gasoline pump island must be constructed in a manner that
allows vehicular access adjacent to the gasoline pump island without
interference with or obstruction to off-street parking. Determination of the
proper placement of gasoline pump islands must be based on the dimensions in
the City of Dallas manual, “Layout and Design Standards for Parking Lots,”
which is expressly adopted as part of this subsection. A person shall obtain
approval from the director for the placement of a gasoline pump island before
the building official may issue a building permit for the construction.
            (iv)   Except for compression cylinder tanks used in connection
with compressed natural gas fueling facilities, all storage tanks for motor
vehicle fuel must be located underground.
            (v)   Compression cylinder tanks used in connection with compressed
natural gas fueling facilities must be screened from adjacent streets, alleys,
and residential uses.
            (vi)   Charging equipment may not obstruct a required off-street
parking space. A charging cord may not cross over a sidewalk or pedestrian
walkway.
            (vii)   When six feet or less in height, structures and equipment
associated with this use may be located where an off-street parking space is
allowed.
            (viii)   Vehicles being serviced or repaired must be parked on
site.
      (14)   Engine or motor repair shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the disassembly, rebuilding, and
repair of motor vehicle engines, electrical motors, vehicle transmissions, or
other major machinery components.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area; with a
minimum of five spaces required only when contiguous to a property containing a
single-family or handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family
district.
            (iii)   Parking spaces that are used to repair vehicles and located
in a structure are not counted in determining the required parking.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   General vehicle repair is not a part of this use.
            (ii)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
      (15)   Bus or truck repair/parking garage.
         (A)   Definition: A facility in which currently licensed buses or
trucks are stored or repaired.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area of repair garage with a minimum of
five spaces required; no parking required for a parking garage.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (16)   Drag strip, go-cart track, or commercial racing.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for motor vehicle races, including closed
course, straightaway, or acceleration runs.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts;
specific use permit required in an agricultural district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading. None.
      (17)   Surface parking.
         (A)   Definition: A passenger vehicle parking facility.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Parking district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   All parking must be at grade level.
            (ii)   A commercial parking lot or garage is not permitted under
this use.
            (iii)   No structure is permitted under this use except signs and
required screening.
            (iv)   The owner of surface parking must maintain a minimum front
yard of 10 feet when the surface parking is contiguous to a residential
district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51A.
      (18)   Commercial parking lot or garage.
         (A)   Definition: A vehicle parking facility that is not managed by a
main use on the same lot.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in all nonresidential districts.
Compliance with residential adjacency standard as described in Section
51-4.803, as amended, in all nonresidential districts is required.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None; however, if this use is in
the central business district, off-street stack spaces or passenger unloading
zones may need to be provided. For more information regarding off-street
parking in the central business district, see Section
51-4.306.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The parking of oversized motor vehicles is prohibited under
this use.
            (ii)   This use must comply with the off-street parking regulations
in Division 51-4.300 et seq. (Ord. Nos. 18268; 18849; 19063; 19455; 20237;
20272; 27404; 28073; 28737; 28803; 32441; 32907; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.213.   COMMERCIAL USES.
   Commercial uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Appliance fix-it shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the repair of household and home
equipment such as radios, televisions, electrical appliances, lawn mowers,
tools, and similar items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts; specific use permit required in a NS district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
      (2)   Custom furniture construction, repair, or upholstery shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for making, repairing, or reupholstering
furniture on a single item basis.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use located in a single family district
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Specialized equipment for custom making, repairing, and
reupholstering furniture is permitted under this use.
      (3)   Building repair and maintenance shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility providing general building repair and
maintenance service.
         (B)   Districts permitted: GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use located in a single family district.”
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
      (4)   Plumbing, electrical, air conditioning, and heating shops.
         (A)   Definition: A facility providing supplies, repair, and
installation of plumbing, electrical, air conditioning, and heating equipment.
         (B)   Districts permitted: GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 [300] square feet of floor area only
when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use located in a single family district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (5)   Lumber, brick, or building materials sales yard.
         (A)   Definition: A facility where brick, lumber, and other similar
building materials are sold and stored.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
            (ii)   In all districts where this use is permitted, accessory
outside sales and display of merchandise may occupy up to 100 percent of the
lot.
      (6)   Machinery sales and services.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for selling, servicing, and repairing
machinery.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in this Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 300 square feet of floor area, or one
space for each 1,000 square feet of site are including the floor area,
whichever is greater when contiguous to a property containing a single-family
or handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside welding is permitted under this use.
            (ii)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use
is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (7)   Machine or welding shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility in which material is processed by
machining, cutting, grinding, welding, or similar processes.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use located in a single family district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (8)   Tool and equipment rental (inside display only).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for renting tools and equipment with no
outside display.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), o[O]ne space for each 500 square feet of floor area is
required only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
      (9)   Tool and equipment rental (with outside display).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for renting tools and equipment with
outside display permitted.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 [200] square feet of floor area is
required only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (10)   Petroleum products storage and wholesale.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the storage and sale of petroleum
products.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
            (ii)   In the I-2 and I-3 districts, petroleum products storage and
wholesale must be visually screened on any side that is within 200 feet of and
visible from a thoroughfare or an adjacent property that is not zoned an I-2 or
I-3 district. For purposes of this paragraph, adjacent means across the street
or sharing a common lot line.
      (11)   Monument sales yard.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for stocking and selling memorial stones
and gravestones.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, CA-2, I-2, and I-3 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (12)   Mining.
         (A)   Definition: The extraction, removal, or stockpiling of earth
materials, including soil, sand, gravel, oil, or other materials found in the
earth. The excavation of earth materials for ponds or lakes, including
excavations for fish farming ponds and recreational lakes, are considered
mining unless otherwise expressly authorized by another provision of this code.
The following are not considered mining:
            (i)   The extraction, removal, or stockpiling of earth materials
incidental to an approved plat or excavation permit, incidental to construction
with a building permit, or for governmental or utility construction projects
such as streets, alleys, drainage, gas, electrical, water, and telephone
facilities and similar projects.
            (ii)   The extraction, removal, or stockpiling of earth materials
incidental to construction of landscaping, retaining walls, fences, and similar
activities consistent with the land use allowed at the site of removal.
            (iii)   Gas drilling and production. See 51-4.213(19).
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in MH, A, O-2,
commercial, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The applicant shall submit a site plan of existing
conditions, operations plan, reclamation plan, and the proposed bond to the
director for review and recommendation.
            (ii)   If a specific use permit is granted, the city shall inspect
and monitor the mining and reclamation operation at least once annually.
            (iii)   A specific use permit may not be issued for mining on city
park land.
         (F)   Site plan of existing conditions: The applicant shall submit a
site plan of existing conditions that includes:
            (i)   a site location map on a small scale showing major
circulation routes and other landmarks which would aid in the location of the
site;
            (ii)   contours shown at no greater than five-foot intervals;
            (iii)   connection to roads outside the site;
            (iv)   location, identification, and dimensions of all public and
private easements;
            (v)   location of flood plain, water bodies, natural and man-made
channels (wet and dry), and subsurface channels;
            (vi)   tree and other vegetation groupings, rock outcroppings, and
other significant natural features;
            (vii)   location and depth of any known former or current mines or
landfills in or within 500 feet of the boundaries of the excavation and an
indication of the type of fill used;
            (viii)   analyzed core samples if the city determines that
contaminants may be present; and
            (ix)   any other information the director determines is reasonably
necessary for a complete review of the proposed operations.
         (G)   Operations plan: The applicant shall submit an operations plan
that includes:
            (i)   storage of reclamation topsoil and methods of disposing of
all material not to be sold or reclaimed;
            (ii)   hours of operation;
            (iii)   location and depth of excavation;
            (iv)   drainage and erosion control measures;
            (v)   method for the disposal of contaminants, if present;
            (vi)   roads to be used for transportation of stone, sand, or
gravel;
            (vii)   fences or any other barriers necessary for safety;
            (viii)   noise and dust control measures;
            (ix)   the length of time necessary to complete the mining and
reclamation of the site; and
            (x)   any other information the director determines is reasonably
necessary for a complete review of the proposed operations.
         (H)   Reclamation plan: The applicant shall submit a reclamation plan
that is verified by a registered surveyor. The reclamation plan must show the
reclamation of the entire site upon completion of operation and phases of
reclamation to be completed at no greater than five-year intervals. The
reclamation plan must include the following information:
            (i)   contours shown at no greater than five-foot intervals with
slopes not steeper than a three-to-one (horizontal to vertical) ratio;
            (ii)   circulation routes, including roadways, any internal
circulation, rights-of-way, and connections to roads outside the site;
            (iii)   location, identification, and dimensions of all public and
private easements;
            (iv)   location of flood plain, water bodies, natural and man-made
channels (wet and dry), subsurface dams, dikes, or channels;
            (v)   location of any areas to be filled with water including a
description of the source of the water, the means of water retention, and the
prevention of stagnation and pollution;
            (vi)   location and type of vegetation;
            (vii)   structures (including height), utilities, and proposed land
uses, if any;
            (viii)   the amount of the performance bond that will be posted in
accordance with Subparagraph (I) below; and
            (ix)   any other information the director determines is reasonably
necessary for a complete review of the proposed operation.
         (I)   Performance bond:
            (i)   The applicant shall post a performance bond with the city
controller before passage of the ordinance granting the specific use permit.
The performance bond must be approved as to form by the city attorney.
            (ii)   The bond must be twice the estimated cost to the city of
restoring the premises in a manner shown on the reclamation plan. The amount of
the bond shall be determined by the director on the basis of relevant factors
including expected changes in the price index, topography of the site, project
methods being employed, depth and composition of overburden, and data provided
in the reclamation plan.
            (iii)   The bond must be issued by a surety company licensed to do
business in Texas. The applicant may deposit cash, certificates of deposit, or
government securities in lieu of a bond. Interest received on deposits and
securities must be returned to the applicant upon the approval of reclamation
of the site.
            (iv)   The director shall conduct a final inspection to determine
whether the site has been reclaimed in accordance with the specific use permit.
Final inspection must be made not more than two years after the expiration of
the specific use permit. A registered surveyor provided by the applicant shall
verify the final topography of the site.
            (v)   The director shall report to the city council on the
completion of the project. The city council shall determine by resolution
whether the reclamation has been completed in accordance with the specific use
permit and whether the performance bond should be released.
            (vi)   The city controller shall release the bond or deposit if the
city council finds that the applicant has completed reclamation of the site in
accordance with the specific use permit. If the site is not restored in
accordance with the reclamation plan, the director shall use the bond or
deposit to restore the site in accordance with the plan.
      (13)   Sand, gravel, or earth sales and storage.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for storing and selling sand, gravel, and
earth.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-3 districts; specific use permit required
in A, HC, and I-2 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No mining is permitted under this use.
            (ii)   In all districts, where this use is permitted, accessory
outside sales, display of merchandise, or storage may occupy up to 100 percent
of the lot.
            (iii)   In the I-2 and I-3 districts, sand, gravel, or earth sales
and storage must be visually screened on any side that is within 200 feet of
and visible from a thoroughfare or an adjacent property that is not zoned an I-
2 or I-3 district. For purposes of this paragraph, adjacent means across the
street or sharing a common lot line.
      (14)   Job printing, lithographer, printing, or blueprinting plant.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the commercial reproduction of
written material or drawings on a bulk basis using lithography, offset
printing, blueprinting, and similar methods.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), o[O]ne space for each 500 square feet of floor area is
required only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district.”
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (15)   Duplication shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the reproduction on standard or legal
sized paper of material by office type photocopiers.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: Commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in O-2, LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   A retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
required in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (16)   Custom print shop.
         (A)   Definition: A facility which performs custom printing.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts; specific use permit required in a GR district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No more than two printing presses with a maximum weight of
1,000 pounds each are permitted under this use.
            (ii)   The floor area for the printing presses may not exceed 400
square feet.
            (iii)   The noise level under this use may not exceed 63 decibels
as measured at the exterior walls of the print shop.
      (17)   Gummed label printing.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the cutting, printing, and binding of
labels made from gummed paper.
         (B)   Districts permitted: GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (18)   Venetian blind or window shade repair, assembly, and sales.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the repair, assembly, or sale of
Venetian blinds and window shades.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area is
required only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district.”
         (D)   Required off-loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (19)   Gas drilling and production.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   BOUNDARY means the perimeter of the operation site. OPERATION
SITE means the area identified in the SUP to be used for drilling, production,
and all associated operational activities after gas drilling is complete.
            (ii)   ENVIRONMENTALLY SIGNIFICANT AREA means an area:
               (aa)   with slopes greater than three to one;
               (bb)   containing endangered species of either flora or fauna;
               (cc)   that is geologically similar to the Escarpment Zone, as
defined in Division 51A-5.200, “Escarpment Regulations,” of Article V, “Flood
Plain and Escarpment Zone Regulations;”
               (dd)   identified as wetlands or wildlife habitat;
               (ee)   determined to be an archeological or historical site; or
               (ff)   containing more than 1,000 inches of trunk diameter of
protected trees, in the aggregate, within a 10,000 square foot area. Trunk
diameter is measured at a point 12 inches above grade. To be included in the
aggregate calculations of trunk diameter, a protected tree must have a trunk
diameter of six inches or more. For purposes of this provision, a protected
tree is defined in Section 5A-10.101.
            (iii)   GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION means the activities related to
the extraction of any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, that is
produced in a natural state from the earth and that maintains a gaseous or
rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions, or the
extraction of any gaseous vapors derived from petroleum or natural gas.
            (iv)   HABITABLE STRUCTURE means any use or structure that is not a
protected use but has a means of ingress or egress, light, and ventilation.
Habitable structure does not include an accessory structure, such as a garage
or shed.
            (v)   PROTECTED USE means institutional and community service uses
(except cemetery or mausoleum); lodging uses; office uses; recreation uses
(except when the operation site is on a public park, playground, or golf
course); residential uses; and retail and personal service uses (except
commercial motor vehicle parking or commercial parking lot or garage). Parking
areas and areas used exclusively for drainage detention are not part of a
protected use.
            (vi)   See Article XII for additional definitions that apply to gas
drilling and production.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in all districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   See Article XII for additional regulations relating to gas
drilling and production. No provision found in Articles IV or XII may be waived
through the adoption of or amendment to a planned development district.
            (ii)   Before an SUP for a gas drilling and production use within a
public park, playground, or golf course may be processed, city council must
hold a public hearing and make a determination in accordance with Texas Parks
and Wildlife Code Chapter 26, “Protection of Public Parks and Recreational
Lands.”
            (iii)   A favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the
city council is required to approve a gas drilling and production use on a
public park, playground, or golf course if city council finds that the approval
will not harm the public health, safety, or welfare.
            (iv)   In addition to the findings required in Section
51-4.219 for the granting of an SUP, city plan commission and city council must
consider the:
               (aa)   proximity of a proposed gas drilling and production use
to an environmentally significant area; and
               (bb)   potential impact the proposed gas drilling and production
use may have on the environmentally significant area.
            (v)   Compliance with federal and state laws and regulations and
with city ordinances, rules, and regulations is required, and may include
platting, a flood plain fill or alteration permit, building permits, and gas
well permits. Compliance with these additional regulations may be required
before, concurrently with, after, or independently of the SUP process.
            (vi)   Trailers or mobile homes that are temporarily placed on the
operation site and used by gas drilling workers as a residence are a permitted
accessory use.
            (vii)   Once any gas drilling related activity begins on the
operation site, the applicant shall limit access to the operation site by
erecting an eight-foot-tall temporary chain-link fence. Within 30 days after
any well completion activity ceases, an eight-foot-tall permanent fence must be
erected and maintained around the perimeter of the operation site. This
provision controls over the fence height regulations of the zoning district.
City council, by SUP, may require a different form of screening, but may not
reduce the fence height requirements of this provision.
            (viii)   Access to the operation site must comply with the Dallas
Fire Code. The operation site plan must be reviewed and approved by the fire
marshal before an SUP can be granted.
            (ix)   The operation site may not have a slope greater than 10
degrees unless the director determines that all equipment is located and
activities occur on a portion of the operation site that does not have a slope
greater than 10 degrees, there is adequate erosion control, and the slope of
the operation site will not be a threat to the public safety or welfare.
            (x)   The operator shall provide the director with a statement of
intent to enter into a road repair agreement before an SUP may be scheduled for
a public hearing.
            (xi)   The director shall revise the zoning district maps upon the
granting of an SUP for a gas drilling and production use, to provide a 1,000
foot gas drilling and production use notice overlay around the boundary of the
operation site.
         (F)   Spacing:
            (i)   Habitable structure.
               (aa)   Except as otherwise provided in this provision, a gas
drilling and production use must be spaced at least 300 feet from a habitable
structure.
               (bb)   If a gas drilling and production use is located on the
same property as a habitable structure, the spacing requirements in this
provision may be waived for that habitable structure with a favorable vote of
two-thirds of all members of the city council if city council finds that the
reduction will not harm the public health, safety, or welfare.
               (cc)   Spacing is measured from the boundary of the operation
site in a straight line, without regard for intervening structures or objects,
to the closest point of the habitable structure.
            (ii)   Protected use.
               (aa)   Except as otherwise provided in this provision, a gas
drilling and production use must be spaced at least 1,500 feet from a protected
use (except trailers or mobile homes placed on the operation site as temporary
residences for workers).
               (bb)   City council may reduce the minimum 1,500 foot spacing
requirement from a protected use by not more than 500 feet with a favorable
vote of two-thirds of all members of the city council if city council finds
that the reduction will not harm the public health, safety, or welfare.
               (cc)   If a gas drilling and production use is located on the
same property as a protected use, the spacing requirements in this provision
may be waived for that protected use with a favorable vote of two-thirds of all
members of the city council if city council finds that the reduction will not
harm the public health, safety, or welfare.
               (dd)   If a gas drilling and production use is located on a
public park, playground, or golf course, the spacing requirements in this
subparagraph do not apply to protected uses or habitable structures located on
the public park, playground, or golf course. The spacing requirements in this
provision for protected uses and habitable structures off the public park,
playground, or golf course use still apply.
               (ee)   Spacing is measured as follows:
                  (11)   For institutional and community service uses (except
cemetery or mausoleum), and residential uses, from the boundary of the
operation site in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, to the property line of the institutional and community service use
(except cemetery or mausoleum) or the residential use.
                  (22)   For recreation uses (except when the operation site is
on a public park, playground, or golf course), lodging uses, office uses, and
retail and personal service uses (except commercial motor vehicle parking or
commercial parking lot or garage), from the boundary of the operation site in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the
closest point of a physical barrier or demarcation that establishes a boundary
of the protected the use. Examples of physical barriers or demarcations include
fencing around activity areas, such as play fields, courts, or pools; or edges,
borders, or boundaries of maintained areas adjacent to trails, golf courses, or
active recreation areas. If the protected use is conducted exclusively inside,
from the boundary of the operation site in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, to the closest point of the structure
housing the protected use.
         (G)   Neighborhood meeting:
            (i)   Within 60 days after filing an SUP application, the applicant
or operator shall, at the applicant or operator’s expense, provide notice of a
neighborhood meeting regarding the pending SUP application.
            (ii)   The applicant or operator shall mail notice of the
neighborhood meeting by depositing the notice properly addressed and postage
paid in the United States mail. The notice must be written in English and
Spanish. The applicant or operator shall mail notice of the neighborhood
meeting to all real property owners as indicated by the most recent appraisal
district records and all mailing addresses within 2,000 feet of the boundary of
the proposed gas drilling and production use operation site.
            (iii)   The notice of the neighborhood meeting must include:
               (aa)   the date, time, and location of the neighborhood meeting;
               (bb)   the identity of the applicant and the operator;
               (cc)   the location of the pending SUP application;
               (dd)   information about the proposed gas drilling and
production use;
               (ee)   the purpose of the neighborhood meeting; and
               (ff)   information about subscribing to the operator’s
electronic notification list to receive updates about when specific operations
will occur, including site preparation, drilling, casing, fracturing, pipeline
construction, production, transportation, and maintenance of the operation
site.
            (iv)   Within five days after mailing the notice of the
neighborhood meeting, the applicant shall file an affidavit with the director
swearing and affirming that all real property owners and mailing addresses
within 2,000 feet of the boundary of the proposed gas drilling and production
use operation site were mailed notice of the neighborhood meeting in accordance
with this subparagraph. The affidavit must include a list of the real property
owners and mailing addresses to which notice was sent.
            (v)   The applicant and operator shall attend and conduct the
neighborhood meeting not less than seven or more than 21 days after providing
notice of the neighborhood meeting. The neighborhood meeting must be held at a
facility open to the public near the proposed gas drilling and production use.
            (vi)   The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is for the applicant
or operator to:
               (aa)   inform the community about the proposed gas drilling and
production use;
               (bb)   explain the operations associated with gas drilling and
production, including site preparation, site development and construction,
drilling, casing, fracturing, pipeline construction, production,
transportation, and maintenance of the operation site; and
               (cc)   explain and provide information about subscribing to the
operator’s electronic notification list to receive updates about when specific
operations will occur, including site preparation, drilling, casing,
fracturing, pipeline construction, production, transportation, and maintenance
of the operation site.
      (20)   Computer service center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the service and repair of computers.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area is
required only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district.”
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (21)   Custom commercial engraving.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the engraving or etching of items,
including, but not limited to trophies and name plates, or the laminating of
paper or other items in protective or decorative plastics.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area is
required only when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district.”
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (22)   Garden shop, plant sales, or greenhouse.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the growing, display, and sale of
garden or flower seeds, plants, nursery stock, and related items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In all districts where this use is permitted, accessory
outside sales, display of merchandise, or storage may occupy up to 100 percent
of the lot.
      (23)   Diamond and precious stone sales (wholesale only).
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the sale of diamonds and precious
metals or gems at wholesale only and the occasional mounting of diamonds,
precious gems, and jewelry.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   In general: O-2, commercial, central area, and industrial
districts; limited use in LO, MO, and GO districts.
            (ii)   As a retail-related use: GO districts; specific use permit
in MO districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Retail sales, factories, and showrooms are not permitted
under this use.
      (24)   Design or decorative center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the display of furniture and relative
decorator items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No retail sales are permitted under this use.
            (ii)   This use must have at least 150,000 square feet of floor
area use for merchandise display and accessory office use.
            (iii)   Accessory office use must not exceed 20 percent of the
total floor area.
      (25)   Attached non-premise sign.
         (A)   Definition: A “non-premise sign” as defined in Article VII that
is also an “attached sign” as defined in that article.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   By express authorization in special provision sign districts.
            (ii)   By express authorization and SUP only in planned development
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must be located in or within one mile of the central
business district, and be spaced at least 1,000 feet from all other attached
non-premise signs.
            (ii)   The effective area of this use may not exceed 25 percent of
the area of the facade to which it is attached, or 672 square feet, whichever
is less. No more than 10 percent of the effective area of this use may contain
words, and this use may not contain more than eight words.
            (iii)   An SUP granted for this use must have a time limit of no
more than three years, and is not eligible for automatic renewal.
            (iv)   These use regulations cannot be modified in an ordinance
establishing or amending regulations governing a planned development district.
            (v)   Subparagraphs (i), (ii), and (iii) do not apply when this use
is expressly authorized in a special provision sign district.
            (vi)   No certificate of occupancy is required for this use.
      (26)   Detached non-premise sign.
         (A)   Definition: A “non-premise sign” as defined in Article VII that
is also a “detached sign” as defined in that article.
         (B)   Districts permitted: See Section 51A-7.306 in Chapter 51A.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Legal and non-conforming detached non-premise signs may be
relocated under certain circumstances. See Section 51A-7.307 in Chapter 51A.
            (ii)   No certificate of occupancy is required for this use.
      (27)   Labor Hall.
         (A)   Definitions: In this paragraph:
            (i)   LABOR HALL means any profit or non-profit public or private
entity, whether a corporation, partnership, natural person, or any other legal
entity, whose business involves securing temporary unskilled or agricultural
employment for a client through the use of a hiring hall or facility where
unskilled workers gather to await employment.
            (ii)   UNSKILLED WORKER means an individual who performs labor
involving physical toil that does not require persons engaged in a particular
occupation, craft, or trade, or practical or familiar knowledge of the
principles or processes of an art, science, craft, or trade.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in the industrial districts when
located at least:
            (i)   1000 feet from all conforming residential uses; and
            (ii)   500 feet from all “public or private school” uses.
Otherwise, by SUP in industrial districts. By SUP only in the LC and HC
districts.
         (C)    Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)    Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 500 square feet of floor area only when
contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use located in a single family district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must have a lobby or waiting room with a floor area
of not less than the greater of 500 square feet or 50 percent of the total
floor area of the premises.
            (ii)   Food may be prepared and served as an accessory use.
            (iii)   No SUP for a labor hall may be granted for more than a two-
year time period. An SUP for a labor hall is not eligible for automatic
renewal.
            (iv)   In determining whether to grant a specific use permit for a
labor hall, the city council shall consider its proximity to the main uses
listed in Subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, and require that the labor hall
meet, as nearly as practicable, the distance requirements set out in that
subparagraph.
            (v)   Measurements of distance under this paragraph are taken
radially. “Radial” measurement means a measurement taken along the shortest
distance between the nearest point of the building site of the labor hall and
the nearest point of the building site of another use.
            (vi)   This use must comply with all applicable licensing
provisions.
      (28)   Gas pipeline compressor station.
         (A)   Definition:
            (i)   BOUNDARY means the perimeter of the compressor station site.
GAS PIPELINE COMPRESSOR STATION SITE means the area identified in the SUP to be
used for the gas pipeline compressor station.
            (ii)   GAS PIPELINE COMPRESSOR STATION means a facility for devices
that raise the pressure of a compressible fluid (gas) in order for the gas to
be transported through a transmission pipeline. This use does not include
compressors that are part of a gas drilling and production use that only
provide compression for gas to circulate into a gathering system.
            (iii)   PROTECTED USE means institutional and community service
uses (except cemetery or mausoleum); lodging uses; office uses; recreation uses
(except when the operation site is on a public park, playground, or golf
course); residential uses; and retail and personal service uses (except
commercial motor vehicle parking or commercial parking lot or garage). Parking
areas and areas used exclusively for drainage detention are not part of a
protected use.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP only in I-3 Industrial Districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), five spaces are required only when contiguous to a property
containing a single-family or handicapped group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A gas pipeline compressor station must be spaced at least
1,500 feet from a protected use, measured from the boundary of the gas pipeline
compressor station site in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the closest point of the protected use or areas of
the protected use activity.
            (ii)   To reduce noise, all compressors must be fully enclosed in a
building.
            (iii)   Except as otherwise provided in this subparagraph, the
perimeter of the gas pipeline compressor station site must be screened from
public view. City council may, by SUP, require a different form of screening
but may not reduce the height requirements in this subparagraph. Screening must
be at least six feet in height and must be constructed of:
               (aa)   earthen berm planted with turf grass or ground cover that
does not have a slope that exceeds one foot of height for each two feet of
width;
               (bb)   brick, stone, metal, or masonry wall that significantly
screens equipment and structures from view;
               (cc)   landscaping materials recommended for local area use by
the chief arborist. The landscaping must be located in a bed that is at least
three feet wide with a minimum soil depth of 24 inches. The initial plantings
must be capable of obtaining a solid appearance within 18 months; or
               (dd)   any combination of the above.
            (iv)   Unless a specific color is required by federal or state law,
all equipment and structures must be painted with a neutral color to match the
nearby surroundings as nearly as possible.
            (v)   To reduce noise and emissions, electric motors must be used
on the gas pipeline compressor station unless the operator submits a report to
the gas inspector and the gas inspector finds that electric motors cannot be
used.
            (vi)   Internal combustion engines and compressors, whether
stationary or mounted on wheels, must be equipped with an exhaust muffler or a
comparable device that suppresses noise and disruptive vibrations and prevents
the escape of gases, fumes, ignited carbon, or soot.
   (vii)   Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor may not be
discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler or
mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of non-combustible materials
sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and prevent the escape
of noxious gases, fumes, ignited carbon, or soot.
            (viii)   Compressors must comply with the low and high frequency
noise requirements in Section
51A-12.204(1), “Noise.” (Ord. Nos. 16807; 16808; 17258; 17446; 18849; 19581;
19652; 21697; 24232; 26920; 27153; 27404; 29228; 29917; 30890; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.214.   STORAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL USES.
   Storage and waste disposal uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Warehouse.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the inside storage of commodities.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
      (2)   Contractor’s maintenance yard.
         (A)   Definition: A site visually screened for the storage and
maintenance of contractor’s supplies and operational equipment.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, CA-2, I-2, and I-3 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Screening is required around this use.
      (3)   Building mover’s, temporary storage yard.
         (A)   Definition: A site where a building or storage which has been
removed from its original construction site is temporarily stored.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in an I-
3 district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must be surrounded by a solid visual screen of at
least nine feet in height and constructed of solid masonry, solid concrete,
corrugated sheet metal, or a chain link fence with strips of metal through all
links.
            (ii)   This use must be landscaped with plants meeting the
requirements of the specific use permit.
            (iii)   Buildings temporarily stored under this use may not be
placed upon a foundation.
            (iv)   This use does not include bona fide sales lots on which new
buildings or structures are located displaying examples of workmanship or
appearance of the buildings or structures to be constructed on other sites and
sold.
      (4)   Open storage.
         (A)   Definition: A lot used for the outside placement of an item for
a period in excess of 24 hours. Outside placement includes storage in a
structure that is open or not entirely closed.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in HC, I-1, I-2, and I-
3 districts. RAR required in HC and industrial districts. By SUP only in the
central area and LC districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: One space for each 5,000 square
feet of site area excluding the parking area; a minimum of one space is
required, and a maximum of four spaces is allowed.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Landscaping:
            (i)   A landscape buffer must be provided between any required
screening fence and an adjacent thoroughfare.
            (ii)   The director may approve an alternative irrigation plan for
landscaping if the director determines that it will maintain the required
landscaping.
         (F)   Screening:
            (i)   In central area, HC, LC, and I-1 districts, open storage must
be screened.
            (ii)   In I-2 and I-3 districts, open storage must be screened on
any side that is within 200 feet of and visible from a thoroughfare, expressway
as defined in Section
51A-7.102, new expressway as defined in Section 51A-7.102, or an adjacent
property that is not zoned an I-2 or I-3 district. For purposes of this
paragraph, adjacent means across the street or sharing a common lot line.
         (G)   Stacking height.
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, maximum open storage
stacking height is 30 feet if the open storage is visible from and within 200
feet of a thoroughfare or adjacent property that is not zoned an I-3 district.
If open storage is 200 feet or more from a thoroughfare or adjacent property,
no maximum open storage stacking height. For purposes of this provision,
adjacent means across the street or sharing a common lot line.
            (ii)   Open storage stacking height within 40 feet of required
screening may not exceed the height of the required screening.
         (H)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A person shall not place, store, or maintain outside for a
period in excess of 24 hours, an item that is not:
               (aa)   customarily used or stored outside; or
               (bb)   made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (ii)   Open storage may be an accessory use if it is customarily
incidental to a main use. See Section
51-4.217.
            (iii)   Open storage is prohibited in required yards, landscaping
areas, and parking areas.
            (iv)   All nonconforming open storage uses must comply with
Subparagraphs (F) and (G) before September 22, 2018. The owner or operator may
request from the board of adjustment an extension of this time period by filing
an application with the director on a form provided by the city. The
application must be filed before the September 22, 2018 deadline expires. The
application is not considered filed until the fee is paid. The board of
adjustment may grant an extension of this time period if it determines, after a
public hearing, that strict compliance would result in substantial financial
hardship or inequity to the applicant without sufficient corresponding benefit
to the city and its citizens in accomplishing the objectives of this Paragraph
(4), “Open Storage.” The fee to request that the board of adjustment extend
time is the same fee as the fee for a nonresidential special exception set
forth in Article I, “General Provisions,” of the Dallas Development Code.
      (5)   Outside salvage or reclamation.
         (A)   Definition: A facility which stores, keeps, dismantles, or
salvages scrap or discarded material or equipment outside. Scrap or discarded
material includes but is not limited to metal, paper, rags, tires, bottles, or
inoperable or wrecked motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts, machinery, or
appliances.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-3; specific use permit required in an I-
2 district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), if an SUP is required for this use, the off-street parking
requirement may be established in the ordinance granting the SUP, otherwise a
minimum of five spaces required only when contiguous to a property containing a
single-family or handicapped group dwelling unit use.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must have a visual screen of at least nine feet in
height which consists of a solid masonry, concrete, or corrugated sheet metal
wall, or a chain link fence with metal strips through all links.
            (ii)   The owner of an outside salvage or reclamation use shall not
stack objects higher than eight feet within 40 feet of the visual screen. The
owner of an outside salvage or reclamation use may stack objects one foot
higher than eight feet for each five feet of setback from the 40 foot point.
            (iii)   If an inoperable or wrecked motor vehicle remains outside
on the premises for more than 24 hours, the premises is an outside salvage or
reclamation use. However, a premise is not an outside salvage or reclamation
use if the premise stores not more than four inoperable or wrecked motor
vehicles each of which having a valid state registration, current safety
inspection certificate, and documentary record of pending repairs or other
disposition, and if the premise has a current certificate of occupancy for a
motor vehicle related use.
            (iv)   A minimum distance of 500 feet is required between an
outside salvage or reclamation use and a residential district, as defined both
in this chapter and in Chapter 51A.
      (6)   Metal processing facility.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that collects, separates, and processes
scrap metal in bulk form for reuse and manufacturing.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-3; specific use permit required in an I-
2 district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)    Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space for each 500 square feet of floor area; a minimum
of five spaces required; only when contiguous to a property containing a
single-family or handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family
district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must have a visual screen of at least nine feet in
height which consists of a solid masonry, concrete, or corrugated sheet metal
wall, or a chain link fence with metal strips through all links.
            (ii)   The owner of a metal processing facility shall not stack
objects higher than eight feet within 40 feet of the visual screen. The owner
of a metal processing facility may stack objects one foot higher than eight
feet for each five feet of setback from the 40 foot point.
            (iii)   A minimum distance of 500 feet is required between a metal
processing facility and a residential district, as defined both in this chapter
and in
Chapter 51A.
      (7)   Inside salvage and reclamation.
         (A)   Definition: A business which stores, keeps, dismantles, or
salvages scrap or discarded material or equipment wholly inside a building.
Scrap or discarded material includes but is not limited to metal, paper, rags,
tires, bottles, inoperable or wrecked motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts, or
appliances.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-2 and I-3 districts; specific use permit
required in an HC district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)    Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), o[O]ne space for each 500 square feet of floor area only
when contiguous to a property containing a single-family or handicapped group
dwelling unit use located in a single family district.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
      (8)   Refuse transfer station.
         (A)   Definition: A privately owned facility for the transfer and
packing of solid waste materials from smaller collecting vehicles to larger
transport vehicles.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (9)   Sanitary landfill.
         (A)   Definition: A site for collection, handling, storage, and
disposal of solid wastes.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in
agricultural and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Reserved.
      (10)   Aluminum collection center.
         (A)   Definition: A facility used for the temporary storage of empty
aluminum beverage cans and other discarded aluminum products.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use may only be located on a parking lot in an enclosed
vehicle not less than 40 feet in length or in an automatic aluminum collection
machine, or within a retail food store building as an accessory use.
            (ii)   Aluminum collection centers in a vehicle may only be placed
on the parking lot of a building site containing 50,000 square feet or more of
floor area. An aluminum collection machine may be placed on the parking lot of
a building site containing 50,000 square feet or more of floor area, or on the
parking lot of a building site containing a retail food store with 20,000
square feet or more of floor area. Not more than one aluminum collection center
in a vehicle or automatic aluminum collection center machine is permitted on a
building site.
            (iii)   An aluminum collection center located on a parking lot may
not occupy required off-street parking spaces. An aluminum collection center
must be arranged so as to not impede free traffic flow.
            (iv)   Receipt of and payment for aluminum at an aluminum
collection center located on a parking lot may take place outside the
collection center but at a point no more than 20 feet from the opening of the
enclosed vehicle where the aluminum is stored.
            (v)   The owner of the property and the owner and operator of the
aluminum collection center shall not process or flatten aluminum on the site.
It is a defense to prosecution that the flattening of aluminum is being
conducted wholly within an automatic aluminum collection machine.
            (vi)   The owner of the property and the owner and operator of the
aluminum collection center remove aluminum stored at the collection center at
least once a week.
            (vii)   The owner of the property and the owner and operator of the
aluminum collection center shall keep the aluminum collection center in proper
repair and the exterior must have a neat and clean appearance.
            (viii)   The owner of the property and the owner and operator of
the aluminum collection center shall keep the building site clean and in a neat
appearance and shall dispose of aluminum cans and other litter from the
building site where the aluminum collection center is located.
      (11)   Mini-warehouse.
         (A)   Definition: A building or group of buildings containing one or
more individual compartmentalized storage units for the inside storage of
customer’s goods or wares, where no unit exceeds 500 square feet in floor area.
         (B)   Districts permitted: LC, HC, central area, and industrial
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No outside display or open storage is permitted under this
use unless the use is in a district where open storage is permitted as a main
use.
            (ii)   Caretaker’s quarters are permitted as an accessory use to
the mini-warehouse use. One parking space must be provided for each 500 square
feet of caretaker’s quarters; however, no more than two spaces are required for
each caretaker’s quarters.
      (12)   Office/showroom warehouse.
         (A)   Definitions. In this paragraph:
            (i)   OFFICE SHOWROOM/WAREHOUSE means a facility which has the
combined uses of office and showroom or warehouse for the primary purpose of
wholesale trade, display, and distribution of products.
            (ii)   OFFICE SHOWROOM COMPONENT means the portion of this use
which provides area for the regular transaction of business and for the display
of uncontainerized merchandise in a finished building setting.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in HC, industrial, and central
area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Retail sales of products which are sold at wholesale on the
premises are permitted as a part of this use. (Ord. Nos. 16911; 17034; 17043;
18144; 18188; 18923; 19455; 27404; 28803; 29917; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.215.   ANIMAL RELATED USES.
   Animal related uses are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Farm or ranch.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   AQUACULTURE means the cultivation, maintenance, and
harvesting of aquatic species.
            (ii)   AQUAPONICS means the combination of aquaculture (fish) and
hydroponics (plants) to grow food crops or ornamental crops and aquatic species
together in a recirculating system without discharge or exchange of water.
            (iii)   BED COVER means a hoop-house, shade structure, or similar
structure located above a planting bed to assist with the growing or shading of
food crops or ornamental crops.
            (iv)   COMMUNITY GARDEN means an URBAN GARDEN as that use is
defined in this subparagraph. Except in those Chapter 51P articles where
community garden is specifically defined, any reference to community garden in
Chapter 51P is a reference to an urban garden in this subparagraph.
            (v)   FARM OR RANCH means an area which is used for growing farm
products or keeping farm poultry and farm livestock.
            (vi)   URBAN GARDEN means an area managed and maintained to grow
and harvest food crops and/or ornamental crops for personal or group use,
consumption, sale, or donation. Urban gardens may be divided into separate
plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively
by members of the group and may include common areas maintained and used by
group members.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   A community garden is permitted by right in all districts.
            (ii)   A farm or ranch is permitted by right in residential
districts except MH; nonresidential districts except NO, LO, MO, and GO
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions for urban gardens:
            (i)   An urban garden must comply with the regulations for the
zoning district in which the urban garden is located.
            (ii)   Aquaponics, aquaculture, and the raising of chickens are
permitted. All other animal grazing and animal production are prohibited.
            (iii)   For an urban garden in a residential district, the combined
floor area of structures may not exceed 10 percent of the lot, with no single
structure exceeding 200 square feet in floor area. Structures that assist in
the growing of vegetation, such as bed covers and raised planting beds, are not
included in floor area calculations. Structures must comply with yard, lot, and
space regulations for the district.
            (iv)   For an urban garden in a residential district, one single,
non-illuminated, flat sign of no more than six square feet must be provided.
The sign must contain the phone number of an emergency contact person for the
urban garden. If animals are present in the urban garden, the sign must also
contain the contact information for Dallas 311 city services. In residential
districts, no other signage is permitted.   
            (v)   Each bed cover may only cover one planting bed.
            (vi)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, maximum height of a
bed cover is four feet from the growing surface or eight feet, measured from
grade, whichever is less. Within the required front yard, maximum height of a
bed cover is four feet, measured from grade.
            (vii)   The on-site sale of food crops, ornamental crops, and eggs
produced at the urban garden is allowed only in non-residential districts. No
other items may be sold.
         (F)   Additional provisions for farms or ranches:
            (i)   A person shall not operate a farm or ranch upon an area less
than three acres.
            (ii)   Farm products include vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain.
            (iii)   Farm poultry and farm livestock include but are not limited
to pigs, chickens, turkeys, cows, sheep, goats, and horses.
            (iv)   A structure may be erected for a private stable, pen, barn,
shed, or silo for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the
premises. This structure may not include a dwelling unit.
            (v)   Standings under roofed stables must be made of a material
that provides for proper drainage so as not to create offensive odors, fly
breeding, or other nuisances.
            (vi)   The keeping of horses is subject to the requirements under
the private stable use.
            (vii)   Fences for pens, corrals, or similar enclosures must be of
sufficient height and strength to retain the animals. No pen, corral, fence, or
similar enclosure may be closer than 20 feet to an adjacent property line. The
widths of alleys, street rights-of-way, or other public rights-of-way may be
used to calculate the 20-foot requirement.
            (viii)   Manure must be collected at least once a day and placed in
concrete or metal fly-proof containers. Manure must be removed from the
premises at least once a week.
            (ix)   The regulations under this use do not apply to government
agencies, governmentally supported organizations, or educational agencies that
keep and maintain animals for health research or similar purposes, nor do these
regulations apply to special events such as circuses and livestock exhibits
which are otherwise regulated by the city.
      (2)   Veterinarian’s office.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the prevention, treatment, cure, or
alleviation of disease and injury in animals.
         (B)   Districts permitted: O-2, LO, MO, GO, SC, GR, LC, HC, central
area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use includes outpatient treatment only, and no boarding
is permitted.
      (3)   Animal clinic without outside runs.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the diagnosis, treatment, or
hospitalization of household pets including but not limited to dogs, cats,
birds, and horses.
         (B)   Districts permitted: SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Outside runs are not permitted under this use.
      (4)   Animal clinic with outside runs.
         (A)   Definition: An animal clinic as defined in Subsection (3) above
that has outside enclosures for the animals.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Industrial districts when located at least
1,000 feet from residential districts; otherwise by SUP only in the same
districts. Specific use permit required in the HC district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (5)   Kennel with outside run.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the breeding or boarding of animals
that has outside enclosures for the animals.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-3; specific use permit required in I-
1 and I-2 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE     TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                NONE
10,000 to 60,000                           1
Each additional 60,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (6)   Animal pound.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the keeping of animals, especially
stray or unlicensed pets.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-3; specific use permit required in HC, I-
1, and I-2 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   An animal pound may have outside enclosures for the animals.
      (7)   Commercial stable.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the business of boarding horses or
renting horses to the public.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-2 and I-3 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use does not include sales, auction, or similar trading
activity.
      (8)   Zoo.
         (A)   Definition: A facility consisting of a zoological garden or a
collection of animals for display to the public.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in I-2 and I-
3 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The city council must specially approve a public zoo.
      (9)   Hatchery and breeding operation.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for hatching eggs or breeding of animals.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-2 and I-3 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (10)   Livestock auction pens or sheds.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the public sale of animals to the
highest bidder.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-3; specific use permit required in I-
2 district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (11)   Slaughterhouse.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for butchering animals or poultry.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-3 district; specific use permit required
in I-2 district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), none.
            (ii)   When contiguous to a property containing a single-family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district; one
space for each 1,000 square feet of site area if the use is conducted outdoors;
one space for each 500 square feet of floor area with a minimum of five spaces
required.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
(Ord. Nos. 18849; 26269; 27404; 28125; 29687; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.216.   INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING USES.
      (1)   Industrial uses other than listed.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for processing or industrial uses that
has not been listed as a separate use.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph (ii), none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space per 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (2)   Permanent concrete or asphalt batching or recycling plant.
         (A)   Definition: A permanent facility for mixing, batching, or
recycling concrete or asphalt.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-3 district; specific use permit required
in an I-2 district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: Five spaces.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (3)   Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant.
         (A)   Definition: A temporary facility for mixing concrete or asphalt.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Special authorization by the building
official is required in accordance with the additional provisions of this use.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A temporary certificate of occupancy is required for this
use. The building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy in
any zoning district for a temporary batching plant to mix, compound, and batch
concrete, asphalt, or both, for a public or private project. The certificate is
valid for six months. If the project is not completed within six months, the
building official may extend the certificate to complete the project.
            (ii)   A person to whom a temporary certificate of occupancy is
issued shall:
               (aa)   comply with city, state, and federal laws at the batching
plant site;
               (bb)   clear the site of equipment, material, and debris upon
completion of the project;
               (cc)   repair or replace any public improvement that is damaged
during the operation of the temporary batching plant; and
               (dd)   operate the temporary plant in a manner which eliminates
unnecessary dust, noise, and odor (as illustrated by, but not limited to
covering trucks, hoppers, chutes, loading and unloading devices, and mixing
operations, and maintaining driveways and parking areas free of dust).
            (iii)   A person shall only furnish concrete, asphalt, or both, to
the specific project for which the temporary certificate of occupancy is
issued. The placement of a temporary batching plant for a private project is
restricted to the site of the project.
      (4)   U-cart concrete system.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the batching of concrete on an
individual order basis for general household uses.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Industrial districts; specific use permit
required in an HC district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (5)   Fiberglass swimming pool fabricator.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the fabrication of swimming pools
from fiberglass and other similar materials.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The manufacturing of fiberglass or similar material used to
fabricate the swimming pools is not a part of this use.
      (6)   Light fabrication and assembly.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the manufacturing of jewelry,
trimming, decorations, and any similar items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (7)   Clothing manufacturing.
         (A)   Definition: An operation involving cutting, sewing, forming, and
packing of garments and similar items including the making of millinery and
clothing accessories.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space per 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (8)   Bedspread, drapes, and headboard manufacturing.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the manufacturing of bedspreads,
drapes, headboards, and similar bedding materials.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (9)   Manufacturing laboratory.
         (A)   Definition: An operation involving compounding of products such
as perfumes and pharmaceuticals, and the development and assembly of
instruments and similar items.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC, central area, and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No open storage is permitted under this use unless the use is
in a district where open storage is permitted as a main use.
      (10)   Artificial marble manufacturing.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the manufacturing of artificial
marble.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (11)   Corrugated cardboard box fabrication.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the fabrication and storage of
corrugated cardboard boxes.
         (B)   Districts permitted: HC and industrial districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The manufacturing of the materials used to construct the
corrugated cardboard boxes is not permitted under this use.
      (12)   Tread rubber manufacturing plant.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the manufacturing, processing, and
storage of tread rubber.
         (B)   Districts permitted: I-3 district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (13)   Metal smelting and plating.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the smelting and plating of metals.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in an I-
3 district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
      (14)   Rendering plant.
         (A)   Definition: A facility for the rendering of parts of animals
into marketable products.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in I-2 and I-
3 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), when contiguous to a property containing a single family or
handicapped group dwelling unit use located in a single family district, one
space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions.
            (i)   This use must be located a minimum distance of 1,000 feet
from a residential district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter
51A.
      (15)   Alcoholic beverage manufacturing.
         (A)   Definition: An establishment for the manufacture, blending,
fermentation, processing, and packaging of alcoholic beverages with a floor
area exceeding 10,000 square feet that takes place wholly inside a building. A
facility that only provides tasting or retail sale of alcoholic beverages is
not an alcoholic beverage manufacturing use.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By right in industrial districts with RAR
required. By SUP only in central area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking:
            (i)   Except as provided in this subparagraph, none.
            (ii)   Except as provided in Section
51A-4.301(a)(2)(B), one space per 200 square feet of floor area used for retail
sales and seating.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Retail sales of alcoholic beverages and related items and
tastings or sampling are allowed in accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission regulations.
            (ii)   Except for loading, all activities must occur within a
building.
            (iii)   Silos and containers of spent grain are allowed as outdoor
storage. Containers of spent grain must be screened. All other outdoor storage
or repair is prohibited.
            (iv)   If an SUP is required, silos and outdoor storage areas for
spent grain must be shown on the site plan.
            (vi)   Drive-through facilities are prohibited.
            (vi)   This use is permitted as an accessory use if it is
customarily incidental to the main use and occupies no more than 40 percent of
the total floor area of the main use. (Ord. Nos. 16873; 17756; 18142; 18849;
19455; 27404; 28700; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.216.1.   LODGING USES.
      (1)   Extended stay hotel or motel.
         (A)   Definition: A lodging facility containing six or more guest
rooms, in which:
            (i)   25 percent or more of the guest rooms have a kitchen that
includes a sink, a full-size stove, and a full-size refrigerator (a cooking
area limited to a microwave, mini-refrigerator, or cook-top does not constitute
a “kitchen” for purposes of this definition); and
            (ii)   10 percent or more of the guest rooms contain a sleeping
area that is separated from a sitting area by a wall or partition.
         (B)   Districts permitted: By SUP in MO, GO, CS, LC, HC, industrial,
and central area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 10,000                                 NONE
10,000 to 50,000                            1
50,000 to 100,000                           2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Amenities such as maids, laundry, concierge, meeting rooms,
exercise rooms, pool, and business services (fax, internet, voice mail,
courier, etc.) may only be provided to guests.
      (2)   Lodging or boarding house.
         (A)   Definition: A structure that is rented to occupants for 30
consecutive days or more and contains more than five units with living and
sleeping accommodations, but no kitchen.
         (B)   Districts permitted: MF-2, MF-3, MF-4, GR, LC, HC, and central
area districts; specific use permit in I-1 and I-2 districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The operator of a lodging or boarding house may serve meals
to the occupants.
            (ii)   This use is subject to the nonresidential use regulations in
this chapter.
      (3)   Hotel and motel.
         (A)   Definition: A building containing six or more guest rooms, and
furnishing customary hotel services such as linen, maid service, and the use
and upkeep of furniture.
         (B)   Districts permitted: O-2, GO, SC, GR, LC, HC, central area, and
industrial districts; specific use permit required if the hotel or motel has 60
or fewer guest rooms.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 100,000                           1
100,000 to 300,000                          2
Each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use is subject to the nonresidential use regulations in
this chapter.
      (4)   Overnight general purpose shelter.
         (A)   Definitions: In these use regulations:
            (i)   BED means a piece of furniture, mat, cushion, or other device
on or in which a person may lie and sleep.
            (ii)   OVERNIGHT GENERAL PURPOSE SHELTER means an emergency lodging
facility (as opposed to a residential or medical treatment facility) that
provides room and board to more than four persons who are not related by blood,
marriage, or adoption to the head of the household or the owner or operator of
the facility, and that negotiates sleeping arrangements on a daily basis,
whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services
it offers. This definition does not include:
               (aa)   dwelling units occupied exclusively by families (Note:
Dwelling units occupied exclusively by families are considered to be single-
family, duplex, or multiple-family uses, as the case may be); or
               (bb)   any other use specifically defined in this chapter.
            (iii)   THIS USE means an overnight general purpose shelter as
defined in this paragraph.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   If this use provides shelter for 20 or less overnight guests,
it is permitted by SUP only in LO, MO, GO, SC, GR, LC, HC, industrial, and
central area districts.
            (ii)   If this use provides shelter for more than 20 overnight
guests, it is permitted by SUP only in GO, LC, HC, industrial, and central area
districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading:
 
SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA IN STRUCTURE      TOTAL REQUIRED SPACES OR BERTHS
0 to 50,000                                 NONE
50,000 to 150,000                           1
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional
 
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   The maximum number of overnight guests permitted under this
use is:
               (aa)   20 in LO, MO, SC, and GR districts; and
               (bb)   200 in all other cases.
            (ii)   The cumulative maximum number of beds permitted for all of
these uses combined on building sites located wholly or partially in the
central business district is 250.
            (iii)   The cumulative maximum number of beds permitted for all of
these uses combined on building sites located wholly or partially in the area
including and within one-third of a mile of the central business district is
1100.
            (iv)   In the event of a conflict between Subparagraphs (ii) and
(iii) and the provisions of any special purpose, planned development, or
conservation district ordinances, Subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) control.
            (v)   This use must be spaced at least 1,000 feet away from:
               (aa)   a church;
               (bb)   a public or private elementary or secondary school;
               (cc)   any residential use listed in Section
51-4.201;
               (dd)   any residential district, historic overlay district, or
public park; and
               (ee)   any other overnight general purpose shelter.
If this use provides shelter for more than 50 overnight guests, it must be
spaced at least one-half mile from any other overnight general purpose shelter.
For purposes of these use regulations, measurement is made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest boundary
of the building site containing the overnight general purpose shelter to the
nearest boundary of the building site containing the church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, or residential use, or to the nearest boundary
of the residential or historic overlay district or public park, whichever is
applicable. The distance between overnight general purpose shelters is measured
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
between the nearest boundaries of the building sites on which the shelters are
located.
            (vi)   This use must be located within one-half mile of public
transit.
            (vii)   This use must comply with all applicable licensing
requirements.
            (viii)   The board of adjustment shall not establish a compliance
date for this use under Section
51A-4.704(a)(1) of Chapter 51A.
            (ix)   Whenever an overnight general purpose shelter operating on
city-owned land in full compliance with all applicable laws is, through no
fault of its own, forced to vacate its current location as a result of the
direct, positive, and affirmative action of the city, and if the requirements
of this subparagraph are met, the shelter shall be permitted to relocate in any
nonresidential district for a period of time of one year without applying for
an SUP. The SUP requirement shall be suspended only if the proposed new
building site is located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any building site
containing any residential use listed in Section
51-4.201 and a minimum of 1,000 feet from any building site containing another
shelter. All measurements shall be taken radially between the building sites in
question. In addition, the shelter must obtain a certificate of occupancy and
any other required licenses and approvals before it may begin operating. A
shelter that relocates in accordance with this subparagraph shall not acquire
any nonconforming rights during the period of suspension, and any investment
made in land, buildings, or structures during that period shall be at the
complete risk of the shelter that an SUP may not ultimately be granted. At or
before the end of the one-year period, the shelter shall either file an
application for an SUP or cease operations. A shelter that files an application
for an SUP in accordance with this subparagraph may remain operating while the
application is pending before the city plan commission or city council;
however, if the application is denied or withdrawn, the shelter shall cease
operations no later than 60 days after the date the final decision is made to
deny the application, or the date the application is withdrawn, whichever is
applicable. (Ord. Nos. 27404; 33112)
SEC. 51-4.217.   ACCESSORY USES.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   An accessory use must be a use customarily incidental to a main
use. An accessory use not listed in Subsection (b) is permitted if the
accessory use complies with Subsection (a).
      (2)   Except as specifically permitted in this article, no use listed in
Sections
51-4.201 through
51-4.216.1 may be an accessory use.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (b) or in Sections
51-4.201 through
4.216.1, an accessory use is permitted in any district in which the main use is
permitted.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (b), an accessory use
must be located on the same lot as the main use, and must not be across a
street or alley from the main use.
      (5)   Unless otherwise specifically required in this article, an
accessory use must comply with all regulations applicable to the main use.
      (6)   An alcohol related establishment that is customarily incidental to
a main use, such as an alcohol related establishment within a hotel,
restaurant, or general merchandise store, will be considered as part of the
main use when determining the gross revenue derived by the establishment from
the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption.
   (b)   Specific accessory uses. The following accessory uses are subject to
the general provisions in Subsection (a) and the regulations below:
      (1)   Game court (private).
         (A)   Definition: Court for engaging in tennis, handball, racquetball,
or similar physical activities.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential and nonresidential districts.
This accessory use is not permitted in the P district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This accessory use may occupy no more than 50 percent of the
area of the lot containing the main use.
      (2)   Swimming pool (private).
         (A)   Definition: A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of
the residents of a residential use.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential and nonresidential districts.
This accessory use is not permitted in the P district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No private swimming pool may be operated as a business,
except that private swimming lessons may be given under the home occupation
use.
            (ii)   No private swimming pool may be maintained in such a manner
as to be hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners.
            (iii)   No private swimming pool may be constructed in the required
front yard. However, a private swimming pool may be located within the required
side or rear yard if it meets the requirements of Section
51-4.217(a).
            (iv)   A private swimming pool must be surrounded by a fence.
      (3)   Private stable.
         (A)   Definition: An area for the keeping of horses for the private
use of the property owner.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential districts except MH, and
nonresidential districts except NO, LO, MO, GO, and P districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A private stable is permitted only on a lot that has at least
15,000 square feet and a person may keep only the number of horses permitted
for the lot area as described in the following chart:
 
Lot Area                                             Number of Horses
At least 15,000 sq. ft. but less than 21,780 sq. ft. 1
At least 21,780 sq. ft. but less than 43,560 sq. ft. 2
At least 43,560 sq. ft. but less than 87,120 sq. ft. 3
At least 21,780 sq. ft. per animal                   4 or more
 
            (ii)   A private stable must include a pen or corral containing at
least 800 square feet for each animal with a stable under a roof containing at
least 100 square feet for each animal.
            (iii)   A stable must have proper drainage so as not to create
offensive odors, fly breeding, or other nuisances.
            (iv)   The owner of a private stable shall collect manure at least
once a day and place it in a concrete or metal flyproof container, and cause
the manure to be removed from the premises at least once a week.
            (v)   A pen, corral, fence, or similar enclosure may not be closer
than 20 feet to an adjacent property line. The widths of alleys, street rights-
of-way, or other public rights-of-way may be used in establishing the 20-foot
distance to the adjacent property line.
            (vi)   Fences for pens, corrals, or similar enclosures must be of a
sufficient height and strength to retain the horses.
      (4)   Home occupation.
         (A)   Definition: An occupation that is incidental to the primary use
of the premises as a residence and is conducted on the residential premises by
an occupant of the residence.
         (B)   Districts permitted: All residential districts and
nonresidential districts except I-3 and P districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A person who engages in a home occupation shall not:
               (aa)   use an advertisement, sign, or display relating to the
home occupation on the premises;
               (bb)   use a street address of the premises on an advertisement,
sign, or display off the premises;
               (cc)   involve more than three people on the premises at one
time, other than the residents of the premises;
               (dd)   employ more than one person other than the occupants of
the residence;
               (ee)   conduct any activities relating to the home occupation,
including activities on any porch, deck, patio, garage, or unenclosed or
partially enclosed portion of any structure, unless conducted entirely inside
the main structure;
               (ff)   use equipment other than ordinary household equipment;
               (gg)   generate loud and raucous noise, that renders the
enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and
comfort;
               (hh)   sell or offer or advertise products of the home
occupation at or on the premises;
               (ii)   generate vehicular traffic that unreasonably reduces the
availability of on-street parking spaces on surrounding streets; or
               (jj)   generate parking congestion that unreasonably reduces the
availability of on-street parking spaces on surrounding streets.
            (ii)   A home occupation may not occupy more than 25 percent or 400
square feet of the total floor area of the main structure, whichever is less.
      (5)   Occasional sales (garage sales).
         (A)   Definition: The sale of tangible personal property at retail by
a person who is not in the business or does not hold himself or herself out to
be in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential districts, and nonresidential
districts except I-3 and P districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A person shall sell tangible personal property only on the
premises of the owner or lessee of the premises where the sale is conducted,
and the owner or lessee must be the legal owner of the tangible personal
property at the time of the sale.
            (ii)   The sale must be inside the building or garage, or on an
approved surface as described in Section 51A-4.301(d)(4).
            (iii)   A person shall not sell, offer, or advertise for sale
merchandise made, produced, or acquired solely for the purpose of resale at an
occasional sale.
            (iv)   A person shall not conduct an occasional sale for a duration
of more than three consecutive calendar days.
            (v)   A person shall not conduct more than two occasional sales at
a premise during any 12-month period.
            (vi)   A person shall not place more than one sign, not to exceed
two square feet in effective area, upon the lot where the sale is taking place.
Up to five signs, not to exceed two square feet in effective area each, are
permitted at locations remote from the sale property with the permission of the
owner of the remote location. Signs advertising an occasional sale are not
permitted in medians or on trees or light poles. All signs advertising an
occasional sale must be removed within 24 hours after expiration of the permit
issued under Section 51A-1.105(x). 
            (vii)   Any advertisement of an occasional sale or of an item being
offered for sale at an occasional sale must contain the street address at which
the sale will occur and the date(s) on which the sale will occur.
            (viii)   A person commits an offense if he operates an occasional
sale without a valid permit under Section 51A-1.105(x).
      (6)   Community center (private).
         (A)   Definition: An integral part of a residential project or
community unit development that is under the management and unified control of
the operators of the project or development, and that is used by the residents
of the project or development for a place of meeting, recreation, or social
activity.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Multiple-family, MH, O-1, O-2, GO,
commercial, and central area districts; limited use in LO and MO districts;
specific use permit required in all single-family, duplex, TH, I-1, and I-
2 districts. This use is not permitted in the P district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   A private community center may not be operated as a place of
public meetings or as a business.
            (ii)   The operation of a private community center must not create
noise, odor, or similar conditions beyond the property line of the project or
development site.
            (iii)   A liquor permit may not be issued for a private community
center.
            (iv)   This accessory use need not be located on the same lot as
the main use.
      (7)   Amateur communication tower.
         (A)   Definition: A tower with an antenna that transmits amateur
radio, citizen band, or both spectrums, or that receives any portion of a radio
spectrum.
         (B)   Districts permitted: All residential and nonresidential
districts. This use is not permitted in the P district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   In all residential districts except MF-3 and MF-4, a person
may erect one amateur communication tower that exceeds the maximum height
specified in Section
51-4.408, if the amateur communication tower:
               (aa)   does not exceed 60 feet in height;
               (bb)   is setback an additional 12 inches from the required
front, side, and rear yards for each additional 18 inches of height above the
maximum height specified in Section
51-4.408;
               (cc)   has a maximum horizontal cross-sectional area of three
square feet;
               (dd)   has no more than two antennae above the maximum height
specified in Section
51-4.408 with a maximum volume of 900 cubic feet for a single antenna and 1400
cubic feet for two antennae. In this provision, antenna volume is the space
within an imaginary rectangular prism which contains all extremities of the
antenna;
               (ee)   does not encroach into the required front, side, or rear
yard. A guy wire and anchor point for a tower is prohibited in the required
front yard and is also prohibited in the required side and rear yards unless
the guy wire and anchor point is attached to the top of a structural support
that is no less than six feet in height. If a structural support for a guy wire
and anchor point is used, the structural support may project into the required
side and rear yards no more than two feet, measured from the setback line. In
this provision, a structural support for an anchor point is any pole, post,
strut, or other fixture or framework necessary to hold and secure an anchor
point; and
               (ff)   has a minimum space between antennae above the maximum
height specified in Section
51-4.408 of eight feet or more as measured vertically between the highest point
of the lower antenna and the lowest point of the higher antenna.
            (ii)   The board of adjustment may allow a special exception from
the requirements of Subsection (E)(i) with the exception of Subsection (E)(i)
(aa), if the board finds that the special exception would not adversely affect
neighboring property and would be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this section.
            (iii)   In an NS, O-1, and all residential districts except MF-
3 and MF-4, a person may erect an amateur communication tower over 60 feet and
not above 100 feet in height if authorized by a specific use permit.
            (iv)   This accessory use may occupy no more than 25 percent of the
area of the lot containing the main use.
            (v)   This accessory use is prohibited in all residential districts
in the area between the street and the façade of any main or accessory
structure. (This area includes, but may be greater than, the front yard.)
            (vi)   The owner or operator of an amateur communication tower
shall remove the tower within six months of the date that the tower ceases to
operate as an amateur radio, citizen band, or radio spectrum authorized by the
Federal Communications Commission. Upon failure of the owner or operator to
remove the tower within the prescribed period, the building official shall
notify the city attorney to pursue enforcement remedies against that owner or
operator for failure to remove the tower.
      (8)   Private street or alley.
         (A)   Definition: A thoroughfare or an alley built to the same
specifications as a street or alley dedicated to the public use, whose
ownership has been retained privately.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Specific use permit required in single-
family, duplex, and TH districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Private streets and alleys must be constructed and maintained
to the standards for public rights-of-way and must be approved by the director
of transportation and public works. Sidewalks are required and must be
constructed and maintained to the standards for sidewalks in the public right-
of-way. Water and sanitary sewer mains must be installed in accordance with the
applicable ordinances.
            (ii)   A legal entity must be created that is responsible for
street lighting, street maintenance and cleaning, and the installation and
maintenance of interior traffic control devices. The legal instruments
establishing the responsibility for a private street or alley must be submitted
to the city plan commission for approval, be approved as to legal form by the
city attorney, and recorded in the appropriate county.
            (iii)   Private streets and alleys must contain private service
easements including, but not limited to, the following easements: utilities;
firelane; street lighting; government vehicle access; mail collection and
delivery access; and utility meter reading access.
            (iv)   Street lights comparable with those required on public
rights-of-way must be provided. Street lighting design plans must be approved
by the director of transportation and public works.
            (v)   Design plans and location of all traffic control devices must
be approved by the traffic engineer. The design, size, color, and construction
of all traffic control devices must comply with those required in public
rights-of-way.
            (vi)   The fire protection standards in Article XIII of the Dallas
Fire Code must be followed.
            (vii)   A public school, park, or other public facility must be
accessible from public rights-of-way in accordance with this code.
            (viii)   Private streets must comply with the thoroughfare plan and
may not interrupt public through streets.
            (ix)   Private street names and numbers must be approved by the
city plan commission.
            (x)   Private streets and the area they serve must be platted.
            (xi)   Guard houses may be constructed at any entrance to a private
street. All guard houses must be at least 25 feet from a public right-of-way.
            (xii)   Any structure that restricts access to a private street
must provide a passageway 20 feet wide and 14 feet high.
            (xiii)   One private street entrance must remain open at all times.
If an additional private street entrance is closed at any time, it must be
constructed to permit opening of the passageway in emergencies by boltcutters
or breakaway panels.
            (xiv)   A private street serving an area containing over 150
dwelling units must have a minimum of two access points to a public street.
            (xv)   A private street may serve no more than 300 dwelling units.
            (xvi)   The city has no obligation to maintain a private street. If
a private street is not maintained in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, the city, after a public hearing before the city plan commission,
shall have the right, but not the obligation, to take those actions necessary
to put the private street in compliance. The legal entity responsible for
maintaining the private street shall pay the city for the work performed within
a period of 180 days from the presentation of the bill, or the private street
will become a public street of the city.
            (xvii)   A court or plaza may be considered a private street for
the purpose of creating a building site if a specific use permit for a private
street or alley use is obtained.
      (9)   Open storage.
         (A)   Definitions:
            (i)   ACCESSORY OPEN STORAGE means the outside placement of an item
for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours. Outside placement includes
storage in a structure that is open or not entirely enclosed, or that is
located on an unenclosed porch of a building.
            (ii)   BOOK EXCHANGE STRUCTURE means an enclosed structure that
holds books or other literary materials to be shared or exchanged in a
pedestrian accessible location constructed and maintained by the owner of the
property.
         (B)   Districts permitted: This accessory use is permitted in any
district if it satisfies the requirements of Subsection (a) of this section and
if it is not prohibited by the additional provisions of the main use and this
section. This accessory use in not permitted in the P district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Accessory outside storage is not permitted unless the item
is:
               (aa)   customarily used or stored outside; or
               (bb)   made of a material that is resistant to damage or
deterioration from exposure to the outside environment.
            (ii)   Accessory open storage is not permitted in the area between
any street and the main building and extending across the width of the lot or
tract or on a front porch of a residential building unless it is:
               (aa)   an operable motor vehicle with valid state registration
parked on a surface that meets the standards for parking surfaces contained in
the off-street parking regulations of this chapter and is not an oversized
motor vehicle;
               (bb)   a boat, trailer that is not an oversized trailer, or
recreational vehicle parked on a surface that meets the standards for parking
surfaces contained in the off-street parking regulations of this chapter, and
the item cannot reasonably be placed in an outside area behind the street-
facing building facade;
               (cc)   landscaping, or an ornamental structure, including, but
not limited to a birdbath, plant container, or statuette, placed outside for
landscaping purposes;
               (dd)   lawn furniture or a book exchange structure made of a
material that is resistant to damage or deterioration from exposure to the
outside environment;
               (ee)   located on a front porch and not visible from the street;
or
               (ff)   a vehicle displaying a registration insignia or
identification card issued by the state to a permanently or temporarily
disabled person for purposes of Section 681.006 of the Texas Transportation
Code.
            (iii)   A person shall not use more than five percent of the lot
area of a premise for accessory open storage. The area occupied by an operable
motor vehicle with valid state registration is not counted when calculating the
area occupied by accessory open storage. Except as otherwise provided in this
article, open storage is considered to be a separate main use if it occupies
more than five percent of the lot.
            (iv)   The board may grant a special exception to the additional
provisions in Romanette (ii) when, in the opinion of the board, the special
exception will not adversely affect neighboring property.
      (10)   Day home.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that provides care or supervision for
more than three persons of any age not including persons in foster care or
those related to the owner of the residence or the head of the household by
blood, marriage, or adoption. A day home is incidental to the primary use of
the premises as a residence and conducted on the premises by a resident of the
premises who is on the premises during hours of operation.
         (B)   District restrictions: This accessory use is not permitted in
the P district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   No more than 12 day home attendees, including persons in
foster care and those related to the owner of the residence or the head of the
household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are permitted at any time in the
operation of this use.
            (ii)   A person who conducts a day home use shall not:
               (aa)   use an advertisement, sign, or display on or off the
premises;
               (bb)   advertise in the yellow pages of the telephone directory;
               (cc)   employ more than two persons on the premises, other than
the residents of the premises;
               (dd)   conduct outdoor activities between the hours of 10 p.m.
and 7 a.m.;
               (ee)   conduct outdoor activities unless the activities are
screened from the neighboring property by a fence at least four feet in height;
or
               (ff)   generate loud and raucous noise that renders the
enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and
comfort.
      (11)   Pedestrian skybridges.
         (A)   Definition: Use of a structure constructed above grade primarily
to allow pedestrians to cross a city right-of-way. A pedestrian skybridge use
does not include use of a structure constructed primarily for automobiles.
         (B)   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of persons and property within the city by
providing for the structural integrity of pedestrian skybridges over public
right-of-ways; preventing visual obstruction of public right-of-ways and urban
landscapes; facilitating the flow of traffic; encouraging use of public
skybridges by pedestrians through well designed additions to the existing
pedestrian system; minimizing the negative impact of pedestrian skybridges on
adjoining properties, communication and utility company facilities, and public
street lighting and safety facilities; and establishing standards for
construction and maintenance of pedestrian skybridges.
         (C)   Districts permitted: A pedestrian skybridge is permitted in any
district by SUP. An SUP is required for pedestrian skybridges in planned
development (PD) districts. A license or abandonment from the city of Dallas is
also required to cross a city right-of-way. Provisions concerning licenses for
use of the public right-of-way are contained in Chapter 43, “Streets and
Sidewalks,” of the Dallas City Code. Provisions concerning abandonment of the
public right-of-way are contained in Chapter 2, “Administration,” of the Dallas
City Code.
         (D)   Application: An application for an SUP for a pedestrian
skybridge must contain a statement outlining the need for the pedestrian
skybridge and how the pedestrian skybridge will enhance the welfare of the area
of request and adjacent properties.
         (E)   Specific use permit procedure: The provisions concerning
specific use permits contained in Section
51-4.219 apply except as modified by this subsection.
            (i)   Notification. The director shall send written notice of a
public hearing on an application for an SUP for a pedestrian skybridge to all
owners of real property lying within 750 feet of the properties on which the
skybridge will be located.
            (ii)   Protest. For purposes of the protest provisions, the area of
request is the properties on which the skybridge will be located.
            (iii)   Residential adjacency. An SUP for a pedestrian skybridge
must be approved by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all members of the
city council if the pedestrian skybridge is within 750 feet of a residential
zoning district or planned development district that allows residential uses or
is sited within a planned development district that is adjacent to residential
districts.
            (iv)   Term. The term of an SUP for a pedestrian skybridge must
coincide with the term of any related license.
         (F)   Mandatory pedestrian skybridge standards: Additional provisions
concerning construction of pedestrian walkways are contained in Chapter 53,
“Dallas Building Code,” of the Dallas City Code. Pedestrian skybridges must be
constructed and maintained in accordance with the following regulations:
            (i)   Pedestrian skybridges must be properly maintained at all
times. If a pedestrian skybridge connects two buildings which are separately
owned, an operating agreement assigning maintenance and liability
responsibilities is required.
            (ii)   No more than one pedestrian skybridge may be located within
any blockface or 700 feet of frontage, whichever is less.
            (iii)   Pedestrian skybridges must have clearance above the public
right-of-way of at least 18 feet above grade.
            (iv)   If the pedestrian skybridge has a length of less than 150
feet, the interior passageway must be no less than 10 feet and no greater than
20 feet in width. If the pedestrian skybridge has a length equal to or greater
than 150 feet, the interior passageway must be no less than 12 feet and no
greater than 20 feet in width.
            (v)   The interior height of the passageway must be at least seven
and one-half feet. The interior height at the springline of vaulted ceilings
must be at least seven and one-half feet.
            (vi)   Supports may be located within the public right-of-way if
the placement of the support structure does not impede pedestrian traffic and
maintains minimum sidewalk clearance widths required in the zoning district and
in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. Chapter 126.
            (vii)   A sign must be posted within the adjoining structures
indicating whether the skybridge is open to the public, the location of the
pedestrian skybridge, and where the pedestrian skybridge leads.
            (viii)   Pedestrian skybridges must meet state and federal
standards for accessibility to and usability by individuals with disabilities.
            (ix)   Pedestrian skybridges connected to structures with air
conditioning must be enclosed and air conditioned.
            (x)   Any change in slope of the pedestrian skybridge greater than
one percent must be over private property or concealed within the pedestrian
skybridge.
            (xi)   Pedestrian skybridges must not diverge from a perpendicular
angle to the right-of-way by more than 30 degrees.
            (xii)   At least 70 percent of the side walls must be open, or
glass or transparent material with a light transmission of not less than 36
percent and a luminous reflectance of not more than six percent. “Light
transmission” means the ratio of the amount of total light to pass through the
material to the amount of total light falling on the material and any glazing.
“Luminous reflectance” means the ratio of the amount of total light that is
reflected outward by a material to the amount of total light falling on the
material.
            (xiii)   Minimum artificial lighting of 15 foot candles must be
provided. Lighting must not produce glare of an intensity that creates a
nuisance for motor vehicles or pedestrians.
            (xiv)   No exterior signs, other than government signs, may be
applied to or suspended from any pedestrian skybridge.
            (xv)   Pedestrian skybridges must not be located within 300 feet of
an historic overlay district.
            (xvi)   Pedestrian skybridges must be designed to prevent people
from jumping or throwing objects from the pedestrian skybridge.
            (xvii)   Structural materials must be durable and easily
maintained. Construction must comply with the City of Dallas Building and Fire
Codes.
            (xviii)   Pedestrian skybridges must not interfere with or impair
use of the right-of-way by existing or proposed communication and utility
facilities.
            (xix)   The applicant must post bond for the estimated cost to the
city to remove the pedestrian skybridge if it becomes a public nuisance.
            (xx)   Skybridges may be placed in a required front, side, or rear
yard.
         (G)   Recommended pedestrian skybridge standards: Pedestrian
skybridges are recommended to be constructed and maintained in accordance with
the following guidelines:
            (i)   Pedestrian skybridges which are open to the public should
penetrate the second story of the adjoining structures, or, if not possible, as
close as possible to the street level.
            (ii)   Pedestrian skybridges should penetrate the adjoining
structures as close as possible to escalators or elevators having access to the
entire structure and the street.
            (iii)   Free-standing pedestrian skybridges and pedestrian
skybridges connected to structures without air conditioning should have a roof,
wind breaks, and adequate ventilation that maximize the comfort and safety of
pedestrians. A pedestrian skybridge should be open only when the adjoining
structures are open.
            (iv)   If the length of the pedestrian skybridge exceeds 250 feet,
the passageway should be interrupted by interior visual breaks, such as turns,
courts, or plazas.
            (v)   Primary lighting sources should be recessed and indirect.
Accent lighting is encouraged. Natural lighting should be used in addition to
artificial lighting.
            (vi)   The pedestrian skybridge should be designed so as to
coordinate with the adjoining structures to the extent possible. Where
coordination is not possible, the pedestrian skybridge should be of a neutral
color, such as brown or grey.
         (H)   Waiver: The city council may, by a three-fourths vote, grant a
waiver to the pedestrian skybridge standards contained in this paragraph if the
council finds that:
            (i)   strict compliance with the requirements will unreasonably
burden the use of either of the properties;
            (ii)   the waiver will not adversely affect neighboring property;
            (iii)   the waiver will not be contrary to the public interest; and
            (iv)   the waiver will not be contrary to the public health,
safety, or welfare.
         (I)   Compliance regulations: Pedestrian skybridge uses are not
subject to the compliance regulations contained in Section
51-4.704.
      (12)   Accessory helistop.
         (A)   Definition: A landing pad for occasional use by rotary wing
aircraft.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Office-2, GO, and industrial districts.
            (ii)   SUP required in A, multiple-family, MO, SC, GR, LC, HC, and
central area districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Regularly scheduled stops are not permitted under this
accessory use.
            (ii)   Fueling or servicing facilities are not permitted under this
accessory use.
            (iii)   This accessory use must be approved by the city aviation
department.
            (iv)   This accessory use is subject to the Federal Aviation
Administration's rules, regulations, and approval.
      (13)   Accessory medical/infectious waste incinerator.
         (A)   Definition: A facility used to incinerate plastics, special
waste, and waste containing pathogens or biologically active material which,
because of its type, concentration, and quantity, is capable of transmitting
disease to persons exposed to the waste.
         (B)   Districts permitted:
            (i)   Agricultural, multiple-family, O-1, O-2, MO, GO, commercial,
central area, and industrial districts.
            (ii)   An SUP is required for this facility if it is used to
incinerate more than 225 pounds of waste per hour.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This accessory use is permitted only in conjunction with a
hospital use.
            (ii)   The facility must be located at least 200 feet from all lots
containing residential uses.
            (iii)   If the facility is used to incinerate more than 225 pounds
of waste per hour, it must be located at least 200 feet from all lots
containing public or private school uses.
      (14)   Accessory outside display of merchandise.
         (A)   Definition: The outside placement of merchandise for sale for a
continuous period less than 24 hours.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Nonresidential districts except NO, LO, MO,
and P districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (15)   Accessory outside sales.
         (A)   Definition: A site for the outside sale of merchandise.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Nonresidential districts except NO, LO, MO,
and P districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
      (16)   Accessory pathological waste incinerator.
         (A)   Definition: A facility used to incinerate organic human or
animal waste, including:
            (i)   Human materials removed during surgery, labor and delivery,
autopsy, or biopsy, including body parts, tissues or fetuses, organs, and bulk
blood and body fluids.
            (ii)   Products of spontaneous human abortions, regardless of the
period of gestation, including body parts, tissue, fetuses, organs, and bulk
blood and body fluids.
            (iii)   Anatomical remains.
            (iv)   Bodies for cremation.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential districts only in conjunction
with a public park containing a zoo and an aquarium, and the following
nonresidential districts: GR, LC, HC, central area, and industrial.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This accessory use is permitted only in conjunction with a
mortuary or funeral home; or a public park containing a zoo and aquarium owned
or operated by a public agency, available to the general public year-round, and
having a collection of at least 5,000 specimens.
            (ii)   This accessory use must be located at least 200 feet from
all lots containing residential uses.
            (iii)   When this accessory use is operated in conjunction with a
public park containing a zoo and aquarium, no more than one incinerator is
permitted, and the incinerator may not burn more than 200 pounds per hour.
      (17)   General waste incinerator.
         (A)   Definition: A facility used to incinerate solid waste consisting
of combustible rubbish, refuse, and garbage.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential and nonresidential districts.
This accessory use is not permitted in the P district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This accessory use must be located at least 200 feet from all
lots containing residential uses. 
      (18)   Accessory electric vehicle charging station.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that provides electric vehicle supply
equipment (EVSE) on a site with a main use excluding commercial parking lot or
garage, commercial motor vehicle parking, motor vehicle fueling, liquefied
natural gas fueling station, and truck stop uses.
         (B)   Districts permitted: Residential and nonresidential districts.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   Any amount of parking for a main use on the property may be
electric vehicle charging spaces.
            (ii)   If this accessory use is located in a residential district,
it may not have a sign advertising its services.
            (iii)   Charging equipment may not obstruct a required off-street
parking space. A charging cord may not cross over a sidewalk or pedestrian
walkway.
            (iv)   When six feet or less in height, structures and equipment
associated with this use may be located where an off-street parking space is
allowed.”
      (20)   Temporary inclement weather shelter.
         (A)   Definition: A facility that offers shelter during times of
inclement weather in compliance with Chapter 45.
         (B)   Districts permitted: This accessory is not permitted in the P
district.
         (C)   Required off-street parking: None.
         (D)   Required off-street loading: None.
         (E)   Additional provisions:
            (i)   This use must comply with the regulations in Chapter 45.
            (ii)   This use may only operate in conjunction with a valid
certificate of occupancy for a permitted main use. This use is not allowed in
conjunction with single-family, duplex, townhouse, or handicapped group
dwelling unit.
            (iii)   Except at the Kay Bailey Hutchison Convention Center and
other city-owned and city-leased facilities, this accessory use may not operate
within 0.5 mile of the central business district. The Office of Housing and
Community Empowermen and the Office of Emergency Management and Crisis Response
shall brief a city council committee on this provision by May 24, 2025.
(Ord. Nos. 17046; 17093; 17812; 18188; 18849; 19100; 20845; 21454; 21735;
22004; 22204; 23012; 24843; 24915; 27404; 28021; 28737; 28803; 29024; 30257;
30894; 31705; 32441; 32465; 32659; 32864; 32907; 33112; 33233)
51-4.201 USE CHARTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10425.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10427.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10429.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10431.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10433.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10435.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10437.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10439.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10441.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10443.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10445.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10447.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10449.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10451.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10453.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10455.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10457.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10459.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10461.jpg]
 
SEC. 51-4.218.   LIMITED USES.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.218,
“Limited Uses,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended, as that
section exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. 27404)
SEC. 51-4.218.1   RETAIL-RELATED USES.
   (a)   A retail-related use is indicated by an “R” on the use chart.
   (b)   A retail-related use:
      (1)   may not exceed 2,000 square feet in floor area;
      (2)   is only permitted on a street level of a building;
      (3)   may not have a floor area that in combination with the floor areas
of other retail-related uses on the street level exceeds 50 percent of the
aggregate floor area of all uses on the street level; and
      (4)   may not have a floor area that in combination with the floor areas
of other retail-related uses in the building exceeds 10 percent of the floor
area of the building.
   (c)   Some uses permitted as retail-related uses are also permitted as
limited uses. This section does not affect the ability of a property owner to
operate a permitted limited use on a street level of a building. A use that is
operated as a limited use is not considered to be a retail-related use for
purposes of Subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4). (Ord. 18849)
SEC. 51-4.219.   SPECIFIC USE PERMIT.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.219,
“Specific Use Permit (SUP),” of CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF THE DALLAS DEVELOPMENT
CODE,” as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future.
(Ord. Nos. 17813; 18920; 19455; 20132; 22053)
SEC. 51-4.220.   CLASSIFICATION OF NEW USES.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.220,
“Classification of New Uses,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as
amended, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future. 
(Ord. 27404)
SEC. 51-4.221.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.221,
“Sexually Oriented Businesses,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as
amended, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future.
(Ord. Nos. 24438; 24696; 26513; 27404)
Division 51-4.300
Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations.
SEC. 51-4.301.   OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.301,
“Off-street Parking Regulations,” of Division 51A-4.300, “Off-street Parking
and Loading Regulations,” of Article IV, “Zoning Regulations,” of CHAPTER 51A,
“PART II OF THE DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE,” of the Dallas City Code, as that
section exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 16803;
16805; 16915; 17045; 17839; 17859; 17860; 18849; 18968; 19062; 19063; 19305;
19455; 19460; 20383; 23013; 24020)
SEC. 51-4.302.   PARKING DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.302,
“Parking District Regulations,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as
amended, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future.
(Ord. Nos. 19455; 27404)
SEC. 51-4.303.   OFF-STREET LOADING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Required off-street loading standards. This subsection incorporates by
reference the language of 51A-4.303(a), “Required Off-street Loading
Standards,” of Section 51A-4.303, “Off-street Loading Regulations,” of Chapter
51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended, as that section exists today and as it
may be amended in the future.
   (b)   Location and design standards. This subsection incorporates by
reference the language of 51A-4.303(b), “Location and Design Standards,” of
Section 51A-4.303, “Off-street Loading Regulations,” of Chapter 51A of the
Dallas City Code, as amended, as that section exists today and as it may be
amended in the future.
   (c)   Special regulations for the CA-1 district. This subsection
incorporates by reference the language of Subparagraph (C), “Special Off-street
Loading Provisions,” of Paragraph (5), “Off-street Parking and Loading,” of
Subsection (a), “CA-1(A) District,” of Section 51A-4.124, “Central Area
Districts,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended, as that section
exists today and as it may be amended in the future.
   (d)   Screening provisions for off-street loading. In an NO, LO, MO, or GO
district, off-street loading spaces may be located in the front yard behind the
setback line if they are screened from the street. Screening must be at least
six feet in height measured from the horizontal plane passing through the
nearest point of the off-street loading space and may be provided by using any
of the methods described Section
51-4.602(b)(3). (Ord. Nos. 19312; 19455; 27404)
SEC. 51-4.304.   OFF-STREET STACKING SPACE REGULATIONS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.304,
“Off-street Stacking Space Regulations,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City
Code, as amended, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the
future. (Ord. 27404)
SEC. 51-4.305.   HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS.
This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.305,
“Handicapped Parking Regulations,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas Development
Code. (Ord. 27864)
SEC. 51-4.306.   OFF-STREET PARKING IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.306,
“Off-street Parking in the Central Business District,” of Chapter 51A of the
Dallas City Code, as amended, as that section exists today and as it may be
amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 20272; 27404)
SEC. 51-4.307.   NONCONFORMITY AS TO PARKING OR UNLOADING REGULATIONS.
   Consult Section
51-4.704 for regulations concerning nonconformity as to parking and loading.
(Ord. 21553)
SEC. 51-4.308 THRU 51-4.309.   RESERVED.
Division 51-4.310
Off-street Parking Reductions.
   This division incorporates by reference the language of Division 51A-4.310,
“Off-Street Parking Reductions,” of CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF THE DALLAS
DEVELOPMENT CODE,” as that division exists today and as it may be amended in
the future. (Ord. 22053)
Division 51-4.320
Special Parking Regulations.
   This division incorporates by reference the language of Division 51A-4.320,
“Special Parking Regulations,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as
amended, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future.
(Ord. Nos. 19460; 27404)
Division 51-4.330.
Bicycle Parking Regulations.
   This division incorporates by reference the language of Division 51A-4.330,
“Bicycle Parking Regulations,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as
amended, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future.
(Ord. 29128)   
Division 51-4.340.
Mechanized Parking.
   This division incorporates by reference the language of Division 51A-4.340,
“Mechanized Parking,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended, as
that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. 29128)
Division 51-4.400
Yard, Lot, and Space Regulations.
SEC. 51-4.401.   MINIMUM FRONT YARD.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Required front yards must be open and unobstructed except for
fences and light poles 20 feet or less in height. Except as otherwise provided
in this section, ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices,
and other architectural features may not project more than 12 inches into the
required front yard. A fireplace chimney may project up to two feet into the
required front yard if its area of projection does not exceed 12 square feet.
Cantilevered roof eaves and balconies may project up to five feet into the
required front yard.
      (2)   The front yard setback is measured from the front lot line of the
building site or the required right-of-way as determined by the thoroughfare
plan for all thoroughfares, whichever creates the greater setback. On minor
streets, the front yard setback is measured from the front lot line of the
building site or the existing right-of-way, whichever creates the greater
setback. When the city council by ordinance establishes a specific right-of-way
line for a street, the front yard setback is measured from that right-of-way
line.
      (3)   If a building line that is established by ordinance requires a
greater or lesser front yard than prescribed by Section
51-4.410, the building line established by ordinance determines the minimum
required front yard.
      (4)   The building official may approve a ramp that projects into the
required front yard to allow a handicapped person access to an existing single
family, duplex, or handicapped group dwelling unit use. The ramp must be
constructed with minimal encroachment and must be constructed to the applicable
accessibility standard as determined by the building official. Initial review
of a complete permit application for a ramp must be completed in 10 days.
      (5)   If a lot runs from one street to another and has double frontage, a
required front yard must be provided on both streets. If access is prohibited
on one frontage by plat or by the city, the following structures or portions of
structures in the yard along that frontage are governed by the rear yard
regulations in Section
51-4.403:
         (A)   Swimming pools.
         (B)   Game courts.
         (C)   Fences.
         (D)   Garages.
         (E)   Accessory storage buildings.
      (6)   Except as provided in this paragraph, if a blockface is divided by
two or more zoning districts, the front yard for the entire blockface must
comply with the requirements of the district with the greatest front yard
requirement.
         (A)   If the greatest front yard is in a district with only one or
more of the following uses being conducted as a main use and having a minimum
of 80 feet of frontage, the blockface terminates at the boundary of that use:
            (i)   Utility and service uses listed in Section
51-4.202.
            (ii)   A railroad team track or railroad yard, round house, or
shops.
            (iii)   A cemetery or mausoleum.
            (iv)   Recreation and entertainment uses listed in Section
51-4.208(1) through (5).
         (B)   In this section BLOCKFACE means:
            (i)   the distance along one side of a Street between the two
nearest intersecting streets;
            (ii)   where a street deadends, the distance along one side of a
street between the nearest intersecting street and the end of the deadend
street; or
            (iii)   where a street centerline contains a change of direction
greater than 45 degrees, the distance along one side of a street between either
the nearest intersecting street or the deadend and the point determining the
angle of the change of direction.
      (7)   If a building is erected or altered to exceed 36 feet in height,
and if the building site is either perpendicularly contiguous to or
perpendicularly across an adjoining street from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A),
or CH district, an additional setback must be provided that is equal to twice
the height of that portion of the building that exceeds 36 feet. The additional
setback is only required for that portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in
height.
      (8)   The minimum front yard requirements in a planned development
district are controlled by the planned development district regulations.
      (9)   In a multiple-family, MH, A, office, commercial, central area, or
industrial district, the board of adjustment may allow a special exception from
the front yard requirements of Section
51-4.410 to permit the erection of a permanently constructed porte-cochere,
covered walkway, or canopy if the structure is rectilinear in shape and does
not exceed 25 feet in width at the building line, and if the board finds that
the structure will not adversely affect neighboring property.
   (b)   Front yard provisions for residential districts.
      (1)   If a corner lot in a single-family, duplex, or agricultural
district has two street frontages of equal distance, one frontage is governed
by the front yard regulations of this section, and the other frontage is
governed by the side yard regulations in Section
51-4.402. If the corner lot has two street frontages of unequal distance, the
shorter frontage is governed by this section, and the longer frontage is
governed by the side yard regulations in Section
51-4.402. Notwithstanding this provision, the continuity of the established
setback along street frontage must be maintained.
      (2)   In a residential district, if a structure specified in Section
51-4.408(a)(1) is erected or altered to exceed the maximum height allowed in
Section
51-4.410, an additional setback must be provided that is equal to one-half the
height of that portion of the building that exceeds 36 feet, up to a maximum
total setback of 50 feet. The additional setback is only required for that
portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in height. In case of conflict
between Subsection (a)(7) and this provision, Subsection (a)(7) applies.
      (3)   If a TH district abuts another residential district, as defined
both in this chapter and in Chapter 51A, in the same blockface and fronts on
the same side of the street, the residential district with the greater front
yard requirement determines the minimum front yard. The minimum front yard for
the residential district with the greater front yard requirement must extend at
least 150 feet into the TH district.
      (4)   In a manufactured home district, a manufactured home may not be
located closer than 20 feet to a public street right-of-way or a private drive
used for access, circulation, or service to a lot or stand where a manufactured
home is located.
      (5)   Reserved.
      (6)   Reserved.
      (7)   In MF-3 and MF-4 districts, if a building is erected or altered to
exceed 36 feet in height, an additional setback must be provided that is equal
to one-half the height of that portion of the building that exceeds 36 feet, up
to a maximum total setback of 50 feet. The additional setback is only required
for that portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in height. In case of
conflict between Subsection (a)(7) and this provision, Subsection (a)(7)
applies.
   (c)   Front yard provisions for nonresidential districts.
      (1)   In a nonresidential district, if a building is erected or altered
to exceed 36 feet in height and if the building site is either perpendicularly
contiguous to or perpendicularly across an adjoining street from a MF-1, MF-1
(A), MF-2, or MF-2(A) district, an additional setback must be provided that is
equal to one-half the height of that portion of the building that exceeds 36
feet, up to a maximum total setback of 50 feet. The additional setback is only
required for that portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in height.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   In the CA-1-CP and CA-1-SP districts, a 10-foot setback is required
that is measured from the street curb as established by the Dallas Central
Business District Streets and Vehicular Circulation Plan, Ordinance No. 13262,
as amended. When an owner establishes a setback on his property greater than
the 10-foot requirement, a floor area bonus of six times the additional setback
area is allowed. The maximum permitted floor area ratio with a bonus is 24 to
one.
      (4)   In a CA-1 district, a sidewalk must be provided between the back of
the street curb and the face of a building at grade in accordance with this
subsection. The face of a building is behind the columns for a building with
exterior columns.
         (A)   Average sidewalk width equals the total sidewalk surface area
divided by the lineal feet of frontage.
            (i)   Each frontage on each blockface must contain the required
average sidewalk width.
            (ii)   The computation of average sidewalk width excludes the area
occupied by structural walls or columns.
            (iii)   In computing average sidewalk width, the surface area at
the corner is counted only once.
         (B)   In a CA-1-CP district, sidewalks must be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the following regulations.
            (i)   An average sidewalk width of 18 feet is required.
            (ii)   A minimum sidewalk width of 12 feet that is unobstructed by
any structure or planting is required. The 12-foot minimum sidewalk width may
be divided into seven- and five-foot minimum segments.
         (C)   In a CA-1-SP district, sidewalks must be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the following regulations.
            (i)   A building with a floor area ratio of more than 15 to one is
subject to the requirements of the CA-1-CP district in Subsection (c)(4)(B).
            (ii)   A building with a floor area ratio of 15 to one or less must
have an average sidewalk width of 15 feet and a minimum sidewalk width of nine
feet that is unobstructed by any structure or planting.
         (D)   In a CA-1 district without a CP or SP overlay district
designation, sidewalks must be constructed and maintained in accordance with
the following regulations:
            (i)   A building with a floor area ratio of more than 15 to one is
subject to the requirements of the CA-1-CP district in Subsection (c)(4)(B).
            (ii)   A building with a floor area ratio of 10 to one through 15
to one must have an average sidewalk width of 15 feet and a minimum sidewalk
width of nine feet that is unobstructed by any structure.
            (iii)   All other buildings must provide a minimum sidewalk width
of 10 feet with seven feet unobstructed by any structure or planting.
   (d)   Special exception for tree preservation.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to the minimum front yard
requirements in this section to preserve an existing tree.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board
shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   Whether the requested special exception is compatible with the
character of the neighborhood.
         (B)   Whether the value of surrounding properties will be adversely
affected.
         (C)   Whether the tree is worthy of preservation.
   (e)   Schedule of minimum front yards.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, a person shall not erect,
alter, convert, or maintain a structure or part of a structure in violation of
the minimum front yard requirements of Section
51-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 16959; 17044; 17442; 17445; 17859; 19060; 19455; 20236;
20360; 22053; 26531; 30895; 30932)
SEC. 51-4.402.   MINIMUM SIDE YARD.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Required side yards must be open and unobstructed except for fences
and light poles 20 feet or less in height. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices, and
other architectural features may not project more than 12 inches into the
required side yard. A fireplace chimney may project up to two feet into the
required side yard if its area of projection does not exceed 12 square feet.
Roof eaves may project up to three feet into the required side yard. Balconies
may not project into the required side yard.
      (2)   The side yard setback is measured from the side lot line of the
building site, except when a front yard is treated as a side yard, the setback
is measured from the lot line or the existing right-of-way, as determined by
the thoroughfare plan, for all thoroughfares except for minor streets,
whichever creates the greater setback. On minor streets, the setback is
measured from the lot line or the existing right-of-way, whichever creates the
greater setback.
         (A)   When city council by ordinance establishes a specific right-of-
way line for a street, the required setback is measured from that right-of-way
line.
      (3)   If a building is erected or altered to exceed 36 feet in height and
the building site is either perpendicularly contiguous to or, if a front yard
is treated as a side yard, perpendicularly across an adjoining street or alley
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district, an additional setback must
be provided that is equal to twice the total height of the building. The
additional setback is only required for that portion of a building that exceeds
36 feet in height.
      (4)   A unitary air conditioning unit may be located in the required side
yard, but not nearer than three feet to the property line.
      (5)   The building official may approve a ramp that projects into the
required side yard to allow a handicapped person access to an existing single
family, duplex, or handicapped group dwelling unit use. The ramp must be
constructed with minimal encroachment and must be constructed to the applicable
accessibility standard as determined by the building official. Initial review
of a complete permit application for a ramp must be completed in 10 days.
   (b)   Side yard provisions for residential districts.
      (1)   In a single-family district, one required side yard may be reduced
below the setback required in Section
51-4.410, if the other side yard is increased to at least double the side yard
required in Section
51-4.410, subject to the following conditions:
         (A)   The minimum side yard between structures on contiguous lots must
not be less than the minimum side yard required in Section
51-4.410.
         (B)   To reduce the required side yard, a subdivision plat must be
approved by the commission and filed with the county clerk showing the location
of all building lines, and showing the proposed distances between the building
lines and property lines, streets lines, and alley lines.
         (C)   A person may not erect an accessory structure except for a
swimming pool and its appurtenances in the double side yard.
      (2)   In a residential district, if a structure specified in Section
51-4.408(a)(1) is erected or altered to exceed the maximum height allowed in
Section
51-4.410, an additional setback must be provided that is equal to one-half the
height of that portion of the building that exceeds 36 feet, up to a maximum
total setback of 50 feet. The additional setback is only required for that
portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in height. In case of conflict
between Subsection (a)(3) and this provision, Subsection (a)(3) applies.
      (3)   In a residential district, a person need not provide a side yard
setback for a structure accessory to a residential use, including a generator,
if the structure:
         (A)   does not exceed 15 feet in height; and
         (B)   is located in the rear 30 percent of the lot.
Note: This paragraph does not apply to a front yard governed by the side yard
regulations in Section
51-4.402 (such as a front yard treated as a side yard on a corner lot).
      (4)   In a TH, multiple-family, O-1, O-2, commercial, or central area
district, a minimum of 15 feet between each group of eight single-family
structures must be provided by plat.
      (5)   If a TH district abuts a district that requires a greater side
yard, the side yard requirements of the more restrictive district apply to the
abutting side yard in the TH district.
      (6)   In a manufactured home district, no person may locate a
manufactured home nearer than 10 feet to the side line of any lot or stand, and
the minimum space between adjacent manufactured homes must be 20 feet.
      (7)   In an MF-3 or MF-4 district, if a building is erected or altered to
exceed 36 feet in height, an additional setback must be provided that is equal
to one-half of the total height of the building, up to a maximum setback of 50
feet. In providing the additional setback, one side yard may be reduced up to
20 percent from the dimension required, if the other side yard setback is
increased by a distance equal to the reduction. The additional setback is only
required for that portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in height. In case
of conflict between Subsection (a)(3) and this provision, Subsection (a)(3)
applies.
   (c)   Side yard provisions for nonresidential districts.
      (1)   In a nonresidential district, if a building is erected or altered
to exceed 36 feet in height and the building site is either perpendicularly
contiguous to or, if a front yard is treated as side yard, perpendicularly
across an adjoining street or alley from an MF-1, MF-1(A), MF-2, or MF-2(A)
district, an additional setback must be provided that is equal to one-half the
total height of the building, up to a maximum total setback of 50 feet. The
additional setback is only required for that portion of a building that exceeds
36 feet in height.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   In an SC district, if a building site is adjacent to an R, R(A), D,
D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district, a minimum side yard of 20 feet must be
provided.
      (4)   In an SC district, a minimum side yard of 20 feet must be provided
for the side yard of a building site with a nonresidential use that abuts a
residential district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51A, and
that side yard must comply with Subsections (a)(3) and (c)(1).
      (5)   In an LC, HC, I-2, or I-3 district, a minimum side yard of 10 feet
must be provided for the side yard of a building site with a nonresidential use
that abuts a residential district, as defined both in this chapter and in
Chapter 51A, and that side yard must comply with Subsections (a)(3) and (c)(1).
      (6)   In an O-1 district, one side yard may be reduced to zero if the
other side yard is increased to a minimum of 15 feet. When an O-1 district
abuts a residential district, as defined both in this chapter and in
Chapter 51A, the side yards abutting the residential district must be:
         (A)   a minimum of 10 feet, if two side yards are provided; or
         (B)   a minimum of 15 feet, if only one side yard is provided.
      (7)   In an O-2, LO, MO, or GO district, if a nonresidential building is
erected or altered to exceed 36 feet in height, an additional setback must be
provided that is equal to one-half the total height of the building, up to a
maximum total setback of 50 feet. The additional setback is only required for
that portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in height. In case of a
conflict between this provision and Subsections (a)(3) and (c)(1), Subsections
(a)(3) and (c)(1) apply.
      (8)   In an NS or GR district, a minimum setback of 20 feet must be
provided for that portion of a side yard of a building site with a
nonresidential use which abuts or is directly across an alley from:
         (A)   an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district; or
         (B)   that portion of a planned development district restricted to
single-family and/or duplex uses.
      (9)   In an NS or GR district, a minimum setback of 10 feet must be
provided for that portion of a side yard of a building site with a
nonresidential use which abuts or is directly across an alley from:
         (A)   an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district; or
         (B)   that portion of a planned development district restricted to
multiple-family and/or manufactured home uses.
      (10)   The minimum side yards required under Subsections (c)(8) and (c)
(9) must also comply with Subsections (a)(3) and (c)(1).
      (11)   In an NO, LO, MO, or GO district, a minimum setback of 20 feet
must be provided for that portion of a side yard of a building site which abuts
or is directly across an alley from:
         (A)   an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district; or
         (B)   that portion of a planned development district restricted to
single-family and/or duplex uses.
      (12)   In an NO, LO, MO, or GO district, a minimum setback of 10 feet
must be provided for that portion of a side yard of a building site which abuts
or is directly across an alley from:
         (A)   an A, A(A), MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A) district; or
         (B)   that portion of a planned development district restricted to
multiple-family and/or manufactured home uses.
      (13)   The minimum side yards required under Subsections (c)(11) and (c)
(12) must also comply with Subsections (a)(3) and (c)(1).
      (14)   In an NO, LO, MO, or GO district, garbage collection and
mechanical equipment areas may not be located closer than 20 feet to the
nearest building site in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district, or
that portion of a planned development district restricted to single-family and/
or duplex uses.
   (d)   Special exception for child or adult care facilities. The board may
grant a special exception to the minimum side yard requirements in this section
for an accessory structure used for outdoor recreation, when in the opinion of
the board, the special exception will not adversely affect neighboring
properties.
   (e)   Special exception for tree preservation.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to the minimum side yard
requirements in this section to preserve an existing tree.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board
shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   Whether the requested special exception is compatible with the
character of the neighborhood.
         (B)   Whether the value of surrounding properties will be adversely
affected.
         (C)   Whether the tree is worthy of preservation.
   (f)   Schedule of minimum side yards. Except as provided in this section, a
person shall not erect, alter, convert, or maintain a structure or part of a
structure in violation of the minimum side yard requirements of Section 51-
4.410.” (Ord. Nos. 17442; 17859; 18597; 18849; 19060; 19455; 20236; 20360;
22053; 30895; 32659)
SEC. 51-4.403.   MINIMUM REAR YARD.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Required rear yards must be open and unobstructed except for
fences. Except as otherwise provided in this section, ordinary projections of
window sills, belt courses, cornices, and other architectural features may not
project more than 12 inches into the required rear yard. A fireplace chimney
may project up to two feet into the required rear yard if its area of
projection does not exceed 12 square feet. Roof eaves may project up to three
feet into the required rear yard. Balconies may not project into the required
rear yard.
      (2)   The rear yard setback is measured from the rear lot line of the
building site.
      (3)   If a building is erected or altered to exceed 36 feet in height and
the building site is either perpendicularly contiguous to or perpendicularly
across from an adjoining alley from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH
district, an additional setback must be provided that is equal to twice the
total height of the building. The additional setback is only required for that
portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in height.
      (4)   The building official may approve a ramp that projects into the
required rear yard to allow a handicapped person access to an existing single
family, duplex, or handicapped group dwelling unit use. The ramp must be
constructed with minimal encroachment and must be constructed to the applicable
accessibility standard as determined by the building official. Initial review
of a complete permit application for a ramp must be completed in 10 days.
   (b)   Rear yard provisions for residential districts.
      (1)   In a residential district, if a structure specified in Section
51-4.408(a)(1) is erected or altered to exceed the maximum height allowed in
Section
51-4.410, an additional setback must be provided that is equal to one-half the
height of that portion of the building that exceeds 36 feet, up to a maximum
total setback of 50 feet. The additional setback is only required for that
portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in height. In case of a conflict
between Subsection (a)(3) and this provision, Subsection (a)(3) applies.
      (2)   In a residential district, a person need not provide a rear yard
setback for a structure accessory to a residential use, including a generator,
if:
         (A)   the structure does not exceed 15 feet in height; and
         (B)   the rear yard is not adjacent to an alley.
      (3)   In an MF-3 or MF-4 district, if a building is erected or altered to
exceed 36 feet in height, an additional setback must be provided that is equal
to one-half of the total height of the building, up to a maximum total setback
of 50 feet. In providing the additional setback, the rear yard may be reduced
up to 20 percent from the dimension required if the front yard is increased a
distance equal to the reduction. The additional setback is only required for
that portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in height. In case of a
conflict between Subsection (a)(3) and this provision, Subsection (a)(3)
applies.
      (4)   In an MF-1 or MF-2 district, a minimum rear yard of 10 feet may be
provided when a building site backs upon an MF, MF(A), or nonresidential
district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51A, whether the two
districts are separated by an alley or not. The rear yard is subject to
Subsection (a)(3).
   (c)   Rear yard provisions for nonresidential districts.
      (1)   In a nonresidential district, if a building is erected or altered
to exceed 36 feet in height and the building site is either perpendicularly
contiguous to or perpendicularly across from an adjoining alley from an MF-1,
MF-1(A), MF-2, or MF-2(A) district, an additional setback must be provided that
is equal to one-half of the total height of the building, up to a maximum total
setback of 50 feet. The additional setback is only required for that portion of
a building that exceeds 36 feet in height.
      (2)   Reserved.
      (3)   In an O-2, LO, MO, or GO district, if a nonresidential building is
erected or altered to exceed 36 feet in height, an additional setback must be
provided that is equal to one-half the total height of the building, up to a
maximum total setback of 50 feet. The additional setback is only required for
that portion of a building that exceeds 36 feet in height. In case of a
conflict between this provision and Subsections (a)(3) and (c)(1), Subsections
(a)(3) and (c)(1) apply.
      (4)   In an SC district, a minimum rear yard of 20 feet must be provided
when a building site with a nonresidential use backs upon a residential
district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51A, whether the two
districts are separated by an alley or not. The rear yard is subject to
Subsections (a)(3) and (c)(1).
      (5)   In an NS, GR, LC, HC, or industrial district, a minimum rear yard
of 10 feet must be provided when a building site with a nonresidential use
backs upon a residential district, as defined both in this chapter and in
Chapter 51A, whether the two districts are separated by an alley or not. The
rear yard is subject to Subsections (a)(3) and (c)(1).
      (6)   In an NS or GR district, a minimum setback of 20 feet must be
provided for that portion of the rear yard of a building site with a
nonresidential use which abuts or is directly across an alley from:
         (A)   an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district; or
         (B)   that portion of a planned development district restricted to
single-family and/or duplex uses.
      (7)   In an NS or GR district, a minimum setback of 10 feet must be
provided for that portion of the rear yard of a building site with a
nonresidential use which abuts or is directly across an alley from:
         (A)   an A, A(A), MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A) district; or
         (B)   that portion of a planned development district restricted to
multiple-family and/or manufactured home uses.
      (8)   The minimum rear yards required under Subsections (c)(6) and (c)(7)
must also comply with Subsections (a)(3) and (c)(1).
      (9)   In an NO, LO, MO, or GO district, a minimum setback of 20 feet must
be provided for that portion of the rear yard of a building site which abuts or
is directly across an alley from:
         (A)   an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district; or
         (B)   that portion of a planned development district restricted to
single-family and/or duplex uses.
      (10)   In an NO, LO, MO, or GO district, a minimum setback of 10 feet
must be provided for that portion of the rear yard of a building site which
abuts or is directly across an alley from:
         (A)   an A, A(A), MF, MF(A), MH, or MH(A) district; or
         (B)   that portion of a planned development district restricted to
multiple-family and/or manufactured home uses.
      (11)   The minimum rear yards required under Subsections (c)(9) and (c)
(10) must also comply with Subsections (a)(3) and (c)(1).
      (12)   In an NO, LO, MO, or GO district, garbage collection and
mechanical equipment areas may not be located closer than 20 feet to the
nearest building site in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district, or
that portion of a planned development district restricted to single-family and/
or duplex uses.
   (d)   Special exception for child or adult care facilities. The board may
grant a special exception to the minimum rear yard requirements in this section
for an accessory structure used for outdoor recreation, when in the opinion of
the board, the special exception will not adversely affect neighboring
properties.
   (e)   Special exception for tree preservation.
      (1)   The board may grant a special exception to the minimum rear yard
requirements in this section to preserve an existing tree.
      (2)   In determining whether to grant this special exception, the board
shall consider the following factors:
         (A)   Whether the requested special exception is compatible with the
character of the neighborhood.
         (B)   Whether the value of surrounding properties will be adversely
affected.
         (C)   Whether the tree is worthy of preservation.
   (f)   Schedule of minimum rear yards. (Ord. Nos. 17859; 18143; 18597; 18849;
19060; 19455; 20236; 20360; 22053; 30895; 32659)
SEC. 51-4.404.   MINIMUM LOT AREA FOR RESIDENTIAL USE.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   A person shall not reduce a lot below the minimum area requirements
of this section, unless:
         (A)   the lot is replatted for a community unit development; or
         (B)   the city or other governmental agency reduces the lot size by
widening an abutting street. In this situation the minimum lot area is computed
on the basis of the original lot size before the street widening.
      (2)   The area requirements in a planned development district are
controlled by the planned development district regulations.
   (b)   Lot area provisions for manufactured home districts.
      (1)   In a MH district, a manufactured home must have the following
minimum lot area:
         (A)   1,500 square feet for a manufactured home on a transient stand;
or
         (B)   4,000 square feet for a manufactured home on a subdivided lot.
   (c)   Schedule of minimum yard area for residential use.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, a person shall not erect,
alter, or convert any residential structure or part of a structure to have a
smaller lot area than is allowed in the minimum regulations of Section
51-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 18597; 20360)
SEC. 51-4.405.   MINIMUM LOT WIDTH FOR RESIDENTIAL USE.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   A person may not reduce a lot below the minimum width requirements
of this section, unless:
         (A)   the lot is platted for a community unit development; or
         (B)   the city or other governmental agency reduces the lot size by
widening an abutting street. In this situation the minimum lot width is
computed on the basis of the original lot size before widening.
      (2)   The lot width requirements in a planned development district are
controlled by the planned development district regulations.
      (3)   The minimum lot width for a residential use is 10 feet, unless a
larger minimum lot width is specified in Section
51-4.410.
   (b)   Lot width provisions for MH districts. In an MH district, a
manufactured home must have the following minimum lot width:
      (1)   30 feet for a manufactured home on a transient stand; or
      (2)   40 feet for a manufactured home on a subdivided lot.
   (c)   Schedule of minimum lot width for residential use. Except as provided
in this section, a person shall not erect, alter, or convert any residential
structure or part of a structure to have a smaller lot width than is allowed in
the larger of the lot width required in this section or the lot width required
by the minimum regulations of Section
51-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 20360; 24731)
SEC. 51-4.406.   MINIMUM LOT DEPTH FOR RESIDENTIAL USE.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   A person may not reduce a lot below the minimum depth requirements
of this section, unless:
         (A)   the lot is platted for a community unit development; or
         (B)   the city or other governmental agency reduces the lot size by
widening an abutting street. In this situation the minimum lot depth is
computed by the original lot size before the street widening.
      (2)   The depth requirements in a planned development district are
controlled by the planned development district regulations.
      (3)   The minimum lot depth for a residential use is 10 feet, unless a
larger minimum lot depth is specified in Section
51-4.401.
   (b)   Lot depth provisions for MH districts. In an MH district, a
manufactured home must have the following minimum lot depth:
      (1)   50 feet for a manufactured home on a transient stand; or
      (2)   80 feet for a manufactured home on a subdivided lot.
   (c)   Schedule of minimum lot depth for residential use. Except as provided
in this section, a person shall not erect, alter, or convert any residential
structure or part of a structure to have a smaller lot depth than is allowed in
the larger of this section or the minimum regulations of Section
51-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 20360; 24731)
SEC. 51-4.407.   MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Except as provided in Paragraph (2), in a residential, office, NS,
SC, GR, or LC district, institutional buildings may cover a maximum of 60
percent of the lot.
      (2)   In single family and MH districts, structures used solely for child
or adult care facility uses are limited to the maximum lot coverage applicable
to residential structures in each district
      (3)   The maximum lot coverage requirements in a planned development
district are controlled by the planned development district regulations.
      (4)   The board may grant a special exception to increase the lot
coverage on a building site in an NO, LO, MO, or GO district by no more than 10
percent if:
         (A)   the building site is more than 100 feet from an R, R(A), D, D
(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district, or that portion of a planned development
district restricted to single-family and/or duplex uses;
         (B)   the increase will not adversely affect neighboring property; and
         (C)   the building site is landscaped in accordance with a landscape
plan submitted to and approved by the board. The board may also impose
appropriate facade standards for off-street parking structures on the building
site as a condition to the granting of this special exception.
   (b)   Maximum lot coverage for residential districts.
      (1)   In a TH district, 80 percent of an individual lot may be covered by
structures, if the coverage for the total project does not exceed 60 percent
and at least 40 percent is reserved for open space.
   (c)   Schedule of maximum lot coverage.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, a person shall not erect,
alter, or convert any structure or part of a structure to cover a greater
percentage of a lot than is allowed in Section
51-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 17812; 18849; 19455; 27404; 32659)
SEC. 51-4.408.   MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT.
   (a)   Special height provisions.
      (1)   Except as provided in this paragraph, structures for utility and
service uses and institutional uses may be erected to any height consistent
with the Federal Aviation Administration air space limitations and the building
code, if setbacks are provided as required by Sections
51-4.401,
51-4.402, and
51-4.403. However, local utility transmission and distribution lines and
supporting structures, and, as specified in this paragraph, mounted cellular
antennae are exempt from the setbacks required by Sections
51-4.401,
51-4.402, and
51-4.403. A mounted cellular antenna, as defined in Section
51-4.202(12), attached to a utility structure is exempt from the setbacks
required by Sections
51-4.401,
51-4.402, and
51-4.403 if the utility structure is greater than 65 feet in height. For
purposes of this subparagraph, a utility structure means an electrical
transmission distribution tower, an elevated water storage tank, and any other
structure operated by a municipality, a transit authority, or a certificated,
franchised, or licensed utility company in connection with provision of the
utility. In single family, duplex, townhouse, MF-1, and MF-2 districts,
structures used solely for child or adult care facility uses are limited to the
maximum structure height applicable in each district.”
      (2)   In a district in which building height is limited to 36 feet or
less, the following structures may project a maximum of 12 feet above the
height specified in Section
51-4.410:
         (A)   structures on top of a building:
            (i)   elevator penthouse or bulkhead;
            (ii)   mechanical equipment room;
            (iii)   cooling tower;
            (iv)   tank designed to hold liquids;
            (v)   ornamental cupola or dome;
            (vi)   skylights;
            (vii)   clerestory;
            (viii)   visual screens which surround roof mounted mechanical
equipment;
            (ix)   chimney and vent stacks;
            (x)   amateur communications tower; and
            (xi)   parapet wall, limited to a height of four feet; and
         (B)   structures at grade level:
            (i)   amateur communications tower.
      (3)   The maximum building height requirements in a planned development
district are controlled by the planned development district regulations. The
maximum permitted height in a matrix district is established by the city
council at the time the district is created.
      (4)   In single-family, duplex, townhouse, MF-1, and MF-2 districts:
         (A)   no dormer eaves may project above the height specified in
Section
51-4.410; and
         (B)   the highest point of a structure with a gable, hip, gambrel, or
dome roof may not project more than 12 feet above the height specified in
Section
51-4.410. (See illustrations in Figure 1.)
FIGURE 1
ILLUSTRATION OF SECTION 51-4.408(a)(4)
(Insert diagram here)
de   =   dormer eaves.
e   =   the lowest eaves of the structure.
g   =   grade (the average of the finished ground surface elevations measured
at the highest and lowest exterior corners of the structure)
g1 1    =   the lowest finished ground surface elevation at an exterior corner
of the structure.
g2 2    =   the highest finished ground surface elevation at an exterior corner
of the structure.
h1 3    =   the vertical distance measured from grade to the midpoint of the
vertical dimension between the lowest eaves and the highest ridge of the
structure.
h2 4    =   the vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of
the structure.
r   =   the highest ridge and the highest point of the structure.
s   =   a sloping ground surface.
The height specified in Section
51-4.410 plus 12 feet is the maximum permitted vertical distance measured from
grade to the highest point of the structure.
Dormer eaves may not project above the height specified in Section
51-4.410. (Ord. 18481)
      (5)   In an SC district, the following additional height regulations
apply:
         (A)   The maximum building height in an SC district is 120 feet unless
the SC district boundary line does not touch at any point the boundary line of
a zoning district in which building height is limited to less than 240 feet, in
which case the maximum building height in the SC district is 240 feet.
         (B)   All portions of a building within 330 feet of private property
in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district, or within 330 feet of that
portion of a planned development district restricted to single-family and/or
duplex uses, are limited to 60 feet in height. The distance measured is the
shortest distance between the building and the private property.
         (C)   For purposes of this subsection, “private property” means any
property not dedicated to public use, except that "private property" does not
include:
            (i)   a private street or alley;
            (ii)   property on which a utility and service use, as defined in
Section
51-4.202, is being conducted as a main use; and
            (iii)   a railroad right-of-way.
      (6)   In an NO, LO, MO, or GO district in which building height is
limited to 35 feet or less, the structures in Subsection (a)(2) may project a
maximum of four feet above the maximum permitted height established for the
district by the city council.
   (b)   Schedule of maximum building heights.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, a person shall not erect,
alter, or convert any structure or part of a structure to exceed the maximum
height standards in Section
51-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 18481; 18597; 18849; 19455; 21000; 27404; 28072; 32659)
 
Notes
1  
2  
3  
4  
SEC. 51-4.409.   MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Reserved.
      (2)   A basement is not counted in the computation of floor area ratio.
      (3)   The maximum floor area ratio requirements in a planned development
district are controlled by the planned development district regulations. The
maximum floor area ratio in a matrix district is established by the city
council at the time the district is created.
      (4)   Reserved.
      (5)   The maximum floor area ratio in the CA-1-CP and CA-1-SP districts
may be increased to 24 to 1 by the use of the building setback bonus provisions
in the front yard regulations.
      (6)   In an SC district, the maximum floor area ratio for office uses, as
defined in Section
51-4.210(1), is .75 to 1, and the maximum floor area ratio for all uses
combined is 1 to 1.
      (7)   In an I-2 district, a specific use permit is required to authorize
a floor area ratio greater than 4:1.
   (b)   Schedule of maximum floor area ratio.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, a person shall not erect or
alter any structure or part of a structure to exceed the maximum floor area
ratio in Section
51-4.410. (Ord. Nos. 16959; 18597; 18849; 18920; 20361)
SEC. 51-4.410.   SCHEDULE OF YARD, LOT, AND SPACE REGULATIONS.
   The following charts comprise the schedule of yard, lot, and space
regulations for purposes of this division. (Ord. 18920)
YARD, LOT, AND SPACE CHART (PDF)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9856.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9854.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9852.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5d3109ba2574ef615e6cc8f3cfc4daa86f62e4aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9850.png]
 
SEC. 51-4.411.   MAXIMUM DENSITIES FOR RESIDENTIAL USES.
   (a)   Density provisions for residential districts.
      (1)   In a TH-1 district, no more than six dwelling units for each acre
are allowed.
      (2)   In a TH-2 district, no more than nine dwelling units for each acre
are allowed.
      (3)   In a TH-3 district, no more than 12 dwelling units for each acre
are allowed.
      (4)   In a TH-4 district, no more than 15 dwelling units for each acre
are allowed.
   (b)   Density provisions for nonresidential districts.
      (1)   In an SC district, no more than 15 dwelling units for each acre are
allowed.
      (2)   In an NS district that abuts an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH
district, or that abuts that portion of a planned development district
restricted to single-family and/or duplex uses, no more than 15 dwelling units
for each acre are allowed. (Ord. Nos. 18597; 19455)
SEC. 51-4.412.   SHARED ACCESS DEVELOPMENT.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.411 of
Chapter 51A, “DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE: ORDINANCE NO. 19455,” of the Dallas City
Code, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future.
(Ord. 24731)
Division 51-4.500
Overlay and Conservation District Regulations.
(Title, Ord. 19045)
SEC. 51-4.501.   HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 4.501 of
CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF THE DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE,” of the Dallas City Code,
as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos.
17243; 17654; 17655; 17656; 17838; 18211; 19455; 19499; 23506)
SEC. 51-4.502.   INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   The institutional overlay district promotes cultural, educational,
and medical institutions, and enhances their benefit to the community while
protecting adjacent property.
      (2)   Institutional uses in this section include community service,
religious, medical, and educational (excluding business and technical schools)
uses, and may be permitted in an institutional overlay district.
      (3)   All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district are allowed in
an institutional overlay district.
      (4)   The zoning regulations of the underlying zoning district are
applicable to an institutional overlay district unless otherwise provided in
this section.
   (b)   Special yard, lot, and space regulations.
      (1)   In an institutional overlay district, institutional buildings over
36 feet in height are not subject to additional setback requirements except:
         (A)   Additional setbacks, if any, for institutional buildings greater
than 36 feet in height may be established by the site plan process.
         (B)   If a building is erected or altered to exceed 36 feet in height,
and if the building is adjacent to an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH
district, an additional setback must be provided that is equal to the height of
that portion of the building that exceeds 36 feet in height. The additional
setback is only required for that portion of the building that exceeds 36 feet
in height.
      (2)   Buildings in an institutional overlay district must comply with
applicable height regulations.
   (c)   Special parking regulations.
      (1)   Required off-street parking for institutional uses may be located
anywhere within the boundaries of the institutional overlay district or outside
the district if the parking meets the requirements of Section
51-4.301(a)(11).
      (2)   Not more than 20 percent of the required off-street parking spaces
for institutional uses may be located outside the institutional overlay
district if the remote off-street parking spaces are:
         (A)   within one-half mile of the facility to be served;
         (B)   consolidated under one certificate of occupancy with the
facility to be served;
         (C)   located in a district zoned for a commercial parking lot or
garage use; and
         (D)   supplied with adequate transportation access for the users of
the institutional facilities. The means of transportation access must be other
than walking, private automobile, or public transportation if the parking is
farther than 300 feet from the facility to be served.
      (3)   The applicant for remote parking must submit a legal document that
guarantees the availability of the remote spaces and the modes of
transportation other than walking, private automobile, or public
transportation, that are available to the users of the remote parking.
   (d)   Procedures for establishing an institutional overlay district. This
subsection incorporates by reference the language of Subsection (d),
“Procedures for Establishing an Institutional Overlay District,” of Section
51A-4.502, “Institutional Overlay District,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City
Code, as amended, as that subsection exists today and as it may be amended in
the future.
   (e)   Site plan process. This subsection incorporates by reference the
language of Subsection (e), “Site Plan Process,” of Section 51A-4.502,
“Institutional Overlay District,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as
amended, as that subsection exists today and as it may be amended in the
future. (Ord. Nos. 17226; 17393; 19455; 27404)
SEC. 51-4.503.   D AND D-1 LIQUOR CONTROL OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.503, “D
and D-1 Liquor Control Overlay Districts,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City
Code, as amended, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the
future. (Ord. Nos. 18040; 21735; 27404)
SEC. 51-4.504.   DEMOLITION DELAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.
This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.504 of
Chapter 51A of the Dallas Development Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 27404;
28072; 29893)
SEC. 51-4.505.   CONSERVATION DISTRICTS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.505 of
CHAPTER 51A of the Dallas City Code, as that section exists today and as it may
be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 19045; 19930; 20037; 24843)
SEC. 51-4.506.   MODIFIED DELTA OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.506,
“Modified Delta Overlay District,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as
amended, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future.
(Ord. Nos. 19453; 27404)
SEC. 51-4.507.   NEIGHBORHOOD STABILIZATION OVERLAY.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.507 of
Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended. (Ord. 26161)
SEC. 51-4.508.   TURTLE CREEK ENVIRONMENTAL CORRIDOR.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.508 of
CHAPTER 51A, “DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE: ORDINANCE NO. 19455, AS AMENDED,” of the
Dallas City Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 26026; 26248)
SEC. 51-4.509.   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT OVERLAY.
This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.510 of
Chapter 51A of the Dallas Development Code, as amended. (Ord. 30931)
Division 51-4.600
District Regulations of Special Applicability.
SEC. 51-4.601.   CREATION OF A BUILDING SITE.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.601 of
CHAPTER 51A, “DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE; ORDINANCE NO. 19455, AS AMENDED,” of the
Dallas City Code. (Ord. Nos. 17328; 25809)
SEC. 51-4.602.   FENCE, SCREENING, AND VISUAL OBSTRUCTION REGULATIONS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.602,
“Fence, Screening, and Visual Obstruction Regulations,” of Division 51A-4.600,
“Regulations of Special Applicability,” of Article IV, “Zoning Regulations,” of
CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE,” of the Dallas City Code, as
that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos.
18849; 19062; 19455; 20236; 20362; 20539; 22994; 25831)
SEC. 51-4.603.   USE OF A CONVEYANCE AS A BUILDING.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.603 of
CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE,” as that section exists today
and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 17034; 20360; 22759)
SEC. 51-4.604.   RESTRICTIONS ON ACCESS THROUGH A LOT.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.604,
“Restrictions on Access through a Lot,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code,
as amended, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the
future. (Ord. Nos. 17442; 20238; 27404)
SEC. 51-4.605.   DESIGN STANDARDS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-4.604,
“Design Standards,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended, as that
section exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 25785;
27404)
Division 51-4.700
Zoning Procedures.
   This division incorporates by reference the language of Division 51A-4.700,
“Zoning Procedures,” of CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF THE DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE,”
as that division exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord.
Nos. 16170; 17048; 17403; 17651; 17652; 17810; 18849; 18934; 19455; 19809;
19872; 19935; 20037; 20307; 20381; 20412; 20926; 21553; 22053; 22389)
Division 51-4.800
Development Impact Review.
SEC. 51-4.801.   PURPOSE.
   The general objectives of this division are to promote and protect the
health, safety, and general welfare of the public through the establishment of
an administrative review procedure for certain proposed development considered
likely to significantly impact surrounding land uses and infrastructure needs
and demands. Development impact review should occur before the developer has
completed a full set of working drawings for submission as part of an
application for a building permit. As part of the review procedure, the
developer may be required to submit a site plan indicating building siting and
layout, buffering, landscaping, usable open space, access, lighting, loading,
and other specific data. Site plan review is not intended to mandate aesthetics
of design, nor is it intended to alter basic development standards such as
floor area ratio, density requirements, height, setbacks, and coverage. (Ord.
18921)
SEC. 51-4.802.   DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
      (1)   BUILDING ENVELOPE means the three dimensional form within which the
horizontal and vertical elements of a building are contained.
      (2)   CALIPER means the diameter of the trunk measured six inches above
ground level, up to and including four-inch-caliper size, and measured 12
inches above ground level if the measurement, taken at six inches above ground
level, exceeds four inches. If a tree is of a multi-trunk variety, the caliper
of the tree is the average caliper of all of its trunks.
      (3)   ESTIMATED TRIP GENERATION means the total number of vehicle trips
generated by one or more uses on the lot derived from calculations based
exclusively on trip generation assumptions contained in Table 1 in Section
51-4.803. (Ord. 18921)
SEC. 51-4.803.   SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (a)   When a site plan is required.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsections (a)(3) and (a)(4), a
site plan must be submitted in accordance with the requirements of this section
before an application is made for a permit for work on an individual lot if:
         (A)   the lot is in a district or subdistrict listed in Subsection (a)
(2); and
         (B)   the estimated trip generation for all uses on the lot
collectively is equal to or greater than 6,000 trips per day and 500 trips per
day per acre. (See Table 1 to calculate estimated trip generation.)
      (2)   The districts and subdistricts listed for purposes of Subsection
(a)(1) are:
         (A)   all nonresidential zoning districts except central area
districts; and
         (B)   SC, GR, LC, HC, O-2, and industrial subdistricts in the Oak Lawn
Special Purpose District (Planned Development District No. 193).
TABLE 1
TRIP GENERATION ASSUMPTIONS
USE                                       TRIPS PER DAY
INDUSTRIAL USES                           6.97 per 1,000 gsf
LODGING USES                              10.50 per room
OFFICE USES
Financial institution without drive-in    140.61 per 1,000 gsf
Financial institution with drive-in       265.21 per 1,000 gsf
Other by floor area:
10,000 gsf or less                        24.60 per 1,000 gsf
over 10,000 to 50,000 gsf                 16.58 per 1,000 gsf
over 50,000 to 100,000 gsf                14.03 per 1,000 gsf
over 100,000 to 150,000 gsf               12.71 per 1,000 gsf
over 150,000 to 200,000 gsf               11.85 per 1,000 gsf
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single Family                             9.55
Other                                     6.59/dwelling unit
RETAIL AND PERSONAL SERVICE USES
General merchandise over 3,500 sq.ft.     177.59 per 1,000 gsf
General merchandise under 3,500 sq. ft.   737.99 per 1,000 gsf
Restaurant without drive-in               205.36 per 1,000 gsf
Restaurant with drive-in                  786.22 per 1,000 gsf
Other:
10,000 gsf or less                        167.59 per 1,000 gsf
over 10,000 to 50,000 gsf                 91.65 per 1,000 gsf
over 50,000 to 100,000 gsf                70.67 per 1,000 gsf
over 100,000 to 150,000 gsf               62.59 per 1,000 gsf
over 150,000 to 200,000 gsf               54.50 per 1,000 gsf
WHOLESALE, DISTRIBUTION, AND STORAGE USES
Mini-warehouse                            2.61 per 1,000 gsf
Warehouse                                 4.88 per 1,000 gsf
"gsf" means gross square feet. These rates are based on the ITE Trip
Generation Report, 5th edition, January, 1991. Rates for uses and floor areas
not listed shall be based on the ITE Trip Generation Report. Rates for uses
and floor areas not listed in the ITE Trip Generation Report shall be
determined by the Director of Transportation based on a survey of similar
existing uses.
 
      (3)   A site plan is not required under Subsection (a)(1) if the permit
is only needed for:
         (A)   restoration of a building that has been damaged or destroyed by
fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the public enemy, or accident of
any kind. For purposes of this subsection, “restoration” means the act of
putting back into a former or original state; or
         (B)   construction work that does not change the use or increase the
existing building height, floor area ratio, or nonpermeable coverage of the
lot.
      (4)   If a site plan is included as part of an ordinance establishing the
zoning classification of a lot, or if a site plan is approved by official
action of the board of adjustment as a condition to the granting of a variance
or special exception on the lot, then no site plan is required to be submitted
or approved under this section if the record also reflects that:
         (A)   traffic signals, turn lanes, additional lanes, or other public
infrastructure improvements were, or are required to be, constructed or paid
for by the owner in connection with the passage of the ordinance or the
granting of the variance or special exception; and
         (B)   if the lot would otherwise be subject to the residential
adjacency standards of this section, the approving body considered the impact
of the development on surrounding land uses.
      (5)   The building official shall not issue a permit authorizing work for
which a site plan is required under Subsection (a)(1) unless the site plan has
been approved by:
         (A)   the director; or
         (B)   the city plan commission as part of the appeal process.
   (b)   Application for review. An application for review of a site plan
required under this section must be filed with the director on a form furnished
by the city for that purpose. The application must contain the following:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number, and signature of the
applicant. If the applicant is not the owner of the lot, he must submit a
letter from the owner authorizing him to act on the owner's behalf.
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the lot. If
there is more than one owner, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of
all owners must be provided.
      (3)   The street address and complete legal description of the lot.
      (4)   A brief description of all existing and proposed uses on the lot.
      (5)   Any other reasonable and pertinent information that the director
determines to be necessary for site plan review.
   (c)   Site plan submission. A site plan submission under this section must
include one reproducible print (backline polyester film or equal) with five
folded blueline or blackline copies, and one 8-1/2 inch by 11 inch clear film
positive. The print and copies must have a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or
larger (e.g. one inch equals 50 feet, one inch equals 40 feet, etc.) and be on
a standard drawing sheet of a size not to exceed 36 inches by 48 inches.
   (d)   Site plan requisites.
      (1)   In general. A site plan submitted for review under this section
must:
         (A)   include a location diagram showing the position of the lot in
relation to surrounding streets in the city's major street network;
         (B)   contain title block and reference information pertaining to the
lot and plan, including the name of the project, the names of the persons
responsible for preparing the plan, the zoning classification of the lot, the
scale of the plan (both numeric and graphic), and the date of submission, with
provision for dating revisions;
         (C)   show the dimensions of the lot, and indicate lot area in both
square feet and acres;
         (D)   show or describe the building envelope for each existing and
proposed building on the lot;
         (E)   show the location of all existing streets, alleys, easements for
street purposes, utility and other easements, floodway management areas, and
the 100-year flood plain, if applicable;
         (F)   show all areas proposed for dedication or reservation;
         (G)   show zoning setback and building lines for each existing and
proposed building on the lot;
         (H)   show all existing and proposed points of ingress and egress and
estimated peak hour turning movements to and from existing and proposed public
and private streets and alleys;
         (I)   show all existing and proposed median cuts and driveways located
within 250 feet of the lot;
         (J)   show all existing and proposed off-street parking and loading
areas, indicating the general dimensions of parking bays, aisles, and
driveways, and the number of cars to be accommodated in each row of parking
spaces;
         (K)   show all existing and proposed provisions for pedestrian
circulation on the lot, including sidewalks, walkways, crosswalks, and
pedestrian plazas;
         (L)   indicate average daily traffic counts on adjacent streets and
illustrate estimated peak hour turning movements at intersections located
within 250 feet of the lot;
         (M)   show the location and indicate the type of any special traffic
regulation facilities proposed or required;
         (N)   show the existing and proposed topography of the lot using
contours at intervals of two feet or less. Existing contours must be shown with
dashed lines; proposed contours must be shown with solid lines;
         (O)   show the existing and proposed locations for municipal solid
waste containers and receptacles;
         (P)   show surrounding properties and the approximate location of
buildings within a distance of 250 feet of the lot, indicating their zoning
district classification. Surrounding properties may be drawn at a smaller scale
than that required under Subsection (c);
         (Q)   show locations, calipers, and names (both common and scientific)
of all trees near proposed construction activity; and
         (R)   contain any other reasonable and pertinent information that the
director determines to be necessary for site plan review.
      (2)   Residential adjacency items. If the lot has a residential adjacency
as defined in Subsection (d)(3) and is not in the Oak Lawn Special Purpose
District (Planned Development District No. 193), the site plan must:
         (A)   show the existing and proposed locations for all building
entrances, exits, service areas, and windows;
         (B)   show the location and indicate the type, size, and height of
perimeter fencing, screening, and buffering elements proposed or required;
         (C)   show all provisions to be made to direct and detain storm water
and to mitigate erosion both during and following the completion of
construction;
         (D)   show the location and indicate the type, orientation, size, and
height of light standards which will illuminate any portion of a required yard;
         (E)   show the location of existing and proposed signs; and
         (F)   contain any other reasonable and pertinent information that the
director determines to be necessary for site plan review.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, a lot has a residential adjacency
when:
         (A)   the lot is adjacent to or directly across:
            (i)   a street 64 feet or less in width; or
            (ii)   an alley;
from an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH district; or
         (B)   an existing or proposed building or structure on the lot is
within 330 feet of a lot in an R, R(A), D, D(A), TH, TH(A), or CH zoning
district.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, any identifiable portion of a planned
development (PD) district governed by a distinct set of use regulations is
treated as though it were a separate zoning district. If the PD district or a
portion of the district is limited to those uses permitted in an expressly
stated zoning district, the PD district or portion of the district is treated
as if it were that expressly stated zoning district; otherwise it is treated as
if it were:
         (A)   a duplex zoning district if it is restricted to single-family
uses in detached structures and/or duplex uses;
         (B)   an MF-2 zoning district if it is restricted to residential uses
and allows single-family uses in attached structures or multiple-family uses
not exceeding 36 feet in height;
         (C)   an MF-3 zoning district if it is restricted to residential uses
and allows single-family uses in attached structures or multiple-family uses
exceeding 36 feet in height; or
         (D)   a nonresidential zoning district if it allows a nonresidential
use.
      (5)   The following information, in addition to being shown graphically,
must be separately tabulated in a conspicuous place on the plan for quick and
easy reference:
         (A)   Lot area in square feet and acres.
         (B)   Total building floor area and floor area for each use on the lot
in square feet.
         (C)   Floor area ratio of the lot.
         (D)   Square footage and percentages of building coverage and
nonpermeable coverage of the lot.
         (E)   Number of parking spaces required and number of parking spaces
provided.
         (F)   Zoning classification of the lot.
   (e)   Review by the director.
      (1)   Upon the filing of a complete application for review of a site plan
and a complete site plan submission, the director shall promptly forward one
copy of each to the directors of transportation and public works and health and
human services for their review and comments. The directors of transportation
and public works and health and human services shall review the application and
submission and return written recommendations to the director within 15
calendar days of the filing date.
      (2)   The director shall make a decision regarding the application and
submission within 30 calendar days of the filing date. That decision must take
one of three forms:
         (A)   Approval, no conditions.
         (B)   Approval, subject to conditions noted.
         (C)   Denial.
      (3)   If the director fails to make a decision regarding the application
and submission within 30 calendar days of the filing date, the application and
submission are considered to be approved subject to compliance with all
applicable city codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   The time periods in Subsections (e)(1), (e)(2), and (e)(3) do not
begin to run until the applicant provides all of the information required in
Subsections (b), (c), and (d). In cases where the director requests additional
information within 10 calendar days of the filing date, the time periods in
Subsections (e)(1), (e)(2), and (e)(3) do not begin to run until the applicant
provides the additional information.
      (5)   If the director denies an application or submission, he shall state
in writing the specific reasons for denial. If he approves an application or
submission subject to conditions, he shall state in writing the specific
requirements to be met before issuance of a permit to authorize work on the
lot.
   (f)   Grounds for denial.
      (1)   In general. The director shall deny a site plan application or
submission under this section if:
         (A)   it does not contain sufficient information to allow for site
plan review; or
         (B)   the site plan does not comply with all applicable city codes,
ordinances, rules, or regulations.
      (2)   Infrastructure standards.
         (A)   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (g), the director
shall deny a site plan under this section if:
            (i)   the provisions for vehicular loading and unloading or
parking, or for vehicular or pedestrian circulation, will create hazards to
safety or will impose a significant burden upon public facilities which can be
avoided or substantially mitigated by reasonable modifications in the plan, or
            (ii)   the owner of the lot refuses to comply with one or more of
the following development related infrastructure cost-sharing requirements:
               (aa)   The owner shall pay for a proportion of the cost of
traffic signal upgrade for an intersection within a distance of 250 feet of the
lot according to the following ratio:
                   __A__
                  A + B
Where A represents projected traffic using the intersection generated by the
owner's development, and B represents current traffic counts at the
intersection. Values for both A and B are determined by the director of
transportation and public works.
               (bb)   The owner shall pay for a proportion of the cost of
constructing right and left turn lanes and bus turnouts that are in part
necessitated by his development according to the following ratio:
                   C__
                  C + D
Where C represents projected demand for the lanes and turnouts generated by the
development, and D represents current demand for the lanes and turnouts. Values
for both C and D are determined by the director of transportation and public
works.
               (cc)   The owner shall pay the entire construction cost of those
stacking lanes which the director of transportation and public works determines
are necessitated by his development.
               (dd)   The owner shall grant to the city easements for those
right and left turn lanes, stacking lanes, and bus turnouts which the director
of transportation and public works determines are necessitated by his
development.
         (B)   In cases where the owner is responsible for the entire cost of
an infrastructure improvement, the director may allow the owner to construct
the improvement upon entering into a private development contract satisfactory
to the city. The contract must contain terms and conditions stated on forms
provided by the director and approved by the city attorney. The contract must
include performance and payment bonds acceptable as to form by the city
attorney, and be executed by the owner and at least one corporate surety
authorized to do business in the state of Texas. In addition, the owner shall
provide adequate financial assurance that funds will be available to construct
the improvement, which may consist of a letter of credit or other instrument
payable to the city of Dallas.
         (C)   In cases where the owner is responsible for a proportion of the
cost of an infrastructure improvement, the owner shall submit payment in the
form of cash or a letter of credit to the building official before issuance of
a permit to authorize work on the lot. Cash payments must be credited to
separate interest-bearing accounts and used only for financing construction of
the specified improvements. If none of the funds collected are spent on the
specified improvements within five years after the date of collection, the
funds must be returned to the present owner of the lot together with interest
accrued at the city's investment rate during the five-year period, less
administrative costs.
      (3)   Residential adjacency standards. If the lot has a residential
adjacency as defined in Subsection (d)(3) and is not in the Oak Lawn Special
Purpose District (Planned Development District No. 193), the director shall
also review the site plan for compliance with these neighborhood protection
standards and, except as otherwise provided in Subsection (g), shall deny the
site plan if:
         (A)   the location of existing or proposed buildings, structures, or
equipment on the lot will be detrimental or injurious to each other or to
surrounding development, or will impose an undue burden on public facilities,
and the detrimental or injurious results or undue burden can be avoided or
substantially mitigated by reasonable modifications in the plan;
         (B)   development of the lot will create a soil or drainage problem
which can be avoided or substantially mitigated by reasonable modifications in
the plan;
         (C)   the proposed on-site fencing, screening, or buffering elements
do not provide adequate protection to adjacent property, and adequate
protection can be provided by reasonable modifications in the plan; or
         (D)   the exterior lighting to be provided on the lot will create a
hazard to motorists on an adjacent public or private street or alley, or will
damage or diminish the value or usability of adjacent property.
      (4)   If the director denies a site plan under this section, he shall
state in writing the specific reasons for denial.
   (g)   Approval subject to conditions noted. As an alternative to denial of a
site plan under Subsection (f), the director may approve the site plan subject
to conditions noted if compliance with all conditions will eliminate what would
otherwise constitute grounds for denial. If the director approves the site plan
subject to conditions noted, he shall state in writing the specific
requirements to be met before issuance of a permit to authorize work on the
lot.
   (h)   Approval, no conditions. If there are no grounds for denial of a site
plan under Subsection (f), the director shall approve the site plan with no
conditions.
   (i)   Appeals.
      (1)   The applicant may appeal the following decisions made by the
director:
         (A)   Denial of an application or site plan submission.
         (B)   Approval of an application or site plan submission subject to
conditions noted.
      (2)   An appeal must be made within 10 days after notice is given to the
applicant of the director's decision.
      (3)   An appeal is made by filing a written request with the director for
review by the city plan commission.
      (4)   Decisions of the commission are final as to available
administrative remedies and are binding on all parties.
      (5)   If the commission fails to make a decision on the appeal within 30
calendar days of the date that the written request is filed with the director,
the application and submission are considered to be approved subject to
compliance with all other applicable city codes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations.
   (j)   Validity of approved site plan. An approved site plan is valid for a
period of two years. If a permit to authorize work on the lot has not been
obtained upon expiration of the two-year period, a new site plan submission is
required.
   (k)   Effect of approved site plan. The approval of a site plan by the
director or commission does not result in the vesting of development rights,
nor does it permit the violation of any city ordinance or state law, nor does
it preclude the building official from refusing to issue a permit if he
determines that plans and specifications do not comply with applicable laws and
ordinances (including ordinance amendments made after site plan approval), or
that the work described in the application for the permit does not conform to
the requirements of the construction codes. (Ord. Nos. 18921; 19455; 19929;
20037; 21760; 22053; 28073; 32864)
ARTICLE V.
FLOOD PLAIN AND ESCARPMENT ZONE REGULATIONS.
   This article incorporates by reference the language of Article V, “Flood
Plain and Escarpment Zone Regulations,” of CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF THE DALLAS
DEVELOPMENT CODE,” of the Dallas City Code, as that article exists today and as
it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 13470; 17226; 17393; 17482; 18008;
18755; 19280; 19686; 20360; 22920; 26000)
ARTICLE VI.
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
SEC. 51-6.101.   DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO THE ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.
   The following definitions are applicable to the environmental performance
standards in this article:
      (1)   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL means the sound pressure level in decibels
as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighing network. The level so
read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
      (2)   BACKGROUND NOISE means noise from all sources other than that under
specific consideration including traffic operating on public thoroughfares, and
is established by measuring the noise level over an eight-minute period of
time.
      (3)   BOUNDING LOT LINE means the far side of any street, alley, stream
or other permanently dedicated open space from the stationary source when such
open space exists between the lot line of the stationary source and adjacent
property. When no such open space exists, the common line between two parcels
of property shall be interpreted as the bounding lot line.
      (4)   CONSTRUCTION means any phase of the on-site erection, including
excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair, of any building or structure
which is designed to be used on that site.
      (5)   DAYTIME means the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any
given day.
      (6)   DECIBEL (dB) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound,
equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of
the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
Micronewtons per square meter).
      (7)   EQUIVALENT SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL (Leg) means the time weighted, mean
square, A-weighted sound pressure level.
      (7.1)   LEGAL HOLIDAY means New Year’s Day (January 1), Memorial Day
(observed date), Fourth of July (July 4), Labor Day (observed date),
Thanksgiving Day (observed date), and Christmas Day (December 25).
      (8)   MOBILE SOURCE means sound pressure created by motorized vehicles
designed to operate on public rights-of-way, including, but not limited to,
automobiles and aircraft.
      (9)   NOISE means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which
causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on
humans.
      (10)   NOISE DISTURBANCE means any sound which (a) endangers or injures
the safety or health of humans or animals, or (b) annoys or disturbs a
reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or (c) endangers or injures personal
or real property.
      (11)   PERMISSIBLE SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL means the equivalent sound
pressure level (Leg) averaged over an eight-minute period of time.
      (12)   PERSON means any individual, association, partnership, or
corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency, or
instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state.
      (13)   PROPERTY means all contiguous land and any fixed or moveable
object on such land, under common ownership, irrespective of leasehold or other
interest.
      (14)   RETAIL DISTRICTS means the NS, SC, and GR districts.
      (15)   SOUND means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use
of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B, or C, as
specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound
level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971, or the latest approved revision thereof). If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
      (16)   SOUND LEVEL METER means an instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.
      (17)   SOUND PRESSURE means the instantaneous difference between the
actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in
space, as produced by sound energy.
      (18)   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10
of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20
micropascals (20 x 10- 1 6 2 N/m2 3 ). The sound pressure level is denoted Lp
or SPL and is expressed in decibels.
      (19)   SPECIAL EVENTS means all public and private school related
activities and all events where a special events permit is issued by the city
of Dallas.
      (20)   STATIONARY SOURCE means the point of origin of any noise emitted
from a property. Multiple sources on a property shall be treated as a single
source.
      (21)   TIME WEIGHTED means an established period of time during which the
sound pressure levels are averaged. (Ord. Nos. 17501; 18849; 19995; 29424)
 
Notes
1  
2  
3  
SEC. 51-6.102.   NOISE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   A person may not conduct a use that creates a noise level that
exceeds the levels established in Subsections (b) through (e) or that exceeds
the background level by five dB(A), whichever is greater.
      (2)   A sound level meter that meets the standards of the American
Standards Association must be used to determine whether the level of noise
violates this section. The instrument must be maintained in good working order.
A calibration check should be made prior to and following any noise
investigation.
      (3)   Traffic, aircraft, and other background noises are not considered
in measuring noise levels except when the background noise level is being
determined.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, any identifiable portion of a planned
development (PD) district governed by a distinct set of use regulations is
considered to be a separate zoning district. If the PD district or a portion of
the district is limited to uses permitted in an expressly stated zoning
district, the PD district or portion of the district is considered to be that
zoning district; otherwise it is considered to be:
         (A)   an MF-3 zoning district if it is restricted to residential uses
and those nonresidential uses permitted in a residential district; otherwise
         (B)   an I-3 zoning district if it allows one or more uses that are
only permitted in that district; otherwise
         (C)   an I-2 zoning district if it allows one or more uses that are
only permitted in an LC, HC, or industrial district; otherwise
         (D)   if it does not fit into one of the above categories, a GR
district.
      (5)   The requirements of this section do not apply to:
         (A)   mobile sources;
         (B)   construction/demolition activities regulated by Chapter 30;
         (C)   special events for which a special events permit is issued under
Chapter 42A;
         (D)   sound generating equipment or apparatus to warn the public of an
emergency or for public safety;
         (E)   noise from use-related loading/unloading operations that impact
residential areas when conducted during daytime hours; or
         (F)   the following activities, as long as they are conducted between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays as a
normal function of a permitted use and the equipment is maintained in proper
working condition:
            (i)   Lawn maintenance.
            (ii)   Repair of personal use vehicles.
            (iii)   Home repair of place of residence.
   (b)   Permissible sound pressure level in residential districts. In a
residential district, a person may not conduct a use so as to create a sound
pressure level on the bounding lot line that exceeds the decibel limits
contained in the following table:
 
Maximum Permissible Daytime Decibel
Limits at the Bounding Lot Line
of a Residential District
                                       A Scale
Decibel Limit (dBA re 0.0002 Microbar) 56
 
   (c)   Permissible sound pressure level in office, retail, and P districts.
      (1)   In an office, retail, or P district, a person may not conduct a use
so as to create a sound pressure level on the bounding lot line that exceeds
the decibel limits contained in the following table:
 
Maximum Permissible Daytime Decibel
Limits at the Bounding Lot Line
of an Office, Retail, or P District
                                       A Scale
Decibel Limit (dBA re 0.0002 Microbar) 63
 
      (2)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between a residential
district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51A, and an office,
retail, or P district may not exceed the decibel limits specified in Subsection
(b).
   (d)   Permissible sound pressure level in LC, HC, I-1, and I-2 districts.
      (1)   In an LC, HC, I-1, or I-2 district, a person may not conduct a use
so as to create a sound pressure level on the bounding lot line that exceeds
the decibel limits contained in the following table:
 
Maximum Permissible Daytime Decibel
Limits at the Bounding Lot Line
of a Use in an LC, HC, I-1, or I-2 District
                                       A Scale
Decibel Limit (dBA re 0.0002 Microbar) 65
 
      (2)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between a residential
district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51A, and an LC, HC, I-
1, or I-2 district may not exceed the decibel limits specified in Subsection
(b)(1).
      (3)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between an office,
retail, mixed use, multiple commercial, or parking district, as defined both in
this chapter and in Chapter 51A, and an LC, HC, I-1, or I-2 district may not
exceed the decibel limits specified in Subsection (c)(1).
   (e)   Permissible sound pressure level in an I-3 district.
      (1)   In an I-3 district, a person may not conduct a use so as to create
a sound pressure on the bounding lot line that exceeds the decibel limits
contained in the following table:
 
Maximum Permissible Daytime Decibel
Limits at the Bounding Lot Line
of a Use in the I-3 District
                                       A Scale
Decibel Limit (dBA re 0.0002 Microbar) 70
 
      (2)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between a residential
district, as defined both in this chapter and in Chapter 51A, and an I-
3 district may not exceed the decibel limits specified in Subsection (b)(1).
      (3)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between an office,
retail, mixed use, multiple commercial, or parking district, as defined both in
this chapter and in Chapter 51A, and an I-3 district may not exceed the decibel
limits specified in Subsection (c)(1).
      (4)   The sound pressure level at the boundary line between an LC, HC,
CS, LI, IR, I-1, or I-2 district and an I-3 district may not exceed the decibel
limits specified in Subsection (d)(1).
   (f)   Noise level adjustments.
      (1)   The maximum permissible noise levels contained in Subsections (b)
(1), (c)(1), (d)(1), and (e)(1) are subject to the following adjustments:
________________________________________________________________________
Noise is present at nighttime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . Subtract 7db
Noise is impulsive (meter reading changes
at a rate greater than 10 decibels per second). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . Subtract 7db
________________________________________________________________________
 
Noise has an “On Time” of no more And an “Off Time” between successive “On Times” of at
than:                                 least:
0.5 Minutes                           1/ Hour/
                                      2
5.0 Minutes                           1  Hour/                                                    Add 10
                                                                                                  Decibels
                                                                                                  to
10.0 Minutes                          2  Hours/                                                   permitted
                                                                                                  level

20.0 Minutes                          4  Hours/
 
      (2)   “Off-time” is when the level of the primary noise being measured
does not exceed that of the background noise by more than five dB(A). (Ord.
Nos. 17501; 19455; 19786; 19995; 29424; 30895)
SEC. 51-6.103.   TOXIC AND NOXIOUS MATTER.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-6.103,
“Toxic and Noxious Matter,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended,
as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos.
19995, 27404)
SEC. 51-6.104.   GLARE.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-6.104,
“Glare,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended, as that section
exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 19995, 27404)
SEC. 51-6.105.   VIBRATION.
   (a)   In an I-1 or I-2 district, a person may not conduct a use so as to
create earthborn vibrations on the bounding lot line that exceed the
displacement contained in the following table:
 
Allowable Displacement of Earthborn Vibrations
in I-1 or I-2 District
Frequency in Cycles per Second Displacement in Inches
0 to 10                     0.0010
10 to 20                       0.0008
20 to 30                       0.0005
30 to 40                       0.0004
40 and over                    0.0003
 
   (b)   In a I-3 district, a person may not conduct a use so as to create
earthborn vibrations on the bounding lot line that exceed the displacement
contained in the following table:
 
Allowable Displacement of Earthborn Vibrations
in I-3 District
Frequency in Cycles per Second Displacement in Inches
0 to 10                     0.0020
10 to 20                       0.0016
20 to 30                       0.0010
30 to 40                       0.0006
40 and over                    0.0005
 
(Ord. 19995)
SEC. 51-6.106.   ODORS, SMOKE, PARTICULATE MATTER, AND OTHER AIR CONTAMINANTS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-6.106,
“Odors, Smoke, Particulate Matter, and Other Air Contaminants,” of Chapter 51A
of the Dallas City Code, as amended, as that section exists today and as it may
be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 19995, 27404)
SEC. 51-6.107.   NONCONFORMANCE WITH THE ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-6.107,
“Nonconformance with the Environmental Performance Standards,” of Chapter 51A
of the Dallas City Code, as amended, as that section exists today and as it may
be amended in the future. (Ord. 27404)
SEC. 51-6.108.   MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATION ORDINANCE.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-6.108,
“Municipal Setting Designation Ordinance,” of CHAPTER 51A of the Dallas City
Code, as amended. (Ord. Nos. 17226; 19995; 26001)
ARTICLE VII.
SIGN REGULATIONS.
   This article incorporates by reference the language of Article VII, “Sign
Regulations,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code, as amended, as that
article exists today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 14086;
14649; 14677; 14697; 14721; 15000; 15028; 15401; 15646; 15690; 15815; 16176;
16451; 16813; 16814; 17404; 17604; 18202; 18278; 18411; 18735; 18794; 18849;
19371; 19455; 19557; 19649; 19704; 19766; 19879; 20007; 20037; 20167; 20343;
20345; 20359; 20360; 20378; 20379; 20596; 21114; 21145; 21626; 21694; 21797;
21978; 22019; 22392; 22738; 23094; 24132; 24232, 24348; 24974; 27404)
ARTICLE VIII.
PLAT REGULATIONS.
   This article incorporates by reference Article VIII, “Plat Regulations,” of
CHAPTER 51A, “Part II of the Dallas Development Code,” as that article exists
today and as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. Nos. 20092; 22053; 22392)
ARTICLE IX.
THOROUGHFARES.
Division 51-9.100
Thoroughfare Plan Amendments.
SEC. 51-9.101.   THOROUGHFARE PLAN DEFINED.
   For the purposes of Section 8, Chapter XV, Dallas City Charter, as approved
by the citizens of Dallas at an election held on January 17, 1981, the
thoroughfare plan of the City consists of Ordinance No. 15277, as amended,
THOROUGHFARE PLAN – CITY OF DALLAS, TEXAS and Ordinance No. 13262, as amended,
CBD STREETS AND VEHICULAR CIRCULATION PLAN. These two ordinances are hereby
designated and will be referred to as the “thoroughfare plan.” (Ord. 16950)
SEC. 51-9.102.   THOROUGHFARE PLAN AMENDMENT PROCESS.
   This section incorporates by reference the language of Section 51A-9.102,
“Thoroughfare Plan Amendment Process,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas City Code,
as amended, as that section exists today and as it may be amended in the
future. (Ord. Nos. 16950; 19300; 27404)
Division 51-9.200
Approval of Alignment of Thoroughfares.
SEC. 51-9.201.   PROCEDURES FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF THOROUGHFARE ALIGNMENT.
   (a)   In cases where the city must purchase right-of-way to construct a
freeway, major thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare, or a street in the CBD,
before initiating purchasing procedures, the city manager shall present to the
city council, the city staff recommendation for alignment of the roadway and
its appurtenant facilities based on engineering criteria.
   (b)   If the city council determines that the nature of the proposed
alignment does not warrant a public hearing, the city council may approve the
alignment by majority vote of city council members present.
   (c)   If the city council determines that the nature of the proposed
alignment requires notification of affected property owners and a public
hearing, the city manager shall send written notice of a public hearing on the
proposed alignment to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the
proposed right-of-way line. The measurement of the 200 feet includes streets
and alleys. The notice must be given not less than 10 days before the date set
for the hearing by depositing the notice, properly addressed and postage paid,
in the United States mail to the property owners as evidenced by the last
approved city tax roll.
   (d)   After a public hearing, the city council may approve an alignment by a
majority vote of the city council members present.
   (e)   After an alignment has been approved by the city council, the
alignment may not be changed in a way that will require the purchase of
additional right-of-way unless the change is approved by the city council
following the same procedures for approval of an original alignment in
accordance with Subsections (b) and (c).
   (f)   For the purpose of this article, “alignment” means the location of the
right-of-way lines, curb lines, and roadway placement of a freeway, major
thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare, or a street in the CBD. (Ord. 16950)
SEC. 51-9.202.   PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF STATE OR COUNTY THOROUGHFARE
IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Before the city gives its approval of a construction plan for a
freeway, major thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare, or a street in the CBD by
the state or county, the city manager shall present the proposed construction
plan to the city council for review.
   (b)   If the city council determines that the nature of the proposed
construction plan does not warrant a public hearing, the city council may
approve the construction plan by majority vote of the city council members
present.
   (c)   If the city council determines that the nature of the proposed
construction plan requires notification of affected property owners and a
public hearing, the city manager shall send written notice of a public hearing
on the proposed construction to all owners of real property lying within 200
feet of the proposed right-of-way line. The measurement of 200 feet includes
streets and alleys. The notice must be given not less than 10 days before the
date set for the hearing by depositing the notice, properly addressed and
postage paid, in the United States mail to the property owners as evidenced by
the last approved city tax roll.
   (d)   After a public hearing, the city council may approve a construction
plan by the state or county by a majority vote of the city council members
present.
   (e)   The public hearing on a construction plan of the state or county may
be held jointly with the state or county. (Ord. 16950)
Division 51-9.300
Street Naming and Name Change Process.
   This division incorporates by reference the language of Division 51A-9.300,
“Street Naming and Name Change Process,” of CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF THE DALLAS
DEVELOPMENT CODE,” as that division exists today and as it may be amended in
the future. (Ord. Nos. 19832; 20037; 22224)
Division 51-9.400
Four-Way/All-Way Stop Controls at Residential Intersections.
   This division incorporates by reference the language of Division 51A-9.400,
“Four-way/All-Way Stop Controls at Residential Intersections,” of Chapter 51A
of the Dallas City Code, as amended, as that division exists today and as it
may be amended in the future. (Ord. 27404)
ARTICLE X.
LANDSCAPE AND TREE PRESERVATION REGULATIONS.
   This article incorporates by reference the language of Article X, “Landscape
and Tree Preservation Regulations,” of CHAPTER 51A, “PART II OF THE DALLAS
DEVELOPMENT CODE,” as that article exists today and as it may be amended in the
future. A reference to a Chapter 51A zoning district in that article shall mean
the equivalent zoning district in Chapter 51, with the “CS” district meaning
the “HC” district. (Ord. Nos. 18968; 19237; 19455; 22053)
ARTICLE XI.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION TAX EXEMPTIONS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES FOR
HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
   This article incorporates by reference the language of Article XI, “Historic
Preservation Tax Exemptions and Economic Development Incentives for Historic
Properties,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas Development Code, as amended. (Ord.
27016)
ARTICLE XII.
GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION.
   This article incorporates by reference the language of Article XII, “Gas
Drilling and Production,” of Chapter 51A of the Dallas Development Code, as
amended. (Ord. Nos. 26920; 27153)
NOTE:  The use charts on the following pages have not been formally adopted by
the city council; they are prepared by the city staff and are intended for use
as a guide only. It is necessary to see the text of this chapter for specific
regulations. In the event of a conflict between the use charts and the text of
this chapter, the text of this chapter controls.
 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
CHAPTER 51
DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE: ORDINANCE NO. 10962, AS AMENDED
Ordinance Number Specified Passage Effective Date Ordinance Section 51 Section
                 Date
Ordinance Number Specified    Effective Date Ordinance 51 Section
                 Passage Date                Section
16926            03-25-81                   1         Creates Dallas
                                                       Development Code
16950            04-22-81                   1         Adds Ch. 51, Art.
                                                       IX
16959            04-29-81                   1         51-4.101(4)(E)
                                          2         51-4.101(4)(F)
                                          3         51-4.102(d)(5)
                                          4         51-4.102(d)(6)
                                          5         51-4.401(c)(3)
                                          6         51-4.401(c)(4)
                                          7         51-4.409(a)(4)
                                          8         51-4.409(a)(5)
17034            07-08-81                   1         51-4.214(10)
                                          2         51-4.214 chart
                                          3         51-4.603(g)
17043            07-15-81                   1         51-4.214(1)(c)
17044            07-15-81                   1         51-4.401(b)(4)
17045            07-15-81                   1         51-4.301(b)(3)
                                          2         51-4.301(b)(4)
17046            07-15-81                   1         51-4.217(b) (8)
                                                       (E)(xvii)
17047            07-15-81                   1         51-4.410
17048            07-15-81                   1         51-4.704(c)(3)
                                          2         51-4.704(c)(4)
17092            08-12-81                   1         51-4.210(24)
17093            08-12-81                   1         51-4.217(b) (2)
                                                       (E)(iii)
17158            10-07-81                   1         51-1.105(a)(4)
17216            11-18-81                   1         Ch. 51,
17226            12-09-81     2-3-82         66        51-2.102(9)
                                          67        51-2.102 (18),
                                                       (19)
                                          68        Title, 51-3.104
                                          69        51-3.104(a)
                                          70        51-4.502(e)(6)
                                          71        51-5.105(e)
                                          72        51-6.107(a)
17243            12-16-81                   1         51-4.501(b)(1)
                                          2         51-4.501(b)(2)
                                          3         51-4.501(b)(3)
                                          4         51-4.501(b)(4)
                                          5         51-4.501(b)(9)
                                          6         51-4.501 (b)(11)
                                          7         51-4.501(c)(1)
                                          8         51-3.103(a)(1)
17258            01-13-82                   1         51-4.213(24)
17307            02-17-82                   1         51-4.214(10)
17328            03-10-82                   1         51-4.601(a)(4)
17329            03-10-82                   1         51-4.204(5)
17388            04-28-82                   1         51-1.105(b)(4)
                                          2         51-1.105(b)(5)
                                          6         51-2.102 (18),
                                                       (19)
                                          7         51-3.104 (title)
                                          8         51-3.104(a)
                                          9         51-4.502(e)(6)
                                          10        51-5.105(e)
17403            05-05-82                   1         51-4.704(b)(4)
17404            05-05-82                   1         51-7.903
17442            06-09-82                   1         51-4.401(a)(2)
                                          2         51-4.402(a)(2)
                                          3         Repeals 51-4.604
17443            06-09-82                   1         51-4.303(c) (4)
                                                       (A)
17444            06-09-82                   1         51-4.202(2)(A)
17445            06-09-82                   1         51-4.401 (b)(5),
                                                       (6)
17446            06-09-82                   1         51-4.213(12)
17482            07-28-82                   1         51-5.102(a)
                                          2         51-5.103(b)
                                          3         51-5.104(a)
                                          4         51-5.104(b)
                                          5         51-5.105(a)
17501            08-18-82                   1         51-6.101
                                          2         51-6.102
17552            09-22-82                   1         51-4.201(3)(C)
17604            11-10-82                   1         51-7.404(a)(5)
17651            12-15-82                   1         51-4.701(e)(3)
17652            12-15-82                   1         51-4.702(a)(3)
17654            12-15-82                   1         51-2.102
                                          2         51-4.501(c)
17655            12-15-82                   1         51-4.501(d)
17656            12-15-82                   1         51-4.501(e)
17756            03-16-83                   1         51-4.216(2)
17810            04-20-83                   1         51-4.702(a)(3)
17811            04-20-83                   1         Adds 51-4.201 (1)
                                                       (E)(vii)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.201 (2)
                                                       (E)(ii)
17812            04-20-83                   1         51-4.217(a)
                                          2         51-4.407 (a), (b)
                                          3         51-4.410
17813            04-20-83                   1         51-4.219(b)(3)
17838            05-18-83                   1         51-4.501(a)(4)
                                          2         51-4.501(b)
17839            05-18-83                   1         Adds 51-4.301 (c)
                                                       (8)
17859            05-25-83                   1         Adds 51-4.301 (d)
                                                       (8)
                                          2         51-4.301(d)(1)
                                          3         51-4.301 (Parking
                                                       Bay Chart)
                                          4         51-4.410 (Use
                                                       Chart)
                                          5         Repeals 51-4.401
                                                       (c)(2)
                                          6         Repeals 51-4.402
                                                       (c)(2)
                                          7         Repeals 51-4.403
                                                       (c)(2)
17860            05-25-83                   1         Adds 51-4.301(c)
                                                       (7)
17893            06-29-83                   1         51-8.101-105
17912            07-13-83                   1         51-4.207(1)
18001            10-05-83                   13        51-1.103(a)(1)
18008            10-12-83                   1         51-5.102(a)
18014            10-19-83                   1         51-4.204 (5)(E)
                                                       (iii)
18040            11-09-83                   1         51-4.102(d)(3)
                                          2         51-4.503
18142            01-18-84                   1         Adds 51-4.216(14)
18143            01-18-84                   1         51-4.403(a)(1)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.403(b)
                                                       (3)
18144            01-18-84                   1         51-4.214 (10)(E)
                                                       (ii)
18177            02-22-84     03-01-84       1         Adds 51-1.105(f)
                                          2         Adds 51-1.106
                                          3         Ch. 51, Art. I
                                                       Title
18188            02-29-84     04-01-84       1         51-4.214(4)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.217(b)
                                                       (9)
18202            03-14-84                   1         51-7.101(b)
                                          2         51-7.102
                                          3         51-7.207
                                          4         Adds 51-7.209
                                          5         Adds 51-7.304(i)
                                          6         51-7.305(a)
                                          7         51-7.401
                                          8         51-7.402 (c), (d)
                                          9         51-7.403
                                          10        51-7.404(a)(1)
                                          11        51-7.404(b)
                                          12        51-7.505(c)
                                          13        51-7.605(c)
                                          14        51-7.702(b)
                                          15        Adds 51-7.705
                                                       Repeals 51-7.203
                                          16        (c), 7.205(a),
                                                       7.902(b)
18211            03-21-84                   1         51-4.501(d)(4)
18268            05-23-84                   1         51-4.212
18278            05-30-84                   1         51-7.304
18411            09-26-84     10-01-84       2         Adds 51-7.306
                                          3         Adds 51-7.702(b)
                                                       (3)
                                          31        51-1.105
                                          32        51-7.704(3)
                                          33        51-7.801
                                          34        51-8.107
18481            11-21-84                   1         51-2.102(28)
                                          2         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (20.1), (62.1)
                                          3         Adds 51-4.408(a)
                                                       (4)
                                          4         51-4.410 Chart
18554            01-16-85     02-04-85       1         51-1.105(b)
18597            02-20-85     06-01-85       1         51-4.402(c)(5)
                            6, 06-01-86    2         Adds 51-4.402 (c)
                                                       (8), (9), (10)
                                                       51-4.403(c)(5)
                                          3         and adds (c)(6),
                                                       (7), (8)
                                          4         51-4.404(b)
                                          5         Adds 51-4.408(a)
                                                       (5)
                                          6         Adds 51-4.409(a)
                                                       (6)
                                          7         Adds 51-4.411
                                          8         Adds 51-8.108(6)
                                                   Div. 51-7.1000
                                          2         Adds 51-7.702(e)
18755            06-12-85                   1         Div. 51-5.200
                                          2         Adds 51-8.106.1
18794            07-17-85                   1         51-7.704(1)
18849            08-28-85                   1         51-2.102 (46),
                                                       (49)
                                          2         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (34.1)
                                          3         51-4.101(2)
                                                       Renumbers 51-
                                          4         4.102 (b)(2) thru
                                                       (8) as (b)(6)
                                                       thru (12)
                                          5         Adds 51-4.102 (b)
                                                       (2) thru (5)
                                          6         51-4.201 thru 217
                                          7         Adds 51-4.218.1
                                          8         Ch. 51, Art. IV,
                                                       Use Chart
                                          9         51-4.301(f)
                                          10        Adds 51-4.301(g)
                                          11        Adds 51-4.303 (b)
                                                       (12)
                                          12        Adds 51-4.303(d)
                                          13        51-4.402(b)(3)
                                          14        51-4.402(c)(7)
                                          15        Adds 51-4.402 (c)
                                                       (11) thru (14)
                                          16        51-4.403(c)(3)
                                          17        Adds 51-4.403 (c)
                                                       (9) thru (12)
                                          18        Adds 51-4.407(a)
                                                       (4)
                                          19        51-4.408(a)
                                          20        51-4.409(a)(3)
                                          21        51-4.410
                                          22        51-4.602 (b), (c)
                                          23        51-4.702(a)(4)
                                          24        Adds 51-4.706
                                          25        51-6.101(10)
                                          26        51-7.306(a)(2)
18876            09-18-85     10-01-85       11        51-1.105
                                          12        51-8.107
18920            10-30-85                   1         51-4.219
                                          2         Adds 51-4.409(a)
                                                       (7)
                                          3         51-4.410
18921            10-30-85     02-01-86       1         Adds Div. 51-
                                                       4.800
18922            10-30-85     02-01-86       1         Adds 51-1.105(i)
18923            10-30-85                   1         Adds 51-4.214(11)
18934            11-06-85                   1         Adds 51-4.701 (a)
                                                       (2)(D)
                                          2         51-4.701(c)(3)
18942            11-20-85                   1         51-1.105(a)(4)
                                          2         Adds 51-1.105(h)
18968            12-11-85     03-01-86       1         Adds Ch. 51, Art.
                                                       X
                                          2         51-3.102(c)
                                          3         Repeals 51-4.301
                                                       (g) and Figure 2
19045            02-26-86                   1         51-4.500, Title
                                          2         Adds 51-4.505
19058            03-05-86                   1         51-4.206(5)(C)
19059            03-05-86                   1         Adds 51-4.204(6)
19060            03-05-86                   1         51-4.401(a)(1)
                                          2         51-4.402(a)(1)
                                          3         51-4.403(a)(1)
19061            03-05-86                   1         51-4.210(6)(C)
19062            03-05-86                   1         51-3.102(c)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.301 (a)
                                                       (15)
                                          3         51-4.602(d)
19063            03-05-86                   1         51-4.212(18)
                                          2         51-4.301(a)(1)
                                          3         51-4.301(c)(2)
                                          4         51-4.410 (Use
                                                       Charts)
                                                       Repeals 51-4.101
                                          5         (4)(D) 4.102(d)
                                                       (4), and 4.301
                                                       (c)(5)
19064            03-05-86                   1         51-4.204(4)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.204(7)
19065            03-05-86                   1         Adds 51-4.205(10)
19080            03-19-86                   1         51-1.105(a)
19100            03-26-86                   1         51-4.217(b) (7)
                                                       (E)(i)
19237            07-16-86                   1         51-10.101
                                          2         51-10.103
                                          3         Adds 51-10.103.1
                                          4         51-10.104 (a),
                                                       (b)
                                          5         51-10.106 (a),
                                                       (b)
                                          6         51-10.106(f)
                                          7         51-10.107(a),
                                                       (b), (c)
                                          8         51-10.107 (e),
                                                       (f)
                                          9         Repeals 51-10.105
                                                       (b)
19268            08-27-86                   1         51-3.104(b)
19280            09-10-86                   1         Adds 51-5.101
                                                       (4), (5), (6)
                                          2         Adds 51-5.103.1
                                          3         51-5.105(g) (2)
                                                       (E)
                                          4         51-5.105 (g)(2)
                                                       (I)
19300            09-24-86     10-01-86       57        51-1.105
                                          58        51-8.107(b)
                                          59        51-8.107(c)
                                          60        51-9.102(a)
19305            09-24-86                   1         51-4.206(1)(A)
                                          2         51-4.206(1)(C)
                                          3         Adds 51-4.206 (1)
                                                       (E)(ii)
                                          4         Adds 51-4.301 (b)
                                                       (5)
                                          32        51-4.303 (b)(10)
19358            11-05-86                   1         Adds 51-1.105(k)
19371            11-12-86                   1         51-7.102(32)
                                          2         Repeals 51-7.304
                                                       (i)
19373            11-12-86                   1         Adds 51-1.105(l)
19374            11-12-86                   1         Adds 51-8.107(i)
19453            01-28-87                   1         Adds 51-4.506
19455            02-04-87                   18        51-1.101
                                          19        51-1.102
                                          20        51-2.102
                                          21        51-3.102(c)
                                          22        51-4.204 (5)(E)
                                                       (i)
                                          23        51-4.206 (1)(C)
                                                       (i)
                                          24        51-4.212 (17)(E)
                                                       (iv)
                                          25        51-4.214 (5)(E)
                                                       (iv)
                                          26        51-4.214 (6)(E)
                                                       (iii)
                                          27        51-4.216 (14)(E)
                                                       (I)
                                          28        51-4.219 (b)(3),
                                                       (b)(4)
                                          29        51-4.301 (a)(12)
                                          30        51-4.301 (a)(14)
                                          31        51-4.301 (e)(1)
                                                       (E)
                                          32        51-4.301 (f)(1)
                                          33        51-4.302 (a)(2)
                                          34        51-4.303 (b)(10)
                                          35        51-4.401(a)(7)
                                          36        51-4.401(b)(3)
                                          37        51-4.401(c)(1)
                                          38        51-4.402(a)(3)
                                          39        51-4.402(c)
                                          40        51-4.403(a)(3)
                                          41        51-4.403(b)(3)
                                          42        51-4.403(c)
                                          43        51-4.407(a)(4)
                                          44        51-4.408(a)(5)
                                          45        51-4.411(b)(2)
                                          46        51-4.501(d)
                                          47        51-4.501(e)(2)(A)
                                          48        51-4.502 (b)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          49        51-4.602(b)(7)
                                          50        51-4.602(c)(1)
                                                       thru (c)(4)
                                          50A       Repeals Figures 1
                                                       and 2, 51-4.602
                                          51        51-4.704(a)(1)
                                          52        51-4.803(d)(3)
                                          53        51-6.102(c)(2)
                                          54        51-6.102 (d)(2),
                                                       (d)(3)
                                          55        51-6.102 (e)(2),
                                                       (e)(3)
                                          56        51-7.306(a)(2)
                                          57        51-7.306(f)
                                          58        51-10.101(14)
                                          59        51-10.103(g)
                                          60        51-10.104(b)
19460            02-11-87                   1         51-4.301(a)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.320
                                          3         Repeals 51-4.301
                                                       (c)(8)
19481            02-25-87                   1         Adds 51-1.105(m)
19499            03-18-87                   1         51-3.103,
                                          2         51-4.501
19557            05-20-87                   1         51-1.105 (d)(4)
                                                       and
                                          2         51-7.605 (b), (c)
19581            06-24-87                   1         Adds 51-4.211
                                                       (22)
                                          2         Repeals 51-4.213
                                                       (19)
                                                   51-7.2000
19652            08-26-87                   1         51-4.213 (12)(A)
                                          2         51-4.213(12)
                                                       title
19686            09-23-87                   1         Div. 51-5.100
19700            09-30-87                   1         51-4.201(5)
19704            09-30-87                   1         51-7.303 (b)(2)
19766            11-18-87                   1         51-7.306 (e)(2)
                                          2         Adds 51-7.306 (e)
                                                       (3),
19786            12-09-87                   1         51-2.102 (48),
                                                       (53)
                                                       Adds 51-2.102
                                          2         (60.1), (60.2)
                                                       and (72.1)
                                          3         51-6.102(d)(3)
                                          4         51-6.102(e)(3)
19806            12-16-87                   1         51-4.205(5)
                                          13        Repeals 51-4.205
                                                       (10)
19808            12-16-87                   1         51-4.202(5)
19809            12-16-87                   1         51-4.704
19832            01-13-88                   1         Adds 51, Div.
                                                       9.300
                                                       Adds 51-1.105 (k)
                                          2         and reletters old
                                                       (k), (l), (m) as
                                                       (l), (m), (n)
19872            02-24-88                   1         Adds 51-1.106(e)
                                          2         51-4.701 (e)(2)
19879            03-09-88                   1         51-7.404(a)(5)
19912            03-23-88                   1         Adds 51-4.201(7)
                                          10        Repeals 51-4.205
                                                       (4)
19913            03-23-88                   1         51-4.205(3)
19928            04-13-88                   1         51-4.210(12)
19929            04-13-88                   1         51-4.803 (a)(1),
                                                       (a)(2)
                                          2         51-4.803(a)(4)
                                          3         51-4.803(d)(2)
                                          4         51-4.803 (d)(3),
                                                       (d)(4)
                                          5         51-4.803(e)(1),
                                          6         51-4.803(f)(3)
19930            04-13-88                   1         51-4.505(d)(1),
                                          2         51-4.505(f), (g)
19931            04-13-88                   1         51-4.204(5)
19935            04-27-88                   1         Adds 51-4.701(g)
19963            05-25-88                   71        51-1.103(a)(1)
                                          72        51-1.106(e)
19995            06-22-88                   1         Ch. 51, Art. VI
20007            07-13-88                   1         51-7.301
                                          2         51-7.302
                                          4         51-7.401
                                          5         51-7.802
20037            08-10-88                   6         51-4.505 (g)(6)
                                          7         51-4.701(c)(2)
                                          9         51-4.803(k)
                                                       Renumbers Div.
                                          10        51-7.2000 as Div.
                                                       51-7.1100
                                          11        Repeals 51-9.307
                                                       (c)
20038            08-10-88                   1         51-4.201(a)(5)(B)
20073            09-28-88     10-01-88       7         51-1.105(a)(2)
                                          8         51-1.105(b)(2)
                                          9         51-1.105(c)(2)
                                          10        51-1.105(d)(2)
                                          11        51-1.105(e)(2)
                                          12        51-1.105(f)(2)
                                          13        51-1.105(g)(2)
                                          14        51-1.105(h)(2)
                                          15        51-1.105(i)(2)
                                          16        51-1.105(j)(2)
                                          17        51-1.105(l)(2)
                                          18        51-1.105(n)(2)
                                          19        51-8.107(d),
20092            10-12-88                   1         51, Art. VIII
20093            10-12-88                   1         Adds 51-1.105(o)
                                                   Adds
20122            11-09-88                   1         51-4.203(4)
20132            11-09-88                   1         51-1.105(a)
                                          2         51-4.219(b)
                                          3         Adds 51-4.219(c)
20159            12-14-88                   1         51-4.207(l)
20167            01-11-89                   1         51, Art. 7, Div.
                                                       51-7.900
20236            03-08-89                   1         Adds 51-1.103(a)
                                                       (5)
                                          2         51-4.401(a)(5)(A)
                                                       thru (E)
                                          3         51-4.401(d)(1)
                                          5         51-4.402(b)
                                          7         51-4.402(d)
                                          9         51-4.403(b)
                                          11        51-4.403(d)
                                          13        51-4.602(a)(1)
20237            03-08-89                   1         51-4.212(11)
20238            03-08-89                   1         Adds 51-4.604,
20242            03-08-89                   1         51-4.211(16)(B)
20272            04-12-89                   1         51-2.102(114)
                                          2         51-4.212(18)
                                          3         Adds 51-4.306,
20307            05-10-89                   1         51-4.704(c)(3)
                                                       and (4)
20343            06-14-89                   1         51-7.102(25)
                                          2         Adds 51-7.211
20345            06-14-89                   1         Adds 51, Div.
                                                       7.1200
                                          2         Adds 51-7.504 (e)
20359            06-28-89                   1         51-7.201
                                          2         51-7.203(b)
                                          3         Adds 51-7.210
                                          4         51-7.303(b)
                                                       51-2.102(48),
20360            06-28-89                   1         (70), (71), (75),
                                                       (122)
                                                       Adds 51-2.102
                                          2         (67.1), (67.2),
                                                       (74.1)
                                          3         51-4.101(1)(Q)
                                          4         51-4.102(a)(9)
                                          5         51-4.201(b)(6)
                                          6         51-4.207(a)(B)
                                          7         51-4.401(b)(4)
                                          8         51-4.402(b)(6)
                                          9         51-4.402(c)(9)
                                          10        51-4.402(c)(12)
                                          11        51-4.403(c)(7),
                                                       (c)(10)
                                          12        51-4.404(b)
                                          13        51-4.405(b)(1)
                                          14        51-4.406(b)(1)
                                          15        51-4.603(f)
                                          16        51-5.101(15),
                                                       (17)
                                          17        51-5.104(b)(5)
                                          18        51-7.306 (f)(1)
                                                       (B)
20361            06-28-89                   1         51-2.102(39)
                                          5         Repeals 51-4.301
                                                       (a)(4)
                                          6         Repeals 51-4.409
                                                       (a)(1)
                                          7         Repeals 51-4.409
                                                       (a)(4)
20362            06-28-89                   1         51-4.602(a)
20378            07-12-90                   1         Amends 51-7.1101
20379            07-12-89                   2         Adds 51-7.102
                                                       (15.1)
                                          3         51-7.301
                                          4         51-7.302
                                          5         51-7.401
20381            07-12-89                   1         51-4.701(d)(2)
20383            07-12-89                   3         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (131)
                                          4         Adds 51-4.301(a)
                                                       (4)
20412            08-09-89                   1         Adds 51-4.704(c)
                                                       (2)
20539            12-13-89                   1         Amends 51-4.602
                                                       (d)(2)
                                                       Adds Div. 51-
20596            4-11-90                    1         7.1300 ( 51-
                                                       7.1301 - 51-
                                                       7.1307)
20673            6-27-90                    1         Adds 51-2.102(39)
                                                       (D)
                                          4         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (10.1)
20729            9-12-90                    1         Amends 51-4.103
                                                       (b)
20845            12-12-90                   1         Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (4)
                                          2         Amends 51A-4.204
                                                       (3)(A)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (5)(E)(i)
                                          4         Adds 51-4.217(b)
                                                       (10)
                                          5         Adds 51A-4.217(b)
                                                       (7.1)
                                          10        Repeals 51-4.204
                                                       (7)
20926            4-10-91                    1         Amends 51-1.105
                                                       (b)
                                          2         Amends 51-1.105
                                                       (b)
                                          4         Amends 51-1.106
                                          6         Amends 51-3.102
                                          10        Amends 51-4.703
                                          12        Amends 51-4.703
21000            6-26-91                    1         Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (2)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.408
                                                       (a)(1)
21044            9-11-91                    1         Renaming Art. I
                                          2         Amends 51-1.102
                                                       (b)
                                          3         Adds 51-4.201(a)
                                                       (2)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (3)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (3)(B)
                                          43        Repeals 51-4.204
                                                       (6)
                                          44        Repeals 51-4.205
                                                       (2)
                                          45        Repeals 51-4.207
                                                       (2)
21114            11-13-91                   1         Adds Div. 51-
                                                       7.1400
21145            12-11-91                   1         Adds Div. 51-
                                                       7.1500
21186            1-22-92                    11        Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (67.1)
                                          12        Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (71.1)
                                          13        Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (109.1)
21454            10-28-92                   1         51-4.217(b)(4)(E)
21553            1-27-93                    1         Adds 51-4.307
                                          2         Amends 51-4.704
21626            4-14-93                    1         Amends 51-7.1000
21633            4-14-93                    1         Adds 51-1.104.1
21694            6-9-93                     1         Amends 51-7.900
21697            6-9-93                     1         Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (22)(C)
21735            6-23-93                    2         Amends 51-1.104
                                                       (a)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (1)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (5)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (10)
                                          6         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (a)
                                          28        Amends 51-4.503
                                          35        Repeals 51-4.209
                                                       (4)
21751            8-11-93                    1         Amends 51-1.105
                                                       (1)(3)
21760            8-11-93                    1         Amends 51-4.803
                                                       (a) Table 1
21797            9-8-93                     1         Amends 51-7.208
                                          2         Adds 51-7.212
                                          3         Adds 51-7.213
21978            2-23-94                    1         Amends 51-7.205
                                          3         Amends 51-7.305
                                                       (d)
                                          4         Amends 51-7.404
                                                       (a)(4)
22004            3-23-94                    1         Amends 51-1.105
                                                       (a)
                                          3         Adds 51-4.217(b)
                                                       (11)
22019            4-13-94                    1         Amends 51-7.1400
22053            5-25-94                    1         Amends 51-4.219
                                          2         Adds 51-4.310
                                                       Renumbers 51-
                                          3         4.401(d) as (e),
                                                       and adds a new
                                                       51-4.401(d)
                                                       Renumbers 51-
                                          4         4.402(d) as (e),
                                                       and adds a new
                                                       51-4.402(d)
                                                       Renumbers 51-
                                          5         4.403(d) as (e),
                                                       and adds a new
                                                       51-4.403(d)
                                                       Amends Ch. 51,
                                          6         Art. IV, Div. 51-
                                                       4.700
                                          7         Amends 51-4.803
                                                       (d)(1)
                                          8         Amends 51-4.803
                                                       (d)(2)
                                          9         Amends Ch. 51,
                                                       Art. VIII
                                          10        Amends Ch. 51,
                                                       Art. X
22204            9-28-94                    1         Amends 51-1.104
                                                       (a)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (1)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (5)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (10)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (a)
22224            10-12-94                   1         Amends Div. 51-
                                                       9.300
22389            4-12-95                    1         Amends 51-1.106,
                                                       title
                                          2         Adds 51-1.106(f)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.701
                                                       (a)(1)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.701
                                                       (b)(5)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.703
                                                       (a)(1)
                                          6         Amends 51-4.703
                                                       (c)(2)
22392            4-12-95                    15        Amends 51-7.1406
                                                       (a)(4)
                                          16        Amends 51-8.604
                                                       (b) (4) and (5)
22531            8-23-95      8-28-95        1         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (1)
22738            4-24-96                    1         Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.600
22759            5-22-96                    1         Amends 51-4.603
22920            10-9-96                    1         Amends Ch. 51,
                                                       Art. V
22994            1-8-97                     1         Amends 51-4.602
22995            1-8-97                     1         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (1)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (3)
23012            1-22-97                    1         Amends 51-4.217
23013            1-22-97                    1         Amends 51-4.301
23094            4-9-97                     1         Amends 51-7.702
23506            4-22-98                    1         Amends 51-4.501
24020            9-8-99                     1         Amends 51-4.301
                                                       (e)
24132            12-8-99                    1         Amends 51-7.1502
                                                       (b)
24163            1-12-00                    1         Amends 51-3.103
24232            4-26-00                    1         Adds 51-4.213(25)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.213(26)
                                          3         Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.100
                                          4         Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.200
                                          5         Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.300
                                          6         Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.400
                                          7         Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.500
                                          8         Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.600
                                          9         Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.700
                                          10        Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.800
                                          11        Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.1100
                                          12        Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.1200
                                          13        Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.1300
                                          14        Amends Div. 51-
                                                       7.1500
24271            5-24-00                    1         Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (1)
24348            8-23-00                    1         Adds Div. 51-
                                                       7.1700
24438            10-25-00     10-31-00       1         Adds 51-4.221
24439            10-25-00                   1         Amends 51-1.104
                                                       (a)(4)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (1)(A)(i)
24543            3-21-01                    1         Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (1)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (2)
24637            6-13-01      7-1-01         2         Amends title of
                                                       Ch. 51
                                          3         Repeals 51-1.01
24696            8-22-01                    1         Amends 51-4.221
                                                       (b)(6)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.221
                                                       (b)(13)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.221
                                                       (b)(14)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.221
                                                       (c)
24731            9-26-01                    1         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (61)
                                          2         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (110.1)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.405
                                          4         Amends 51-4.406
                                          5         Adds 51-4.412
24843            2-13-02                    1         Amends 51-1.105
                                                       (o)
                                          2         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (116)
                                          3         Amends Ch. 51,
                                                       Art. III
                                          4         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (9)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.505
24915            4-24-02                    1         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (11)
24974            6-26-02                    1         Adds Div. 51-
                                                       7.1900
25097            11-13-02                   1         Amends 51-1.105
25290            6-11-03                    1         Amends 51-4.324
                                                       (b)(1)
25435            11-12-03                   1         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (5)
25486            1-28-04                    1         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(1)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(2)
25785            10-27-04                   1         Adds 51-4.211(1)
                                                       (E)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.211(3)
                                                       (E)
                                          3         Adds 51-4.211(14)
                                                       (E)
                                          4         Adds 51-4.211(18)
                                                       (E)
                                          5         Adds 51-4.605
25809            11-10-04                   1         Amends 51-4.601
25831            12-8-04                    1         Amends 51-4.602
                                                       (b)(6)
25977            5-11-05                    1         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (2.1)
                                          2         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (7.1)
                                          3         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (35)
                                          4         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (53)
                                          5         Adds 51-4.201(b)
                                                       (1)(E)(viii)
26000            5-25-05                    1         Amends Div. 51-
                                                       5.200
26001            5-25-05                    1         Adds 51-6.108
26026            6-22-05                    1         Adds 51-4.507
26140            10-12-05                   1         Amends 51-1.102
                                                       (b)(2)
                                          2         Adds 51-1.107
                                          3         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (37)
                                          4         Adds 51-4.201(b)
                                                       (1.1)
                                          5         Adds 51-4.201(b)
                                                       (3.1)
26160            11-9-05                    1         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (1)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (3)
26161            11-9-05      12-12-05       1         Adds 51-4.507
                                                       Amends 51-4.507
26248            2-8-06                     1         (renumbers as 51-
                                                       4.508)
26269            2-22-06                    1         Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (4)
26286            3-8-06                     1         Amends 51-1.103
26371            6-14-06                    2         Adds 51-1.108
26513            11-8-06                    1         Amends 51-4.221
                                                       (b)(13)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.221
                                                       (b)(14)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.221
                                                       (c)
26530            12-13-06                   1         Adds 51-1.109
                                          2         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (36.1)
26531            12-13-06                   1         Amends 51-4.401
                                                       (a)
26536            12-13-06                   1         Amends 51-1.104.1
26579            2-14-07                    1         Amends 51-1.104
26746            5-23-07                    1         Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (2)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (14)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (15)
26920            9-12-07                    1         Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (12)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (19)
                                          3         Adds Ch. 51, Art.
                                                       XI
27016            11-28-07                   1         Adds Ch. 51, Art.
                                                       XI
27153            5-14-08                    1         Corrects 51-4.213
                                                       (19)
                                                       Renumbers the
                                                       Article XI added
                                          2         by Ordinance No.
                                                       26920 as Article
                                                       XII
27183            5-14-08                    1         Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (1)(A)
27334            9-24-08                    1         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (45)
27404            11-10-08                   1         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (19)
                                          2         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (32)
                                          3         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (33)
                                          4         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (60.3)
                                          5         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (67.1), (67.2)
                                          6         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (82)
                                          7         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (104.1)
                                          8         Amends 51-4.101
                                                       (4)
                                          9         Amends 51-4.102
                                                       (d)(4)
                                          10        Amends 51-4.102
                                                       (d)(8)
                                          11        Adds 51-4.102(d)
                                                       (9)
                                          12        Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(1)
                                          13        Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(3)(D)
                                          14        Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(4), (5)
                                          15        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          16        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          17        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          18        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          19        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (11)(D)
                                          20        Adds 51-4.202(12)
                                          21        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (1)(D)
                                          22        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (2)(D)
                                          23        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          24        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          25        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          26        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          27        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          28        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (9)(D)
                                          29        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (10)(D)
                                          30        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (11)(D)
                                          31        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (12)(D)
                                          32        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (1)(D)
                                          33        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (2)(D)
                                          34        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (3)(A)
                                          35        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          36        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          37        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          38        Adds 51-4.204(6)
                                          39        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (1)(D)
                                          40        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          41        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          42        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          43        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          44        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (9)(D)
                                          45        Amends 51-4.206
                                                       (1)
                                          46        Amends 51-4.206
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          47        Amends 51-4.206
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          48        Amends 51-4.206
                                                       (5)
                                          49        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (1)(D)
                                          50        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          51        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          52        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          53        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          54        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          55        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (8)
                                          56        Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (2)(D)
                                          57        Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          58        Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          59        Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          60        Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          61        Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          62        Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          63        Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (10)(D)
                                          64        Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (13)(D)
                                          65        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (1)(D)
                                          66        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (2)
                                          67        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          68        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          69        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          70        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (1)(D)
                                          71        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (3)
                                          72        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          73        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          74        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          75        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          76        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          77        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (9)(D)
                                          78        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (10)(D)
                                          79        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (11)(D)
                                          80        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (12)(D)
                                          81        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (13)(D)
                                          82        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (14)(D)
                                          83        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (15)(D)
                                          84        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (16)(D)
                                          85        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (17)(D)
                                          86        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (18)(D)
                                          87        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (19)(D)
                                          88        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (20)(D)
                                          89        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (21)(D)
                                          90        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (22)(D)
                                          91        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (23)(D)
                                          92        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (24)(D)
                                          93        Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (1)(D)
                                          94        Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (2)(D)
                                          95        Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          96        Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          97        Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          98        Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          99        Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          100       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          101       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (9)(D)
                                          102       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (10)(D)
                                          103       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (11)(D)
                                          104       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (12)(D)
                                          105       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (13)(D)
                                          106       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (14)(D)
                                          107       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (15)(D)
                                          108       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (16)
                                          109       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (17)(D)
                                          110       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (18)(D), (E)
                                          111       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (19)(D)
                                          112       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (20)(D)
                                          113       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (21)(D)
                                          114       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (22)
                                          115       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (1)(D)
                                          116       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (2)(D)
                                          117       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          118       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          119       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          120       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          121       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          122       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          123       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (9)(D)
                                          124       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (10)(D)
                                          125       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (11)(D)
                                          126       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (12)(D)
                                          127       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (13)(D), (F)
                                          128       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (14)(D)
                                          129       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (1)(D)
                                          130       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (2)(D)
                                          131       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          132       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          133       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (5)(D), (E)
                                          134       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          135       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          136       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          137       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (9)(D)
                                          138       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (10)(D)
                                          139       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (11)(D)
                                          140       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (12)(D)
                                          141       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (13)(D), (E)
                                          142       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (14)(D)
                                          143       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (15)(D)
                                          144       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (16)(D)
                                          145       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (17)(D)
                                          146       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (18)(D)
                                          147       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (19)(D)
                                          148       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (19)(E)(ix)
                                          149       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (20)(D)
                                          150       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (21)(D)
                                          151       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (22)(D)
                                          152       Adds 51-4.213(22)
                                                       (E)
                                          153       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (23)(D)
                                          154       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (24)(D)
                                          155       Adds 51-4.213(27)
                                          156       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          157       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (2)(D)
                                          158       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          159       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          160       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          161       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          162       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          163       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          164       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (9)(E)
                                          165       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (11)(D)
                                          166       Adds 51-4.214(12)
                                          167       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (2)(D)
                                          168       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          169       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          170       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          171       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          172       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          173       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          174       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (9)(D)
                                          175       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (10)(D)
                                          176       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (11)(D)
                                          177       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (1)(D)
                                          178       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (2)(D)
                                          179       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          180       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          181       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (6)(D)
                                          182       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (7)(D)
                                          183       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (8)(D)
                                          184       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (9)(D)
                                          185       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (10)(D)
                                          186       Adds 51-4.216(11)
                                                       (D)
                                          187       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (12)(D)
                                          188       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (13)(D)
                                          189       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (14)(D)
                                          190       Adds 51-4.216.1
                                          191       Amends 51-4.217
                                          192       Amends 51-4.218
                                          193       Amends 51-4.220
                                          194       Amends 51-4.221
                                          195       Amends 51-4.302
                                          196       Amends 51-4.303
                                          197       Amends 51-4.304
                                          198       Amends 51-4.306
                                          199       Amends Div. 51-
                                                       4.320
                                          200       Amends 51-4.407
                                                       (a)(2)
                                          201       Amends 51-4.408
                                                       (a)(1)
                                          202       Amends 51-4.502
                                                       (d), (e)
                                          203       Amends 51-4.503
                                          204       Amends 51-4.504
                                          205       Amends 51-4.506
                                          206       Amends 51-4.604
                                          207       Amends 51-4.605
                                          208       Amends 51-6.103
                                          209       Amends 51-6.104
                                          210       Amends 51-6.106
                                          211       Amends 51-6.107
                                          212       Amends Ch. 51,
                                                       Art. VII
                                          213       Amends 51-9.102
                                          214       Adds Ch. 51, Art.
                                                       IX, Div. 51-9.400
27864            4-28-10                    1         Amends 51-4.305
28021            9-22-10                    1         Adds 51-4.217(b)
                                                       (5)(E)(viii)
28072            12-8-10                    1         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (56)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.102
                                                       (d)(7)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.103
                                          4         Amends 51-4.408
                                                       (a)(1)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.504
28073            12-8-10                    1         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (32)
                                          2         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (33)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (13)(F)(iii)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.803
                                                       (a)(5)(A)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.803
                                                       (e)
28079            12-8-10                    1         Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (10)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.211(23)
28096            1-12-11                    1         Deletes 51-4.207
                                                       (1)(E)(v)
28125            2-9-11                     1         Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (1)
28214            5-25-11                    1         Adds 51-4.210(25)
28700            6-27-12                    1         Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (1)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.216(15)
28737            8-8-12                     1         Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (13)(F)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.217(b)
                                                       (18)
28803            9-26-12                    1         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(3)(C)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(7)(C)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.206
                                                       (1)(C)(i)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          6         Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          7         Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          8         Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          9         Amends 51-4.208
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          10        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (16)(C)
                                          11        Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (14)(C)
                                          12        Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (18)(C)
                                          13        Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          14        Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          15        Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          16        Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          17        Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (12)(C)
                                          18        Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(6)(C)
29024            6-12-13      10-1-13        1         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(5)(E)
29128            9-11-13                    1         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (8.1)
                                          2         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (23.1)
                                          3         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (23.2)
                                          4         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (86.1)
                                          5         Adds Ch. 51, Art.
                                                       IV, Div. 51-4.330
                                          6         Adds Ch. 51, Art.
                                                       IV, Div. 51-4.340
29228            12-11-13                   1         Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (19)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.213(28)
29424            8-13-14                    1         Adds 51-6.101
                                                       (7.1)
                                          2         Amends 51-6.102
                                                       (a)(5)
29589            12-10-14                   1         Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (3)(A)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (25)(A)(i)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (25)(A)(iii)
                                          4         Deletes 51-4.210
                                                       (25)(A)(iv)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (25)(E)(iii)
                                          6         Deletes 51-4.210
                                                       (25)(E)(iv)
29687            3-25-15                    1         Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (1)(A)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (1)(C)(i)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (1)(E)
29893            9-22-15                    1         Retitles and
                                                       amends 51-4.504
29917            10-28-15                   1         Adds 51-4.213(10)
                                                       (E)(ii)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.213(13)
                                                       (E)(iii)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (4)
29984            1-13-16                    1         Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (12)
30239            9-28-16                    23        Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (99.1)
                                          24        Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (116.1)
30257            10-26-16                   1         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(9)
30477            5-24-17                    1         Adds 51-4.211(23)
30654            9-20-17      10-1-17        35        Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (75)
                                          36        Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (99.1)
                                          37        Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (116.1)
30890            6-13-18                    1         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(1)(C)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (12)(C)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (12)(C)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (19)(C)
30894            6-13-18                    1         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(11)(F)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(11)(H)
30895            6-13-18                    1         Amends 51-4.401
                                                       (a)(1)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.401
                                                       (a)(4)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.402
                                                       (a)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.402
                                                       (b)(3)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.403
                                                       (a)(4)
                                          6         Amends 51-4.403
                                                       (b)(2)
                                          7         Amends 51-6.102
                                                       (a)(5)
30930            6-27-18                    1         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(1)(E)
30931            6-27-18                    1         Adds 51-4.509
30932            6-27-18                    1         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (9)
                                          2         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (9.1)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.401
                                                       (a)(6)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.401
                                                       (b)(3)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.401
                                                       (c)(4)(A)(i)
31040            11-14-18                   1         Adds Div. 51-
                                                       9.500
31041            11-14-18                   1         Adds 51-4.217(b)
                                                       (19)
31152            3-27-19                    1         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(7)(E)(ii)
                                          2         Adds 51-4.404(a)
                                                       (3)
                                          3         Adds 51-4.407(c)
                                                       (2)
                                          4         Adds 51-4.408(b)
                                                       (2)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.409
                                                       (a)
                                          6         Adds Div. 51-
                                                       4.900
                                                       Amends 51-4.201
31607            8-12-20                    1         (b)(1)(E)(viii)
                                                       (ff)
31608            8-12-20                    1         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(3)(C)
31705            11-11-20                   1         Adds 51-4.217(b)
                                                       (19)
                                                       Renumbers 51-
31916            6-23-21                    1         4.217(b)(19) as
                                                       51-4.217(b)(20)
32002            9-22-21                    15        Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (32)
                                          16        Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (33)
32209            5-11-22                    1         Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (3)
32264            8-10-22                    1         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (7.1)
                                          2         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (8)
                                          3         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (53)
32441            4-12-23                    1         Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (13)(A)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (13)(F)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(18)
32465            5-24-23                    1         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(20)(E)(iii)
32482            6-14-23                    1         Adds 51-4.216.1
                                                       (5)
32659            2-14-24                    1         Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (4)
                                          2         Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (6)
                                          3         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(10)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.402
                                          6         Amends 51-4.403
                                          7         Amends 51-4.407
                                                       (a)
                                          8         Amends 51-4.408
                                                       (a)(1)
32864            9-18-24                    34        Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (19)
                                          35        Amends 51-4.206
                                                       (1)(C)(v)
                                          36        Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(8)(E)(i)
                                          37        Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(8)(E)(iv)
                                          38        Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(20)(E)(iii)
                                          39        Amends 51-4.803
                                                       (e)(1)
                                          40        Amends 51-4.803
                                                       (f)(2)(A)
32907            10-23-24                   1         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (91.1)
                                          2         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (91.2)
                                          3         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (121.1)
                                          4         Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (2)
                                          5         Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (18)(E)(i)
                                          6         Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(9)
33112            5-14-25                    1         Amends 51-1.102
                                                       (b)(1)
                                          2         Amends 51-2.102
                                                       (8.1)
                                          3         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (8.2)
                                          4         Adds 51-2.102
                                                       (8.3)
                                          5         Deletes 51-2.102
                                                       (23.1)
                                          6         Deletes 51-2.102
                                                       (23.2)
                                          7         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(1)(C)
                                          8         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(1.1)(C)
                                          9         Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(2)(C)
                                          10        Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(3)(C)
                                          11        Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(3)(D)
                                          12        Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(3.1)(C)
                                          13        Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(6)(C)
                                          14        Amends 51-4.201
                                                       (b)(7)(C)
                                          15        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          16        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          17        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          18        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          19        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          20        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          21        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          22        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (9)(C)
                                          23        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (10)(C)
                                          24        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          25        Amends 51-4.202
                                                       (12)(C)
                                          26        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          27        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          28        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          29        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (3)(D)
                                          30        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          31        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          32        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          33        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          34        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (9)(C)
                                          35        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (10)(C)
                                          36        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          37        Amends 51-4.203
                                                       (12)(C)
                                          38        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          39        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          40        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          41        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          42        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (4)(D)
                                          43        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          44        Amends 51-4.204
                                                       (5)(D)
                                          45        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          46        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          47        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          48        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          49        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          50        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          51        Amends 51-4.205
                                                       (9)(C)
                                          52        Adds 51-4.205(9)
                                                       (E)
                                          53        Amends 51-4.206
                                                       (1)(C)(i )
                                          54        Amends 51-4.206
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          55        Amends 51-4.206
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          56        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          57        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          58        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          59        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          60        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          61        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          62        Amends 51-4.207
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          63        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          64        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          65        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          66        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          67        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          68        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          69        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          70        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (9)(C)
                                          71        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (10)(C)
                                          72        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          73        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (13)(C)
                                          74        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          75        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          76        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          77        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          78        Amends 51-4.209
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          79        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          80        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          81        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          82        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          83        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          84        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          85        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          86        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (9)(C)
                                          87        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (10)(C)
                                          88        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          89        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (12)(C)
                                          90        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (13)(C)
                                          91        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (14)(C)
                                          92        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (15)(C)
                                          93        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (16)(C)
                                          94        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (17)(C)
                                          95        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (18)(C)
                                          96        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (19)(C)
                                          97        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (20)(C)
                                          98        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (21)(C)
                                          99        Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (22)(C)
                                          100       Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (23)(C)
                                          101       Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (24)(C)
                                          102       Amends 51-4.210
                                                       (25)(C)
                                          103       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          104       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          105       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          106       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          107       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          108       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          109       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          110       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          111       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (9)(C)
                                          112       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (10)(C)
                                          113       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          114       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (12)(C)
                                          115       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (13)(C)
                                          116       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (14)(C)
                                          117       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (15)(C)
                                          118       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (16)(C)
                                          119       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (17)(C)
                                          120       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (18)(C)
                                          121       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (19)(C)
                                          122       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (20)(C)
                                          123       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (21)(C)
                                          124       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (22)(C)
                                          125       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (23)(C)
                                          126       Amends 51-4.211
                                                       (24)(C)
                                          127       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          128       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (1)(E)
                                          129       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          130       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (2)(E)
                                          131       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          132       Adds 51-4.212(3)
                                                       (E)
                                          133       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          134       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          135       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          136       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          137       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (7)(E)
                                          138       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          139       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (8)(E)
                                          140       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (9)(C)
                                          141       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (10)(C)
                                          142       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          143       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (12)(C)
                                          144       Adds 51-4.212(12)
                                                       (E)
                                          145       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (13)(C)
                                          146       Adds 51-4.212(13)
                                                       (F)( viii)
                                          147       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (14)(C)
                                          148       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (15)(C)
                                          149       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (16)(C)
                                          150       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (18)(A)
                                          151       Amends 51-4.212
                                                       (18)(B)
                                          152       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          153       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          154       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          155       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          156       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          157       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          158       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          159       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          160       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (9)(C)
                                          161       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (10)(C)
                                          162       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          163       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (13)(C)
                                          164       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (14)(C)
                                          165       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (15)(C)
                                          166       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (16)(C)
                                          167       Amends 51-4.4.213
                                                       (17)(C)
                                          168       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (18)(C)
                                          169       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (20)(C)
                                          170       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (21)(C)
                                          171       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (22)(C)
                                          172       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (23)(C)
                                          173       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (24)(C)
                                          174       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (27)(C)
                                          175       Amends 51-4.213
                                                       (28)(C)
                                          176       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          177       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          178       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          179       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          180       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          181       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          182       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          183       Amends 51-4.214
                                                       (12)(C)
                                          184       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (1)(C)
                                          185       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          186       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (3)(C)
                                          187       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          188       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          189       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          190       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          191       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          192       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (9)(C)
                                          193       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (10)(C)
                                          194       Amends 51-4.215
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          195       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (2)(C)
                                          196       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (4)(C)
                                          197       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (5)(C)
                                          198       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (6)(C)
                                          199       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (7)(C)
                                          200       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (8)(C)
                                          201       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (9)(C)
                                          202       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (10)(C)
                                          203       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (11)(C)
                                          204       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (12)(C)
                                          205       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (13)(C)
                                          206       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (14)(C)
                                          207       Amends 51-4.216
                                                       (15)(C)
                                          208       Amends 51-4.216.1
                                                       (1)(C )
                                          209       Amends 51-4.216.1
                                                       (2)(C )
                                          210       Amends 51-4.216.1
                                                       (3)(C )
                                          211       Amends 51-4.216.1
                                                       (4)(C )
                                          212       Amends 51-4.216.1
                                                       (5)(C )
                                          213       Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(1)( C)
                                          214       Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(6)( C)
                                          215       Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(15)( C)
33233            9-17-25                    16        Amends 51-4.217
                                                       (b)(20)(E)(iii)
                                                    
 
 
CHAPTER 51A
DALLAS DEVELOPMENT CODE: ORDINANCE NO. 19455, AS AMENDED
Ordinance Number Specified Passage Effective Date Ordinance Section 51A Section
                 Date
Ordinance Number Specified    Effective Date Ordinance 51A Section
                 Passage Date                Section
19455            02-04-87                   61        Adds
                                                       Ch. 51A
19499            03-18-87                   1         51A-3.103
                                          2         51A-4.501
19557            05-20-87                   1         51A-1.105 (d)(4)
                                          3         51A-7.605 (b),
                                                       (c)
19581            06-24-87                   2         Repeals Div.
                                                       51A-7.2000
19704            09-30-87                            51A-7.303 (b)(2)
19766            11-18-87                   1         51A-7.306 (e)(2)
                                          2         51A-7.306 (e)(3)
                                                       51A-2.102 (36),
19786            12-09-87                   5         (52), (55), (91),
                                                       (98), (112), and
                                                       (132)
                                                       Adds
                                                       51A-2.102 (61.1),
                                          6         (61.2), (65.1),
                                                       (65.2), (73.1),
                                                       (82.1), (85.1),
                                                       and (122.1)
                                          7         51A-4.101
                                          8         51A-4.105 (a)(5)
                                          9         51A-4.110
                                          10        51A-4.120
                                          11        51A-4.200
                                          12        51A-4.301(a)
                                                       51A-4.301 (c)(6),
                                          13        (c)(7), and (c)
                                                       (8)
                                          14        Adds
                                                       51A-4.301(i)
                                          15        51A-4.303(a)
                                          16        Adds
                                                       51A-4.304
                                          17        51A-4.303 (b)(2)
                                          18        51A, Art. IV
                                          19        51A-4.401 (a)(9)
                                          20        51A-4.412
                                          21        51A-4.502 (a)(2)
                                          22        51A-4.502(c)
                                          23        Adds
                                                       51A-4.506
                                          24        51A-4.602 (b)(7)
                                                       and (b)(8)
                                          25        51A-4.603(g)
                                          26        51A-4.702(a)
                                          27        51A-4.704
                                          28        51A-4.803 (a)(4)
                                          29        51A, Div. 5.100
                                          30        51A-6.102(c)
                                          31        51A-6.105
                                          32        51A-7.102
                                          33        51A-7.306 (c),
                                                       (d), and (e)(1)
                                          34        51A-7.404 (a)(5)
                                          35        51A-10.103(a)
                                          36        51A-10.106 (b)(2)
19806            12-16-87                   2         51A-2.102(55)
                                          3         51A-4.121 (a)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                          4         51A-4.121 (b)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                          5         51A-4.121 (c)(2)
                                                       (G), (d)(2)(G)
                                          6         51A-4.122 (a)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                          7         51A-4.122 (b)(2)
                                                       (G), (c)(2)(G)
                                          8         51A-4.123(a) thru
                                                       (d)(2)(G)
                                          9         51A-4.124 (a)(2)
                                                       (G), (b)(2)(G)
                                          10        51A-4.125(d), (e)
                                                       (2)(G)
                                          11        51A-4.126(d), (e)
                                                       (2)(G)
                                          12        51A-4.207(4)
                                          14        Repeals
                                                       51A-4.207(1)
19807            12-16-87                   1         51A-4.303
19808            12-16-87                   2         51A-4.112 (a)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                          3         51A-4.113 (2)(L)
                                          4         51A-4.114 (2)(L)
                                          5         51A-4.115 (2)(L)
                                          6         51A-4.116 (a)(2)
                                                       (L), (b)(2)(L)
                                          7         51A-4.116 (c)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                          8         51A-4.121 (a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                          9         51A-4.121 (b)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                          10        51A-4.122 (a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                          11        51A-4.125 (d)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                          12        51A-4.126 (d)(2)
                                                       (L), (e)(2)(L)
                                          13        51A-4.212(7)
19810            12-16-87                   1         51A-4.210
19832            01-13-88                   1         Adds 51A, Div.
                                                       9.300
19872            02-24-88                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-1.106(e)
                                          2         51A-4.701 (e)(2)
19873            02-24-88                   1         51A-4.121 (c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                          2         51A-4.122 (c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                          3         51A-4.123 (a)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                          4         51A-4.123 (b)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                          5         51A-4.126 (f)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                          6         51A-4.205(l)
19879            03-09-88                   2         51A-7.404 (a)(5)
19912            03-23-88                   2         51A-4.114 (2)(I)
                                          3         51A-4.115 (2)(I)
                                          4         51A-4.116 (a)(2)
                                                       (I), (b)(2)(I)
                                          5         51A-4.116 (c)(2)
                                                       (I), (d)(2)(I)
                                          6         51A-4.124 (a)(2)
                                                       (I), (b)(2)(I)
                                          7         51A-4.125 (d)(2)
                                                       (I),
                                          8         51A-4.125 (e)(2)
                                                       (I), (f)(2)(I)
                                          9         Adds
                                                       51A-4.209(5.1)
                                          11        Repeals
                                                       51A-4.209(3)
19913            03-23-88                   2         51A-4.114 (2)(D)
                                          3         51A-4.116 (a)(2)
                                                       (D) (b)(2)(D)
                                          4         51A-4.116 (c)(2)
                                                       (D) (d)(2)(D)
                                          5         51A-4.204(8)
19928            04-13-88                   2         51A-4.121 (a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          3         51A-4.210(23)
19929            04-13-88                   5         51A-4.803 (e)(1)
19930            04-13-88                   1         51A-4.505 (d)(1)
                                          2         51A-4.505 (f),
                                                       (g)
19931            04-13-88                   2         51A-4.122 (b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          3         51A-4.123 (c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          4         51A-4.123 (d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          5         51A-4.125 (e)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          6         51A-4.125 (f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          7         51A-4.204(13)
19935            04-27-88                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.701(g)
19963            05-25-88                   73        51A-1.103 (a)(1)
                                          74        51A-1.106(e)
19995            06-22-88                   2         Ch. 51A, Art. VI
20007            07-13-88                   1         51A-7.301
                                          3         51A-7.302
                                          4         51A-7.401
                                          5         51A-7.802
                                                       Renumbers
20037            08-10-88                   1         51A-1.105(l) as
                                                       51A-1.105.1
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(m)
                                          3         51A-4.204(4) (C)
                                                       (iv)
                                          4         51A-4.212 (5)(B)
                                          5         51A-4.408 (a)(1)
                                          6         51A-4.505(g)(6)
                                          7         51A-4.701(c)(2)
                                          8         51A-4.702 (a)(7)
                                          9         51A-4.803(k)
                                                       Renumbers Div.
                                          10        51A 7.2000 as
                                                       51A-7.1100
                                          11        Repeals
                                                       51A-9.307(c)
20038            08-10-88                   2         51A-4.205 (1)(B)
20073            09-28-88     10-01-88       7         51A-1.105 (a)(2)
                                          8         51A-1.105 (b)(2)
                                          9         51A-1.105 (c)(2)
                                          10        51A-1.105 (d)(2)
                                          11        51A-1.105 (e)(2)
                                          12        51A-1.105 (f)(2)
                                          13        51A-1.105 (g)(2)
                                          14        51A-1.105 (h)(2)
                                          15        51A-1.105 (i)(2)
                                          16        51A-1.105 (j)(2)
                                          19        51A-8.107(d)
                                          20        51A-1.105 (k)(2)
20092            10-12-88                   1         51A, Art. VIII
20093            10-12-88                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(n)
                                                       51A-4.110 (a)(2)
20122            11-09-88                   2         (K) thru (g)(2)
                                                       (K)
                                          3         51A-4.113 (2)(K)
                                          4         51A-4.211(9)
20132            11-09-88                   1         51A-1.105(a)
                                          2         51A-4.219(b)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-4.219(c)
20159            12-14-88                   2         51A-4.204(17)
20167            01-11-89                   1         51A, Art. 7, Div.
                                                       51A-7.900
20236            03-08-89                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-1.103 (a)(5)
                                          2         51A-4.401 (a)(5)
                                                       (A) thru (E)
                                          4         51A-4.401(d)(1)
                                          6         51A-4.402(b)
                                          8         51A-4.402(d)
                                          10        Adds
                                                       51A-4.403(b)
                                          12        51A-4.403(d)
                                          13        51A-4.602(a)(1)
20237            03-08-89                   2         51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          3         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          4         51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          5         51A-4.210(b)(6)
20238            03-08-89                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.604
20242            03-08-89                   2         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          3         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          4         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          5         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
20257            03-22-89                   1         51A-4.210(b)(3)
20272            04-12-89                   3         Adds
                                                       51A-4.306
                                          4         51A-2.102(132)
                                          5         51A-4.210(b)(9)
                                          6         51A-4.304(c) and
                                                       (d)(1)
20273            04-12-89                   1         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          2         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          3         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          4         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          5         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          6         51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          7         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          8         51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          9         51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          10        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          11        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Adds
                                          12        51A-4.210(b)(27),
                                                       Renumbers 28 thru
                                                       31
20307            05-10-89                   2         51A-4.704(c)(3)
                                                       and (4)
20308            05-10-89                   1         51A-4.412(a)(3)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-4.505(c)(3)
20343            06-14-89                   1         51A-7.102(25)
                                          2         51A-7.211
20344            06-14-89                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.208(3)(E)
20345            06-14-89                   1         Adds 51A, Div.
                                                       7.1200
                                          2         51A-7.504(e)
20359            06-28-89                   1         51A-7.201
                                          3         51A-7.210
20360            06-28-89                   19        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102 (48.1)
                                          20        51A-2.102 (73.1)
                                                       thru (83), (140)
                                          21        51A-4.101(1)(R)
                                          22        51A-4.117
                                          23        51A-4.209(4)
                                          24        51A-4.603(f)
                                          25        51A-5.101(15),
                                                       (17)
                                          26        51A-5.104(b)(5)
                                          27        51A-7.306(f)(1)
                                                       (B)
20361            06-28-89                   2         51A-2.102(38)
                                          3         51A-2.102(39)
                                                       Repeals
                                          4         51A-4.124 (a)(4)
                                                       (D)(ii)
                                          5         Repeals
                                                       51A-4.301 (a)(4)
                                          6         Repeals
                                                       51A-4.409 (a)(1)
20362            06-28-89                   1         51A-4.602(a)
20363            06-28-89                   1         51A-4.123 (a)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          2         51A-4.123 (b)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          3         51A-4.123 (c)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          4         51A-4.123 (d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Adds
                                          5         51A-4.213 (6),
                                                       renumbers (7)
                                                       thru (15)
20378            07-12-89                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1101
20379            07-12-89                   2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.102(15.1)
                                          3         51A-7.301
                                          4         51A-7.302
                                          5         51A-7.401
20380            07-12-89                   1         51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          2         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          3         51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          4         51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          5         51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          6         51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          7         51A-4.213(7)(B)
20381            07-12-89                   1         51A-4.701(d)(2)
20382            07-12-89                   1         51A-4.121(a)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          2         51A-4.121(b)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          3         51A-4.121(c)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          4         51A-4.121(d)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          5         51A-4.122(a)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          6         51A-4.122(b)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          7         51A-4.122(c)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          8         51A-4.123(a)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          9         51A-4.123(b)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          10        51A-4.123(c)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          11        51A-4.123(d)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          12        51A-4.125(d)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          13        51A-4.125(e)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          14        51A-4.125(f)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          15        51A-4.126(d)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          16        51A-4.126(e)(4)
                                                       (H)
                                          17        51A-4.126(f)(4)
                                                       (H)
20383            07-12-89                   3         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(131)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-4.301(a)(4)
20384            07-12-89                   1         51A-4.111(2)(H)
                                                       51A-4.112(a)(2)
                                          2         (H) thru (g)(2)
                                                       (H)
                                          3         51A-4.113(2)(H)
                                          4         51A-4.114(2)(H)
                                          5         51A-4.115(2)(H)
                                                       51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                          6         (H) thru (d)(2)
                                                       (H)
                                          7         51A-4.208(3)
20411            08-09-89     10-08-89       1         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(47.1)
                                          2         51A-4.203(a)
                                          3         51A-4.217(a)(1)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-6.108
20425            08-23-89                   1         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          2         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          3         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          4         51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (B)
                                          5         51A-4.210(b)(30)
                                                       (B)
20412            08-09-89                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.704(c)(2)
20440            09-13-89                   1         51A-4.403(b)(2)
                                                       Repeals
20441            09-13-89                   1         51A-4.111 (4)(G)
                                                       (ii)
                                                       Repeals
                                          2         51A-4.112 (a)
                                                       thru (g)(4) (G)
                                                       (ii) and (iii)
                                                       Repeals
                                          3         51A-4.113 (4)(G)
                                                       (ii) and (iii)
                                                       Repeals
                                          4         51A-4.114 (4)(G)
                                                       (ii) and (iii)
                                                       Repeals
                                          5         51A-4.116(a) thru
                                                       (b)(4) (G)(ii)
                                                       and (ii)
20478            10-18-89                   1         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                          2         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                          3         51A-4.203(a)
                                          4         51A-4.203(b)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          5         51A-4.203(b)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       51A-4.206(1.1)
                                          11        Repeals Ord.
                                                       20411
20487            10-25-89                   1         51A-3.103(a)(2)
20493            10-25-89                   1         51A-4.201(1)(C)
                                          2         51A-4.201(2)(C)
                                          3         51A-4.201(3)(C)
                                          4         51A-4.202(1)(C)
                                          5         51A-4.202(2)(C)
                                          6         51A-4.202(3)(C)
                                          7         51A-4.202(4)(C)
                                          8         51A-4.202(5)(C)
                                          9         51A-4.202(6)(C)
                                          10        51A-4.202(7)(C)
                                          11        51A-4.202(8)(C)
                                          12        51A-4.202(9)(C)
                                          13        51A-4.202(10)(C)
                                          14        51A-4.202(11)(C)
                                          15        51A-4.202(12)(C)
                                          16        51A-4.202(13)(C)
                                          17        51A-4.202(14)(C)
                                          18        51A-4.203(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                          19        51A-4.203(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          20        51A-4.203(b)(3)
                                                       (C)
                                          21        51A-4.203(b)(4)
                                                       (C)
                                          22        51A-4.203(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
                                          23        51A-4.203(b)(6)
                                                       (C)
                                          24        51A-4.204(1)(C)
                                          25        51A-4.204(2)(C)
                                          26        51A-4.204(3)(C)
                                          27        51A-4.204(4)(C)
                                          28        51A-4.204(5)(C)
                                          29        51A-4.204(6)(C)
                                          30        51A-4.204(7)(C)
                                          31        51A-4.204(8)(C)
                                          32        51A-4.204(9)(C)
                                          33        51A-4.204(10)(C)
                                          34        51A-4.204(11)(C)
                                          35        51A-4.204(12)(C)
                                          36        51A-4.204(13)(C)
                                          37        51A-4.204(14)(C)
                                          38        51A-4.204(15)(C)
                                          39        51A-4.204(16)(C)
                                          40        51A-4.204(17)(C)
                                          41        51A-4.205(1)(C)
                                          42        51A-4.205(2)(C)
                                          43        51A-4.205(3)(C)
                                          44        51A-4.206(1)(C)
                                          45        51A-4.206(2)(C)
                                          46        51A-4.207(2)(C)
                                          47        51A-4.207(3)(C)
                                          48        51A-4.207(4)(C)
                                          49        51A-4.207(5)(C)
                                          50        51A-4.208(1)(C)
                                          51        51A-4.208(2)(C)
                                          52        51A-4.208(3)(C)
                                          53        51A-4.209(1)(C)
                                          54        51A-4.209(2)(C)
                                          55        51A-4.209(4)(C)
                                          56        51A-4.209(5)(C)
                                          57        51A-4.209(5.1)(C)
                                          58        51A-4.209(6)(C)
                                          59        51A-4.210(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                          60        51A-4.210(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          61        51A-4.210(b)(3)
                                                       (C)
                                          62        51A-4.210(b)(4)
                                                       (C)
                                          63        51A-4.210(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
                                          64        51A-4.210(b)(6)
                                                       (C)
                                          65        51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (C)
                                          66        51A-4.210(b)(8)
                                                       (C)
                                          67        51A-4.210(b)(9)
                                                       (C)
                                          68        51A-4.210(b)(10)
                                                       (C)
                                          69        51A-4.210(b)(11)
                                                       (C)
                                          70        51A-4.210(b)(12)
                                                       (C)
                                          71        51A-4.210(b)(13)
                                                       (C)
                                          72        51A-4.210(b)(14)
                                                       (C)
                                          73        51A-4.210(b)(15)
                                                       (C)
                                          74        51A-4.210(b)(16)
                                                       (C)
                                          75        51A-4.210(b)(17)
                                                       (C)
                                          76        51A-4.210(b)(18)
                                                       (C)
                                          77        51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       (C)
                                          78        51A-4.210(b)(20)
                                                       (C)
                                          79        51A-4.210(b)(21)
                                                       (C)
                                          80        51A-4.210(b)(22)
                                                       (C)
                                          81        51A-4.210(b)(23)
                                                       (C)
                                          82        51A-4.210(b)(24)
                                                       (C)
                                          83        51A-4.210(b)(25)
                                                       (C)
                                          84        51A-4.210(b)(26)
                                                       (C)
                                          85        51A-4.210(b)(27)
                                                       (C)
                                          86        51A-4.210(b)(28)
                                                       (C)
                                          87        51A-4.210(b)(29)
                                                       (C)
                                          88        51A-4.210(b)(30)
                                                       (C)
                                          89        51A-4.210(b)(31)
                                                       (C)
                                          90        51A-4.211(1)(C)
                                          91        51A-4.211(2)(C)
                                          92        51A-4.211(3)(C)
                                          93        51A-4.211(4)(C)
                                          94        51A-4.211(5)(C)
                                          95        51A-4.211(6)(C)
                                          96        51A-4.211(7)(C)
                                          97        51A-4.211(8)(C)
                                          98        51A-4.211(9)(C)
                                          99        51A-4.212(1)(C)
                                          100       51A-4.212(2)(C)
                                          101       51A-4.212(3)(C)
                                          102       51A-4.212(4)(C)
                                          103       51A-4.212(5)(C)
                                          104       51A-4.212(6)(C)
                                          105       51A-4.212(7)(C)
                                          106       51A-4.212(8)(C)
                                          107       51A-4.212(9)(C)
                                          108       51A-4.212(10)(C)
                                          109       51A-4.212(11)(C)
                                          110       51A-4.212(12)(C)
                                          111       51A-4.213(1)(C)
                                          112       51A-4.213(2)(C)
                                          113       51A-4.213(3)(C)
                                          114       51A-4.213(4)(C)
                                          115       51A-4.213(5)(C)
                                          116       51A-4.213(7)(C)
                                          117       51A-4.213(8)(C)
                                          118       51A-4.213(9)(C)
                                          119       51A-4.213(10)(C)
                                          120       51A-4.213(11)(C)
                                          121       51A-4.213(12)(C)
                                          122       51A-4.213(13)(C)
                                          123       51A-4.213(14)(C)
                                          124       51A-4.213(15)(C)
                                          125       Adds
                                                       51A-4.305
20494            10-25-90                   1         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          2         51A-4.210(b)(15)
                                                       (B)
                                          3         51A-4.210(b)(15)
                                                       (E)
20495            10-25-90                   1         51A-7.303(b)
20496            10-25-90                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.219(b)(8)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-4.702(i)
                                          3         51A-10.101(14)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-10.101(15.1)
                                          5         51A-10.103(b)
                                          6         51A-10.103(e) and
                                                       (f)
                                          7         51A-10.105(a)
                                          8         Adds
                                                       51A-10.106(a)(3)
                                          9         Adds
                                                       51A-10.106(h)
                                          10        51A-10.107(c)(1)
                                          11        51A-10.107(b)
                                          12        51A-10.107(f)(3)
                                          13        51A-10.108
20539            12-13-89                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.602(d)(2)
20585            3-28-90                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-3.103(c)(10)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.501(a)(2)-
                                                       (5)
                                                       Adds Division
20596            4-11-90                    1         51A-7.1300 (
                                                       51A-7.1301 -
                                                       51A-7.1307)
20599            4-11-90                    14        Amends
                                                       51A-1.103 (a)(1)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-1.106(e)
20612            4-25-90                    16        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(j)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(m)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)(6)
20625            5-9-90                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(K)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.112 (2)(K)
                                                       (a) - (g)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.113(2)(K)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.114(2)(K)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(2)(K)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.116(2)(K)
                                                       (a) - (g)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(K)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.121(2)(K)
                                                       (a) - (d)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.122(2)(K)
                                                       (a) - (c)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.123(2)(K)
                                                       (a) - (d)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.124(2)(K)
                                                       (a), (b)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.125(2)(K)
                                                       (d) - (f)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.126(2)(K)
                                                       (d) - (f)
                                          14        Adds
                                                       51A-4.211(10)
20673            6-27-90                    2         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(38)(D)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(11.1)
20728            9-12-90                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.212
20729            9-12-90                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.103(b)
20730            9-12-90                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(f)(2)
                                          2         Repeals
                                                       51A-8.614(e)
                                                       Amends
20731            9-12-90                    1         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(10)(B)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(11)(B)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(12)(B)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(15)(B)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(11)
                                                       Amends
20752            9-26-90                    1         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(7)(B)
20760            10-10-90                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(b)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-1.106(b)(6)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(b)
                                                       Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(61.2)
20778            10-24-90                   1         renumbers
                                                       51A-2.102(61.2)
                                                       as 51A-102(61.3)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(e)
                                                       Amends
20806            11-14-90                   1         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(14)
                                                       Adds
20807            11-14-90                   1         51A-4.204(12)(E)
                                                       (ii)
20845            12-12-90                   2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(3)(A)
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                                       Amends
20884            2-13-91                    1         51A-4.301(d)(1)
                                                       (C)(ii)
                                                       Amends
20895            2-27-91                    1         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
20902            3-13-91                    1         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                          14        Adds
                                                       51A-4.202(8.1)
20920            4-10-91                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)(4)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(55)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(2.1)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(a)(2)
                                                       Repeals:
                                          20        51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.116(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.116(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.116(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                   51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          21        Repeals
                                                       51A-4.204(12)
20926            4-10-91                    3         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(b)(4)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-1.106(a)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102(b)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102(c)(1)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102(e)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.703(a)-(e)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.703
20927            4-10-91                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(b)(4)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(o)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.102
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.203(a)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.205(c)-(e)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.207
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-7.212(a)(5)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-7.303(e)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-7.304(b)(2)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-7.304(h)
                                          11        Amemds
                                                       51A-7.305(f)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-7.306(b)(2)
                                          13        amends
                                                       51A-7.306(c)-(f)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-7.402(b)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-7.403(a)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-7.403(b)(2)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-7.502(a)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-7.504(a)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-7.504(c)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-7.603
                                          21        Amends 51-7.605
                                                       (c)(1)
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-7.702(b)
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-7.702(c)
                                          24        Amends
                                                       51A-7.702(e)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-7.703(a)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-7.705(b)
                                          27        Adds
                                                       51A-7.706
                                          28        Amends
                                                       51A-7.801
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-7.911(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-7.1005(b)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-7.1105(b)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          32        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1204(d)
                                          33        Repeals:
                                                       51A-1.105(g)
                                                   51A-7.304(g)
                                                   51A-7.604
                                                   51A-7.703(c)(1)
                                                   51A-7.704
                                                   51A-7.705(d)
                                                       Amends
20928            4-10-91                    1         51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(8)(A)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(8)(B)
                                                       Adds
                                          4         51A-4.213(8)(E)
                                                       (ii)
20949            5-22-91                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.106(a)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.505(c)
20950            5-22-91                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(M)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.112(a)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.112(b)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.112(c)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.112(d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.112(e)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.112(f)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.112(g)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.113(2)(M)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.114(2)(M)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(2)(M)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.116(b)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.116(c)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.116(d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(M)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.121(a)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-4.122(a)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          25        51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          26        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          35        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(11)
                                                       Amends
20953            5-22-91                    1         51A-4.209(5)(C)
                                                       (i)
20954            5-22-91                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.507
20962            6-12-91                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.505
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.403(b)(2)
21000            6-26-91                    3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(4)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.408(a)(1)
                                                       Amends
21001            6-26-91                    1         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (K)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (K)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(3)(B)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(9)(B)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(10)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(14)(B)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(3)(B)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(6)(B)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(10)(B)
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(15)(B)
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(25)(B)
                                          24        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(31)(B)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(2)(B)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(12)(B)
                                          27        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(1)(B)
                                          28        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(3)(B)
                                          29        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(4)(B)
                                          30        Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(10)(B)
                                                       Adds new
                                                       51A-2.102(41.1),
21002            6-26-91                    1         (45.1), (52.1),
                                                       (111.1), (118.1),
                                                       (125.1), (131.1),
                                                       (131.2)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.112(a)(3)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.112(b)(3)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.112(c)(3)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.112(d)(3)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.112(e)(3)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.112(f)(3)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.112(g)(3)
                                                       (A)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.113(3)(A)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.114(3)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(3)(A)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-4.116(a)(3)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-4.116(b)(3)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-4.116(c)(3)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.116(d)(3)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(3)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-4.121(a)(3)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-4.121(b)(3)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-4.121(c)(3)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-4.121(d)(3)
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-4.122(a)(3)
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-4.122(b)(3)
                                          24        Amends
                                                       51A-4.122(c)(3)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-4.123(a)(3)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-4.123(b)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                          29        Amends
                                                       51A-4.123(c)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          31        Amends
                                                       51A-4.123(d)(3)
                                          32        Amends
                                                       51A-4.124(a)(3)
                                          33        Amends
                                                       51A-4.124(b)(3)
                                          34        Amends
                                                       51A-4.125(d)(3)
                                          35        Amends
                                                       51A-4.125(e)(3)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-4.125(f)(3)
                                          37        Amends
                                                       51A-4.126(d)(3)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-4.126(e)(3)
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-4.126(f)(3)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-4.203(a)(2)
                                                       Adds
                                          41        51A-4.203(b)
                                                       (2.1), (3.1), and
                                                       (5.1)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-4.206(1.1)(B)
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-4.206(1.1)(E)
                                                       Adds
                                          44        51A-4.217(b)
                                                       (3.1), (6.1), and
                                                       (7.1)
21044            9-1-91                     1         Renaming Art. I
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.102(b)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(55)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(D)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(I)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.112(a)(2)
                                                       (D) thru (g)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.112(a)(2)
                                                       (I) thru (g)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.113(2)(D)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.113(2)(I)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-4.114(2)(D)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-4.114(2)(I)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(2)(D)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(2)(I)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                                       (D) thru (d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                                       (I) thru (d)(2)
                                                       (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.116 (a)(2)
                                                       (I) thru (b)(2)
                                                       (I)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(D)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(I)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          23        Amends 51A-4.(c)
                                                       (2)(D)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          25        51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          26        51A-4.122(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (D) thru (d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (I) thru (b)(2)
                                                       (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (I)
                                                       Amends
                                                   51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          35        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (D) thru (f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(8)
                                          37        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(8)(B)
                                          38        Adds
                                                       51A-4.209(3)
                                          39        Adds
                                                       51A-4.209(3.1)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-4.209(5.1)(A)
                                                       Adds
                                                       51A-4.210(a)
                                          41        renumbering
                                                       paragraphs (1)
                                                       thru (6) as (b)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(a)(2)
                                          46        Repeals
                                                       51A-4.204(6)
                                          47        Repeals
                                                       51A-4.204(10)
                                          48        Repeals
                                                       51A-4.204(15)
21045            9-11-91      1-1-92         2         Amends
                                                       51A-8.612(a)
21114            11-13-91                   1         Adds Div.
                                                       51A-7.1400
21145            12-11-91                   1         Adds Div.
                                                       51A-7.1500
21153            12-11-91                   14        Amends
                                                       51A-3.101(a)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(a)
21183            1-22-92                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105.1
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-1.107
21186            1-22-92                    14        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(7.1)
                                          15        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(23.1)
                                          16        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(77.1)
                                          17        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(77.2)
                                          18        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(111.1)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-2.102
                                          20        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(138.1)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(4)(A)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.123(a)(4)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.123(d)(4)
                                                       (A)
                                          24        Amends
                                                       51A-4.401(a)(2)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-4.402(a)(2)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-6.101(2)
                                          27        Amends
                                                       51A-7.304(b)(2)
                                          28        Amends
                                                       51A-7.304(g)
                                          29        Amends
                                                       51A-7.605(c)
                                          30        Amends
                                                       51A-8.103(c)
                                          31        Amends
                                                       51A-8.403(b)(1)
                                          32        Amends
                                                       51A-8.503(c)
                                          33        Amends
                                                       51A-8.506(a)
                                          34        Amends
                                                       51A-8.601(a)
                                          35        Amends
                                                       51A-8.602(b)(1)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-8.602(b)(3)
                                          37        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(a)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(c)
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(c)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-8.614(d)(1)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-8.617(a)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-9.101
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-9.201(a)
                                          44        Amends
                                                       51A-9.201(f)
                                          45        Amends
                                                       51A-9.202(a)
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-9.301(3)
                                                       Repeals
                                          47        51A-7.102(13) and
                                                       51A-8.201(27) and
                                                       (52)
                                                       Amends
21209            2-26-92                    1         51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (C)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(i)(1)
21210            2-26-92                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(14)(E)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(2)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(3.1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(4)
21243            3-25-92                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.702(c)(2)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.702(d)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-4.702(f)(1.1)
                                                       Amends
21244            3-25-92                    1         51A-4.501(b)(6)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.501(b)(6)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
21259            4-8-92                     1         51A-4.122 (b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.210(b)(22)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Adds
                                          15        51A-4.210(b)(22)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Adds
21289            5-13-92                    1         51A-4.210(b)(12)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Adds
                                          2         51A-4.210(b)(13)
                                                       (E)(ii)
                                                       Adds
                                          3         51A-4.210(b)(14)
                                                       (E)(ii)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(9)(A)
                                                       Adds
                                          5         51A-4.213(9)(E)
                                                       (iii)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.217(b)(6)
                                                       (A)
21290            5-13-92                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(b)(2)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.401(c)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.402(c)
                                                       Amends
21291            5-13-92                    1         51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (C)
21299            5-27-92                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-5.102(d)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-5.105(e)(2)
                                                       and (4)
21314            6-10-92                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(L)
                                                       Amends Paragraph
                                          2         (2)(L) of
                                                       51A-4.112 (a)
                                                       thru (g)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.113(2)(L)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.114(2)(L)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(2)(L)
                                                       Amends Paragraph
                                          6         (2)(L) of
                                                       51A-4.116 (a)
                                                       thru (d)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(L)
                                                       Amends Paragraph
                                          8         (2)(L) of
                                                       51A-4.121 (a)
                                                       thru (d)
                                                       Amends Paragraph
                                          9         (2)(L) of
                                                       51A-4.122 (a)
                                                       thru (c)
                                                       Amends Paragraph
                                          10        (2)(L) of
                                                       51A-4.123 (a)
                                                       thru (d)
                                                       Amends Paragraph
                                          11        (2)(L) of
                                                       51A-4.124 (a) and
                                                       (b)
                                                       Amends Paragraph
                                          12        (2)(L) of
                                                       51A-4.125 (d)
                                                       thru (f)
                                                       Amends Paragraph
                                          13        (2)(L) of
                                                       51A-4.126 (d)
                                                       thru (f)
                                          14        Adds
                                                       51A-4.212(10.1)
21398            8-26-92                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.603(h)
                                                       Amends
21399            8-26-92                    1         51A-4.121(a)(4)
                                                       (B)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.121(b)(4)
                                                       (B)(i)(bb)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.121(c)(4)
                                                       (B)(i)(bb)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.121(d)(4)
                                                       (B)(i)(bb)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.122(a)(4)
                                                       (B)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.122(b)(4)
                                                       (B)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.122(c)(4)
                                                       (B)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.123(a)(4)
                                                       (B)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.123(b)(4)
                                                       (B)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.123(c)(4)
                                                       (B)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.123(d)(4)
                                                       (B)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.125(d)(4)
                                                       (B)(i)(bb)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.125(e)(4)
                                                       (B)(i)(bb)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.125(f)(4)
                                                       (B)(i)(bb)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.126(d)(4)
                                                       (B)(i)(bb)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.126(e)(4)
                                                       (B)(i)(bb)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.126(f)(4)
                                                       (B)(i)(bb)
                                                       Amends
21400            8-26-92                    1         51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (B)
21401            8-26-92                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.102(37)
21402            8-26-92                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.505(a)
21403            8-26-92                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(b)(4)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(b)(5)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.501(b)(6)
                                                       (A)
21404            8-26-92                    1         Amends Div.
                                                       51A-7.900
                                          2         Amends Div.
                                                       51A-7.1000
21431            9-23-92      10-1-92        10        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)(4)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(b)(4)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(e)(5)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(i)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)(4)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.701(e)(3)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-8.702
21442            10-14-92                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(D)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.121(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(7)
                                                       Amends
21454            10-28-92                   2         51A-4.217(b)(8)
                                                       (E)
21455            10-28-92                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.304(i)
                                                       Amends
21456            10-28-92                   1         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-4.203(b)(1.1)
21491            12-9-92      1-1-93         2         Amends
                                                       51A-8.612(a)
21511            12-9-92      12-31-92       1         Repeals
                                                       51A-7.706
21512            12-9-92                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(a)
                                                       Amends
21513            12-9-92                    1         51A-4.501(b)(6)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.501(b)(6)
                                                       (E)
21553            1-27-93                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.307
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(b)(6)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.704
21626            4-14-93                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1004(a)(2)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1004(a)(4)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1005(a)(4)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1005(d)(1)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1005(e)
21633            4-14-93                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-1.104.1
21636            5-12-93                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-5.107
21658            5-12-93                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(5.1)
                                                       Amends
21659            5-12-93                    1         51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Adds
                                          2         51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends Div.
21660            5-12-93                    1         51A-4.320 (
                                                       51A-4.321 -
                                                       51A-4.331)
21663            5-12-93                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105.1
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(75)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(79)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(84)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(85)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(119)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.101(1)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.101(6)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.116(a)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.116(b)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.116(c)(4)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.116(d)(4)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.121(a)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.121(b)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.121(c)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.121(d)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.122(a)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.122(b)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.122(c)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-4.123(a)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.123(b)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.123(c)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.123(d)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-4.125(b)
                                          26        Amends 51A-125(d)
                                          27        Amends
                                                       51A-4.125(e)
                                          28        Amends
                                                       51A-4.125(f)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.126(d)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.126(e)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-4.126(f)(8)
                                                       (B)
                                          32        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(11)(B)
                                          33        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(13)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-4.204(8)(E)
                                                       (i)
                                          35        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(13)(B)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(14)(B)
                                          37        Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(1)(B)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(2)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          39        51A-4.205(2.1)(B)
                                                       (i)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-4.209(2)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          41        51A-4.209(3)(E)
                                                       (i)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-4.209(3.1)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          43        51A-4.209(5.1)(E)
                                                       (ii)
                                          44        Amends
                                                       51A-4.209(6)(B)
                                          45        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(7)(B)
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(16)(B)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(17)(B)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(3)(B)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(4)(B)
                                          50        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(6)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          51        51A-4.211(10)(E)
                                                       (vii)
                                                       Amends
                                          52        51A-4.212(10.1)
                                                       (B)(i)
                                          53        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(8)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          54        51A-4.213(8)(E)
                                                       (ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          55        51A-4.213(11)(B)
                                                       (ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          56        51A-4.213(11.1)
                                                       (B)(ii)
                                          57        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(13)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          58        51A-4.217(b)(3)
                                                       (B)
                                          59        Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(b)(3)
                                          60        Amends
                                                       51A-4.407(a)(1)
                                          61        Amends
                                                       51A-4.408(a)(4)
                                          62        Amends
                                                       51A-4.412(a)(3)
                                          63        Amends
                                                       51A-4.602(c)(6)
                                                       Adds Div.
                                          64        51A-4.900 (
                                                       51A-4.901 -
                                                       51A-4.910)
                                          65        Amends
                                                       51A-7.306(d)
                                                       Amends
                                          66        51A-7.306(e)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          67        Amends
                                                       51A-7.306(f)(1)
                                          68        Amends
                                                       51A-7.306(g)
21694            6-9-93                     2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.911(e)(4)
                                                       Amends
21697            6-9-93                     2         51A-4.210(b)(20)
                                                       (C)
21735            6-23-93                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.104(a)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.116(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(4)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(17)
                                          27        Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(a)
                                          28        Amends
                                                       51A-4.503
21751            8-11-93                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                                       Amends
21760            8-11-93                    1         51A-4.803(a)
                                                       Table 1
                                                       Amends
21796            9-8-93                     1         51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.210(b)(8)
                                                       (B)
21797            9-8-93                     4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.208
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-7.213
                                          7         Repeals
                                                       51A-7.304(i)
21798            9-8-93                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.205
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.304(b)(3)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.403(a)(2)
                                                       Amends
21855            10-13-93                   1         51A-7.205(c)(2)
                                                       (B)
21874            10-27-93                   2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(e)
                                                       Adds Art. XI,
                                          3         Div.
                                                       51A-11.100 (
                                                       51A-11.101)
21895            11-10-93                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.603(i)
21960            1-26-94                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.124(a)(1)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-4.124(a)(9)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.210(b)(9)
                                                       (E)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.306(a)
21978            2-23-94                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.205(c)(1)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.305(d)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.404(a)(4)
22004            3-23-94                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(12)
22018            4-13-94                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(112.1)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(a)(2)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(a)(3)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-4.501(f)
                                                       Amends Ch. 51A,
                                                       Art. VII, Div.
22019            4-13-94                    2         51A-7.1400,
                                                       51A-7.1401 thru
                                                       51A-7.1407
22020            4-13-94                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(7)
22022            4-13-94                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-8.612(a)
22026            4-20-94      7-1-94         113       Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(j)(2)
                                          114       Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(m)(2)
                                                       Amends
                                          115       51A-4.203(b)(4)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          116       51A-4.203(b)(4)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          117       51A-4.204(4)(C)
                                                       (v)
                                                       Amends
                                          118       51A-4.211(10)(E)
                                                       (i)
                                                       Amends
                                          119       51A-4.211(10)(E)
                                                       (vii)
                                          120       Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(3.1)
                                          121       Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(e)(6)
                                          122       Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(a)(2)
                                          123       Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(e)(1)
                                          124       Amends
                                                       51A-8.402
                                                       Amends
                                          125       51A-8.403(b)(8)
                                                       (J)
                                          126       Amends
                                                       51A-8.403(b)(10)
                                          127       Amends
                                                       51A-8.607
                                          128       Amends
                                                       51A-8.608(d)
                                          129       Amends
                                                       51A-8.608(f)
                                          130       Amends
                                                       51A-8.609(d)(2)
                                          131       Amends
                                                       51A-8.613
                                          132       Amends
                                                       51A-9.102(a)
                                          133       Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)
                                                       Amends
                                          134       51A-11.101(b)(6)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
22053            5-25-94                    11        51A-4.219(b)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.219(b)(8)
                                                       Adds Div.
                                          13        51A-4.310,
                                                       51A-4.311 thru
                                                       51A-4.312
                                                       Renumbers
                                                       51A-4.401(d) as
                                          14        (e), and adds a
                                                       new
                                                       51A-4.401(d)
                                                       Renumbers
                                                       51A-4.402(d) as
                                          15        (e), and adds a
                                                       new
                                                       51A-4.402(d)
                                                       Renumbers
                                                       51A-4.403(d) as
                                          16        (e), and adds a
                                                       new
                                                       51A-4.403(d)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.702(d)(1)
                                                       (A)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-4.702(i)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(d)(1)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(d)(2)
                                                       Adds
                                          21        51A-8.403(b)(1)
                                                       (U)
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-8.510(c)
                                          23        Adds
                                                       51A-8.511
                                                       Amends Ch. 51A,
                                                       Art. X; Renumbers
                                                       and amends Div.
                                                       51A-10.100,
                                                       51A-10.101 thru
                                                       51A-10.110; and
                                          24        Div.
                                                       51A-10.120,
                                                       51A-10.121 thru
                                                       51A-10.127; Adds
                                                       Div.
                                                       51A-10.130,
                                                       51A-10.131 thru
                                                       51A-10.140
                                          25        Repeals
                                                       51A-4.301(i)
22061            5-25-94                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.101
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-7.102(13),
                                                       (14)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-7.102(30.1)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.207
                                                       Amends
22097            6-22-94                    21        51A-4.124(a)(9)
                                                       (H)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.124(a)(9)
                                                       (I)(i)
                                                       Adds Div.
                                          23        51A-7.1600,
                                                       51A-7.1601 thru
                                                       51A-7.1607
                                                       Renumbers
                                                       51A-4.124(a)(9)
                                                       (A)(1) thru (6)
                                                       as (i) thru (vi)
                                          24        and
                                                       51A-4.124 (a)(9)
                                                       (H)(vi)(bb)[5](a)
                                                       and (b) as (vi)
                                                       (bb)[5](AA) and
                                                       (BB)
22113            6-22-94                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.702
22139            8-10-94                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(2)(E)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.116(b)(2)
                                                       (E) and (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.116(c)(2)
                                                       (E) and (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.116(d)(2)
                                                       (E) and (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (E) and (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (E) and (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (E) and (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (E) and (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (E) and (I)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(3)
                                                       Renumbers
                                          12        51A-4.209(5.1) as
                                                       (5.2) and adds
                                                       new (5.1)
22150            8-10-94                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-8.510(b)
22204            9-28-94                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.104(a)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(4)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(17)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(a)
22206            9-28-94      10-1-94        14        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(b)(4)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(c)(4)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)(6)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(o)
                                          19        Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(p)
22224            10-12-94                   2         Amends
                                                       51A-9.301(6)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-9.302
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-9.303
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-9.306
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-9.307
22254            11-9-94                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.703(d)(6)
22255            11-9-94                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-4.203(b)(4.1)
22259            11-9-94                    11        Amends
                                                       51A-3.102(a)
22388            4-12-95                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.203(a)(2)
22389            4-12-95                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.106, title
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-1.106(f)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.701(a)(1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.701(b)(5)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.703(a)(1)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.703(c)(2)
                                                       Amends
22390            4-12-95                    1         51A-4.209(b)(6)
                                                       (C)
22392            4-12-95                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(l)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(I)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.203(b)
                                                       (3.1) and (4)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(12)(B)
                                                       Revises
                                          9         51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                                       to create (7.1)
                                                       and a new (7.2)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-7.102(13)
                                                       thru (20)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-7.102(33)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-7.207(a)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-7.306(c)(1)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1004(a)(7)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1406(a)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-8.604(b) (4)
                                                       and (5)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-11.101(b)(1)
                                                       (G) and (N)
22412            5-10-95                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.704(a)(1)
22425            5-24-95                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.505(c)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.903(5.1)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.912
22471            6-28-95                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.506(b)(6)
                                                       Amends
22531            8-23-95      8-28-95        2         51A-4.116(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(4)
22581            10-11-95                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-10.109(c)(1)
22605            11-8-95      12-13-95       1         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.703(d)(2)
                                                       Adds
22639            12-13-95                   1         51A-4.212(10.1)
                                                       (E)(v)
                                                       Adds
                                          2         51A-4.408(a)(1)
                                                       (C)
22738            4-24-96                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(d)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.605
22759            5-22-96                    2         Adds
                                                       51A-4.603(j)
                                                       Amends
22782            6-12-96                    1         51A-4.115(4)(E)
                                                       (i)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.116(a)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.116(b)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.116(c)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.116(d)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.121(a)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.121(b)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.121(c)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.121(d)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.122(a)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.122(b)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.122(c)(4)
                                                       (E)(I)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.123(a)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.123(b)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.123(c)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.123(d)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.125(d)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.125(e)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.125(f)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.126(d)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-4.126(e)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.126(f)(4)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
22783            6-12-96                    1         51A-4.328(a)(11)
                                                       (A)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.328(b)
                                                       Amends
22799            6-26-96                    1         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (K)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (K)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(5)(B)
22920            10-9-96                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(c)(4)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-5.102(b)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(f)(2)
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-5.105(f)(4)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       51A-5.105(h)
22994            1-8-97                     2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.602(a)(5)
                                                       Amends
22995            1-8-97                     3         51A-4.210(b)(4)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.210(b)(24)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.210(b)(25)
                                                       (C)
22996            1-8-97                     1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.206(1.2)
                                                       Amends
23012            1-22-97                    2         51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                                       (E)(ii)(cc)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                                       (E)(ii)(ee)
23013            1-22-97                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(5)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(5.1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(6)
                                                       Amends
23031            2-12-97                    1         51A-4.217(b)(8)
                                                       (E)(i)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.217(b)(9)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.217(b)(9)
                                                       (E)(iii)
                                                       Adds
                                          4         51A-4.217(b)(9)
                                                       (E)(viii)
23094            4-9-97                     2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.702(f)
23239            8-27-97                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.206(1.2)
                                                       Amends
23258            9-10-97                    1         51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                                       (E)(ii)(cc)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                                       (E)(ii)(ee)
23302            10-8-97                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.201(4)
23383            12-10-97                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.601
                                                       Amends Ch. 51A,
23384            12-10-97                   1         Art. VIII,
                                                       51A-8.101 thru
                                                       51A-8.708
23407            1-14-98                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-9.304(g)
23506            4-22-98                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(d)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-11.100
23535            6-10-98                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-8.604
23614            8-12-98                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.311(a)(1)
23694            10-28-98     11-18-98       34        Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(a)(4)
                                          35        Amends
                                                       51A-3.104(b)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(e)(6)
                                          37        Amends
                                                       51A-4.603(d)(2)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-8.609(d)(2)
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-8.613(b)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-10.140
                                                       Amends
23735            12-9-98                    1         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(2)
                                                       Amends
23739            12-16-98                   1         51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (B)(iii)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (B)
23766            1-27-99                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(2)(C)
23897            5-26-99                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.209(b)(3.1)
23898            5-26-99                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(b)(6)
23910            6-9-99                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(2)
23997            8-25-99                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.219(b)(4)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.219(b)(8)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.702(h)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.702(i)
24051            9-22-99      10-1-99        10        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(e)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)(6)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(o)
                                          14        Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(q)
24068            10-27-99                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102(a)
                                                       Amends Div.
24085            10-27-99                   1         51A-5.100,
                                                       51A-5.101 thru
                                                       51A-5.107
24132            12-8-99                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1502(b)
24163            1-12-00                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(48)
                                          3         Repeals
                                                       51A-2.102(112.1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-3.103
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.505
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-11.102(a)(2)
                                                       Adds Div.
24177            2-9-00                     1         51A-9.400,
                                                       51A-9.401 thru
                                                       51A-9.403
24185            2-9-00                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.803
24205            3-8-00                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(6.1)
                                                       Amends
24232            4-26-00                    15        51A-4.121(a)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.122(a)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          25        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          26        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Renumbers
                                          34        subsections of
                                                       51A-4.206
                                          35        Adds new
                                                       51A-4.206(1)
                                          36        Adds new
                                                       51A-4.206(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          37        51A-4.702(a)(3)
                                                       and (4)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-7.102
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-7.205(a)
                                          40        Amends title of
                                                       51A-7.205
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-7.210(b)
                                                       Amends
                                          42        51A-7.303(b) and
                                                       (c)
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-7.304
                                          44        Amends
                                                       51A-7.305(a)
                                          45        Amends
                                                       51A-7.306
                                          46        Adds
                                                       51A-7.307
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-7.402(c)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-7.404(a)(1)
                                                       Amends Div.
                                          49        51A-7.500,
                                                       51A-7.501 thru
                                                       51A-7.507
                                          50        Amends
                                                       51A-7.701
                                          51        Amends
                                                       51A-7.702
24270            5-24-00                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.402(d)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-8.401
24271            5-24-00                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(D)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.121(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.122(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(17)
24348            8-23-00                    2         Adds Div.
                                                       51A-7.1700
24410            9-27-00      10-1-00        5         Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)
24424            10-11-00                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1601.1
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1606
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1607
24438            10-25-00     10-31-00       2         Adds
                                                       51A-4.221
24439            10-25-00                   3         Amends
                                                       51A-1.104(a)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.210(b)(4)
                                                       (A)(i)
24542            2-28-01                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(f)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.106
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(e)(3)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-4.501(e)(4)
24543            3-21-01                    3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(L)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.112(a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.112(b)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.112(c)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.112(d)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.112(e)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.112(f)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.112(g)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.113(2)(L)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.114(2)(L)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(2)(L)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.116(b)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.116(c)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.116(d)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(L)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.121(a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.122(a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          25        51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          26        51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          35        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          36        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          37        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(4)
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(11)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-4.408(a)(1)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-5.104(a)
24544            3-21-01                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(d)(7)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.501(g)(6)
                                                       (E)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(h)(5)
24584            4-11-01                    1         Amends Ch. 51A,
                                                       Art. XI
                                                       Amends
24585            4-11-01                    1         51A-4.209(b)(3)
                                                       (B)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.209(b)(3.1)
24606            5-9-01                     1         Amends Div.
                                                       51A-7.900
24637            6-13-01      7-1-01         4         Amends title of
                                                       Ch. 51A
                                          5         Repeals
                                                       51A-1.101
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.702(a)(4),
                                                       (5), (6)
24659            6-27-01                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(7)
24696            8-22-01                    5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.221(b)(6)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.221(b)(13)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.221(b)(14)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.221(c)
24717            9-12-01                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.930
24718            9-12-01                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(141.2)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(91)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(141.1)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(141.2)
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-4.101(10)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       51A-4.127
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(3)(B)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(3)(B)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(5)(B)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(7)(B)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(8)(B)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(11)(B)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(1)(B)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(2)(B)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(3)(B)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(5)(B)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(7)(B)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(8)(B)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(9)(B)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(14)(B)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(16)(B)
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(17)(B)
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-4.208(1)(B)
                                          24        Amends
                                                       51A-4.208(2)(B)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-4.208(3)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          26        51A-4.209(b)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.209(b)(3)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.209(b)(3.1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.209(b)(5)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.209(b)(5.2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-4.210(b)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-4.210(b)(4)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-4.210(b)(5)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          35        51A-4.210(b)(9)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          36        51A-4.210(b)(11)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          37        51A-4.210(b)(12)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          38        51A-4.210(b)(13)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          39        51A-4.210(b)(14)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          40        51A-4.210(b)(16)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          41        51A-4.210(b)(20)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          42        51A-4.210(b)(23)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          43        51A-4.210(b)(24)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          44        51A-4.210(b)(29)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          45        51A-4.210(b)(30)
                                                       (B)
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(5)(B)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(6)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          48        51A-4.212(10.1)
                                                       (B)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(11)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          50        51A-4.217(b)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          51        51A-4.217(b)(3)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          52        51A-4.217(b)(3.1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          53        51A-4.217(b)(6)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          54        51A-4.217(b)(6.1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          55        51A-4.217(b)(7)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          56        51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          57        51A-4.217(b)(7.2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          58        51A-4.217(b)(10)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Adds
                                          59        51A-4.701(a)(2)
                                                       (E)
24731            9-26-01                    6         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(67)
                                          7         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(128.1)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.405
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.406
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.411
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.601(a)
                                          12        Adds
                                                       51A-8.401(h)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-8.503(b)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-10.125(a)
                                                       Amends
24759            10-24-01                   1         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       Adds
                                          6         51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (30.1)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(21)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(27)
24760            10-24-01                   1         Adds Div.
                                                       51A-7.1800
                                                       Amends
24792            12-12-01                   1         51A-4.203(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.203(b)(1.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.203(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(15)(C)
24833            1-23-02                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(2)
24843            2-13-02                    6         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(134)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-3.101(b)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-3.101(c)(2)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-3.101(d)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(6)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(h)(1)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-4.505(b)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-8.201
                                                       Deletes diagram
                                          15        in Ch. 51A, Art.
                                                       VIII
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-8.401(b)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-8.403(a)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-8.403(b)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-8.403(c)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-8.511
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-8.602
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-8.617
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-9.305
                                          24        Renumbers 51A-
                                                       11.103(e)
                                                       Amends
24857            2-27-02                    1         51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                          16        Adds
                                                       51A-4.205(1.1)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(2)(A)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-4.209(b)(5.1)
24859            2-27-02                    17        Amends
                                                       51A-8.602(f)
                                                       Amends
24898            4-10-02                    1         51A-4.212(10.1)
                                                       (C)
24899            4-10-02                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(7)
24915            4-24-02                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(12)
24925            5-8-02                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.901.1
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-7.903 thru
                                                       51A-7.930
24926            5-8-02                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930
24974            6-26-02                    2         Adds Div.
                                                       51A-7.1900
                                                       Amends
24984            6-26-02                    1         51A-7.1303 thru
                                                       51A-7.1306
25047            9-30-02      10-1-02        16        Amends
                                                       51A-1.104.1(b)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(c)(2)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(j)(2)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-1.105(l)(1)
                                                       (A)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)(6)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-2.102(20),
                                                       (28), (32)
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(a)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.124(a)(9)
                                                       (A)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          25        51A-4.124(a)(9)
                                                       (H)(vi)(cc)[7]
                                                       Amends
                                          26        51A-4.124(a)(9)
                                                       (I)(iv)(aa)[3]
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.203(b)(3.1)
                                                       (E) thru (I)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.204(4)(C)
                                                       (v)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.206(5)(E)
                                                       (iv)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       (E)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (30.1)(E)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-4.211(5)(E)
                                                       (i) and (E)(iv)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-4.211(10)(E)
                                                       (i)(bb)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-4.211(10)(E)
                                                       (vii)
                                                       Amends
                                          35        51A-4.211(10)(E)
                                                       (viii)(bb) and
                                                       (E)(viii)(ff)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(a)(13)
                                                       Amends
                                          37        51A-4.301(d)(3.1)
                                                       and (8)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-4.303(b)(8)
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-4.411(d)(1)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-4.411(e)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(k)(1)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(e)(6)
                                                       Amends
                                          43        51A-4.703(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          44        51A-4.803(a),
                                                       Table 1
                                          45        Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(a)(5)
                                                       Amends
                                          46        51A-4.803(e)(1)
                                                       thru (2)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(f)(2)
                                                       Amends
                                          48        51A-5.102(e) and
                                                       (f)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(e)
                                          50        Amends
                                                       51A-5.106(c)
                                          51        Amends
                                                       51A-5.201(3)
                                          52        Amends
                                                       51A-5.204(j)
                                          53        Amends
                                                       51A-5.209(a)
                                          54        Amends
                                                       51A-7.102(10)
                                          55        Amends
                                                       51A-7.212(a)(2)
                                          56        Amends
                                                       51A-7.504(b)
                                          57        Amends
                                                       51A-7.801
                                          58        Amends
                                                       51A-7.907(a)(2)
                                          59        Amends
                                                       51A-7.913(a)
                                                       Amends
                                          60        51A-7.1204(c) and
                                                       (e)
                                          61        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1607(c)(6)
                                          62        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1704(a)(14)
                                          63        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1720(a)(2)
                                                       Amends
                                          64        51A-8.403(a)(6)
                                                       (D)
                                          65        Amends
                                                       51A-8.404
                                          66        Amends
                                                       51A-8.503(b)(4)
                                          67        Amends
                                                       51A-8.503(c)
                                          68        Amends
                                                       51A-8.504(a)
                                          69        Amends
                                                       51A-8.506(b)
                                          70        Amends
                                                       51A-8.506(e)
                                          71        Amends
                                                       51A-8.507(b)(4)
                                          72        Amends
                                                       51A-8.509(b)
                                          73        Amends
                                                       51A-8.510(g)
                                          74        Amends
                                                       51A-8.601(a)
                                          75        Amends
                                                       51A-8.601(b)(7)
                                                       Amends
                                          76        51A-8.602(c)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          77        Amends
                                                       51A-8.602(c)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          78        51A-8.604(d)(1)
                                                       and (4)
                                                       Amends
                                          79        51A-8.606(a) and
                                                       (d)
                                          80        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(b)(3)
                                          81        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(d)(4)
                                          82        Amends
                                                       51A-8.609(a)
                                                       Amends
                                          83        51A-8.609(d)(1)
                                                       and (2)
                                          84        Amends
                                                       51A-8.609(f)
                                          85        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(b)(1)
                                                       Amends
                                          86        51A-8.611(b)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                          87        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(c)(7)
                                                       Amends
                                          88        51A-8.611(d)(3)
                                                       (F)
                                          89        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(e)
                                          90        Amends
                                                       51A-8.612
                                                       Amends
                                          91        51A-8.613(b) and
                                                       (e)
                                          92        Amends
                                                       51A-8.614(a)
                                                       Amends
                                          93        51A-8.614(b)(6)
                                                       (A)
                                          94        Amends
                                                       51A-8.614(d)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          95        51A-8.614(e)(2)
                                                       and (5)
                                                       Amends
                                          96        51A-8.618(c) and
                                                       (e)
                                          97        Amends
                                                       51A-8.620
                                          98        Amends
                                                       51A-8.702(d)
                                          99        Amends
                                                       51A-8.707
                                          100       Amends
                                                       51A-9.102(a)(2)
                                          101       Amends
                                                       51A-9.302(b)
                                          102       Amends
                                                       51A-9.303
                                          103       Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)
                                          104       Amends
                                                       51A-10.109(c)(1)
                                          105       Amends
                                                       51A-10.140
                                          106       Repeals
                                                       51A-3.104
25048            9-30-02      10-1-02        39        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)(4)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(b)(4)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(e)(5)
                                          42        Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(g)
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(h)(4)
                                          44        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                          45        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(l)(2)
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-8.612(k)
                                                       Amends
25056            10-9-02                    1         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(8.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (30.1)
25092            10-23-02                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.704(a)
25133            12-11-02                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.124(a)(5)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.124(b)(5)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.209(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
25155            1-8-03                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-10.101
                                          2         Amends title of
                                                       51A-10.103
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-10.104
                                          4         Amends title of
                                                       51A-10.105
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-10.106
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-10.109
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-10.110
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-10.121
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-10.125
                                          10        Adds
                                                       51A-10.128
                                          11        Amends Div.
                                                       51A-10.130
25268            5-28-03                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.311(a)
25271            5-28-03                    1         Amends 51A-11.103
                                                       (d)(2)
25290            6-11-03                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.324(b)(1)
25291            6-11-03                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(l)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(m)
25384            9-24-03      10-1-03        5         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(r)
                                          7         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(s)
25435            11-12-03                   2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(1)
                                                       Amends
25440            12-8-03                    1         51A-4.212(10.1)
                                                       (E)(ii)
25455            12-8-03                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.102(34.1)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.203
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-7.303(d)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.402(d)
25486            1-28-04                    3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.209(b)(2)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.209(b)(6)
25487            1-28-04                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.124(a)(9)
25509            2-25-04                    1         Amends Ch. 51A,
                                                       Art. XI
25716            8-25-04                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-5.102(a)
25772            10-13-04                   1         Adds 51A-11.109.1
                                                       Amends
25785            10-27-04                   6         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.127(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.210(b)(12)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.210(b)(14)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Adds
                                          21        51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (14.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.210(b)(15)
                                                       (E)
                                          23        Adds
                                                       51A-4.605
25786            10-27-04                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.301
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.302
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.304
25809            11-10-04                   2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.601
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-8.501
25814            12-8-04                    1, 2      Amends
                                                       51A-7.304(a)(5)
                                                       Amends
25815            12-8-04                    1         51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (L)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (L)
25831            12-8-04                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.602(b)(6)
25899            2-23-05                    1         Adds Div.
                                                       51A-7.2000
25918            3-9-05                     1         Amends Div.
                                                       51A-7.1700
25920            3-9-05                     1         Adds Div.
                                                       51A-7.2100
25921            3-9-05                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.209
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.306(a)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.602
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.705
                                                       Amends title of
                                          5         Div.
                                                       51A-7.700
25926            3-9-05                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.918
25977            5-11-05                    6         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(2.1)
                                          7         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(8.1)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(34)
                                          9         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(57.1)
                                                       Adds
                                          10        51A-4.209(b)(6)
                                                       (E)(vii)
25995            5-25-05                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930
25996            5-25-05                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1306(f)
26000            5-25-05                    2         Amends Div.
                                                       51A-5.200
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-8.707
26001            5-25-05                    2         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(t)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-6.108
26026            6-22-05                    2         Adds
                                                       51A-4.507
                                                       Corrects and
26027            6-22-05                    1         recodifies Div.
                                                       51A-7.1000
26066            8-10-05                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1308
26082            8-24-05                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.214
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.304(b)(6)
26161            11-9-05      12-12-05       2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)(4)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-4.507
                                                       Amends
26248            2-8-06                     2         51A-4.507
                                                       (renumbers as
                                                       51A-4.508)
                                                       Amends
26269            2-22-06                    2         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(2)
26270            2-22-06                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.219(a)
26271            2-22-06                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.701(e)(5)
26286            3-8-06                     2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.103(a)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(57.2)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(l)(1)
26287            3-8-06                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.106(f)
26288            3-8-06                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.602(d)
26333            4-26-06                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.411
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-8.512
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-10.125(a)
26334            4-26-06                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(8)
26335            4-26-06                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-11.102(a)(14)
26371            6-14-06                    3         Adds
                                                       51A-1.108
26511            11-8-06                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.704(b)
26512            11-8-06                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.203
                                                       Amends
26513            11-8-06                    4         51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (A)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.221(b)(13)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.221(b)(14)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.221(c)
26529            12-13-06                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-8.104
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-8.201(5.1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-8.201(7)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-8.201(8)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-8.201(45)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-8.403
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-8.505
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-8.702(d)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-8.703(a)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-8.705
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-8.707(a)
26530            12-13-06                   3         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-1.109
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(35.1)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-8.403(a)(6)
                                          7         Adds
                                                       51A-8.405
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-8.602
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-8.608
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-8.612(a), (b)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-8.614
26531            12-13-06                   2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.401(a)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-8.505
26536            12-13-06                   2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.104.1(a)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)(4)
26552            1-10-07                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1726
                                                       Amends
26577            2-14-07                    1         51A-1.106(b),
                                                       (c), (f)
                                                       Amends
26578            2-14-07                    1         51A-4.212(10.1)
                                                       (B)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.408(a)(1)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-4.412(e)
26579            2-14-07                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.104
26596            2-28-07                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102(e)(3)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(d)(4)
26730            4-25-07                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.219(b)(4),
                                                       (5)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.219(b)(8)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.702(h)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.702(i)
26746            5-23-07                    4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(12)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(13)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(14)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (14.1)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(4)
                                                       Adds
26768            5-23-07                    1         51A-7.1203(9.1),
                                                       (9.2)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1207(a)(1)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1208(b)(1)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1210
                                                       Adds
                                          5         51A-7.1210, Exh.
                                                       C
26920            9-12-07                    4         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)(4)
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(u)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.112(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.112(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.112(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.112(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.112(e)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.112(f)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.112(g)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-4.113(2)(C)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-4.114(2)(C)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(2)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.116(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.116(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.116(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.121(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          25        51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          26        51A-4.122(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          35        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          36        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          37        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          38        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          39        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          40        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          41        51A-4.127(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-4.203(b)(3.1)
                                          43        Adds
                                                       51A-4.203(b)(3.2)
                                          44        Adds Ch. 51A,
                                                       Art. XII
27016            11-28-07                   2         Amends Ch. 51A,
                                                       Art. XI
27069            1-23-08                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(v)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(w)
27097            2-27-08                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.215
27183            5-14-08                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.208(3)(A)
27184            5-14-08                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.106(c), (d)
27204            5-28-08                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-9.305
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-9.306
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-9.307
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-9.309
27244            6-25-08                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.305(e)
27253            6-25-08                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.205(c)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.305(c), (d)
27284            8-13-08                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1306(f)
27300            8-27-08                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930
                                                       Amends
27314            9-10-08                    1         51A-4.213(11.2)
                                                       (E)
27318            9-10-08                    2         Adds
                                                       51A-5.101(a)(3.1)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-5.101(a)(35)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-5.102(a)
27333            9-24-08                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(d)
27334            9-24-08                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(45)
27335            9-24-08                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102(d)(10)
27404            11-10-08                   215       Amends
                                                       51A-4.101(9)
                                          216       Amends
                                                       51A-4.221(c)
                                          217       Amends
                                                       51A-4.303(b)(2)
                                          218       Amends
                                                       51A-4.303(b)(12)
                                          219       Amends
                                                       51A-4.324(b)(1)
                                                       Amends
                                          220       51A-4.605(a)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          221       51A-4.605(a)(9)
                                                       (G)
                                          222       Amends
                                                       51A-4.702(a)(6)
27430            12-10-08                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(d)(7)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.501(g)(6)
                                                       (E)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(h)(5)
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-4.501(m)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       51A-4.501(n)
                                                       Amends
27481            2-11-09                    1         51A-7.909,
                                                       51A-7.910
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(a)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(f)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(g)
27495            2-25-09                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)(4)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-2.101(6)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(39.1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(91)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(119)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(121.1)
                                                       Renumbers
                                          7         51A-2.102(125.1)
                                                       as (125.2) and
                                                       adds new (125.1)
                                                       Adds
                                          8         51A-2.102(142.1),
                                                       (142.2)
                                                       Adds
                                          9         51A-2.102(143.1),
                                                       (143.2)
                                                       Adds
                                          10        51A-4.101(9)(K) -
                                                       (M)
                                          11        Adds
                                                       51A-4.101(11)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.204(8)(E)
                                                       (i)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.209(b)(3)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.209(b)(5.2)
                                                       (E)(ii)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-4.221(c)
                                          16        Adds
                                                       51A-4.509
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.602(b)(7)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-6.102(b)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-6.102(c)
                                                       Renumbers
                                                       51A-8.403(a)(1)
                                          20        (A)(xxiv) as
                                                       (xxvi) and adds
                                                       new (xxiv), (xxv)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(c)
                                          22        Adds Ch. 51A,
                                                       Art. XIII
27516            3-25-09                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.102(13.1)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.307
27551            5-27-09                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-5.102(a)
                                                       Amends
27563            6-10-09                    1         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(5)
                                                       Renumbers
27572            6-24-09                    1         51A-2.102(141.2)
                                                       to
                                                       51A-2.102(133.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (I)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-5.101(a)(3.1)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.910(a)(1)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-8.611(d)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-8.611(d)(2)
                                                       (F)
27587            6-24-09      7-31-09        1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(q)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930
27695            9-23-09      10-1-09        48        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(c)(4)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(t)
27697            9-23-09      10-1-09        79        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(c)(2)
                                          80        Amends
                                                       51A-4.603(d)(2)
                                          81        Amends
                                                       51A-4.603(j)
                                          82        Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(e)(1)
                                          83        Amends
                                                       51A-5.101(a)(14)
                                          84        Amends
                                                       51A-5.102
                                          85        Amends
                                                       51A-5.103
                                          86        Amends
                                                       51A-5.103.1
                                          87        Amends
                                                       51A-5.104(b)
                                          88        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(a)
                                          89        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(b)
                                          90        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(c)
                                          91        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(d)
                                          92        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(e)
                                          93        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(f)
                                          94        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(g)(5)
                                          95        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(i)
                                          96        Amends
                                                       51A-5.107
                                          97        Amends
                                                       51A-6.108(c)(6)
                                          98        Amends
                                                       51A-6.108(e)(1)
                                          99        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611
27790            1-13-10                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.221(b)
                                                       Adds
27795            1-13-10                    1         51A-7.903(22.1),
                                                       (22.2)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.903(33)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.906(b)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(a)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(e)
27864            4-28-10                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.305
27892            5-26-10                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-3.101(a)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(a)(3)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.703(d)(2)
27893            5-26-10                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(c)(4)
                                                       Adds
                                          2         51A-5.101(a)
                                                       (17.1)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-5.102
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-5.104(b)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-5.105
27922            6-23-10                    2         Adds
                                                       51A-4.501(i)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-4.501(j)
                                                       Renumbers
                                                       51A-4.501(i) thru
                                          4         (n) to
                                                       51A-4.501(k) thru
                                                       (p)
28021            9-22-10                    2         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(x)
                                                       Adds
                                          3         51A-4.217(b)(9)
                                                       (E)(ix)
                                                       Adds
                                                       51A-7.1203(7.1),
28071            12-8-10                    1         (7.2), (9.0),
                                                       (9.1.1), (12.1),
                                                       (17.1), (18.1),
                                                       (24.1)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1205.1
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1207(a)(1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1208(a)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1208(b)(1)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1211
                                          7         Adds 51A-7.1212
                                          8         Adds 51A-7.1213
                                          9         Adds 51A-7.1214
                                          10        Adds 51A-7.1215
28072            12-8-10                    6         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(61)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.103
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.408
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.504
28073            12-8-10                    6         Amends
                                                       51A-1.104.1(b)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-1.105(l)(1)
                                                       (A)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)(6)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-1.108(a)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(28)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(32)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(a)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.124(a)(9)
                                                       (K)(xi)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.206(5)(E)
                                                       (iv)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       (E)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (30.1)(E)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.211(5)(E)
                                                       (i)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.211(5)(E)
                                                       (iv)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(10)(E)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(a)(13)
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(3.1)
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(8)
                                          24        Amends
                                                       51A-4.411(d)(1)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(m)(1)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(e)(6)
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.703(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.803 (Table
                                                       1)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.803(a)(5)
                                                       (A)
                                          30        Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(e)(2)
                                          31        Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(f)(2)
                                          32        Amends
                                                       51A-5.106(c)
                                          33        Amends
                                                       51A-5.204(j)
                                          34        Amends
                                                       51A-5.209(a)
                                          35        Amends
                                                       51A-6.108(c)(6)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-6.108(e)(1)
                                          37        Amends
                                                       51A-7.504(b)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-7.801
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-7.907(a)(2)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-7.913(a)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1204(c)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1204(e)
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1607(c)(6)
                                          44        Amends 51A-7.2104
                                                       (c)
                                                       Amends
                                          45        51A-8.403(a)(6)
                                                       (D)
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-8.404
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-8.503(b)(4)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-8.503(c)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-8.504(a)
                                          50        Amends
                                                       51A-8.506(b)
                                          51        Amends
                                                       51A-8.506(e)
                                          52        Amends
                                                       51A-8.507(b)(4)
                                          53        Amends
                                                       51A-8.509(b)
                                          54        Amends
                                                       51A-8.510(g)
                                          55        Amends
                                                       51A-8.601(b)(7)
                                                       Amends
                                          56        51A-8.602(c)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          57        51A-8.602(c)(3)
                                                       (D)
                                          58        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(d)(1)
                                          59        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(d)(4)
                                          60        Amends
                                                       51A-8.606(a)
                                          61        Amends
                                                       51A-8.606(d)
                                          62        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(b)(3)
                                          63        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(d)(4)
                                          64        Amends
                                                       51A-8.609
                                          65        Amends
                                                       51A-8.612
                                          66        Amends
                                                       51A-8.613(b)
                                          67        Amends
                                                       51A-8.613(e)
                                          68        Amends
                                                       51A-8.618(c)
                                          69        Amends
                                                       51A-8.618(e)
                                          70        Amends
                                                       51A-8.620
                                          71        Amends
                                                       51A-8.702(d)(9)
                                          72        Amends
                                                       51A-8.702(d)(10)
                                          73        Amends
                                                       51A-8.707(a)
                                          74        Amends
                                                       51A-9.302(b)(2)
                                          75        Amends
                                                       51A-9.303
                                          76        Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)(4)
                                          77        Amends
                                                       51A-10.135(c)(1)
                                                       Amends
                                          78        51A-10.140(b)(6)
                                                       (H)
                                                       Amends
28079            12-8-10                    3         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          13        Adds
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(9.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.210(b)(13)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.210(b)(14)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.210(b)(17)
                                                       (E)
28096            1-12-11                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105.1(a)
                                                       Deletes
                                          4         51A-4.204(17)(E)
                                                       (v)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.701(b)(5)
                                                       Amends
28125            2-9-11                     2         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.127(c)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(3)
28164            4-13-11                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-5.102(a)
                                                       Amends
28214            5-25-11                    2         51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.127(c)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(1)
28238            6-8-11                     1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.308
28272            6-22-11                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                                       Adds
                                          2         51A-4.124(a)(8)
                                                       (C)(v)
28346            8-24-11                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.901.1(a)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.901.1(c)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.901.1(e)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-7.901.1(f)
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-7.903(8.2)
                                                       Amends caption
                                          6         above
                                                       51A-7.907
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(a)(4)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(c)(1)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(d)(1)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-7.911(e)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-7.911(g)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-7.917(b)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-7.917(d)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(a)(4)
                                          15        Adds
                                                       51A-7.931
28347            8-24-11                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.903(8.1)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.909(b)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.909(g)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.913
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(a)(8)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(b)(4)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(e)(1)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(f)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(g)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-7.930(k)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-7.930(k)(2)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Adds
                                          12        51A-7.930(k)(2)
                                                       (I)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(l)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(m)
28367            9-14-11                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.702
28424            9-28-11      10-1-11        24        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(j)(2)
                                                       Amends
                                          25        51A-1.105(l)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(20)
                                          27        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(139.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.127(c)(8)
                                                       (F)(iii)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.204(4)(C)
                                                       (v)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.211(5)(E)
                                                       (iv)
                                          31        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(e)(6)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-4.803(f)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                          33        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(e)(2)
                                          34        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(h)(1)
                                          35        Amends
                                                       51A-5.209(a)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-6.108(e)(1)
                                          37        Amends
                                                       51A-7.212(a)(2)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-7.909(f)
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1713(b)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1804(h)(2)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1905(d)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-7.2006(i)(2)
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-8.201(23)
                                          44        Amends
                                                       51A-8.201(33)
                                          45        Amends
                                                       51A-8.402
                                                       Amends
                                          46        51A-8.403(a)(1)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          47        51A-8.403(a)(6)
                                                       (G)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-8.404(f)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-8.506(c)(6)
                                          50        Amends
                                                       51A-8.507(b)(8)
                                          51        Amends
                                                       51A-8.508(b)
                                          52        Amends
                                                       51A-8.601(b)
                                          53        Amends
                                                       51A-8.602(d)(2)
                                          54        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(a)
                                          55        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(c)
                                          56        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(a)
                                          57        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(c)
                                          58        Amends
                                                       51A-8.608
                                          59        Amends
                                                       51A-8.615
                                          60        Amends
                                                       51A-8.620
                                          61        Amends
                                                       51A-9.102(a)(2)
                                          62        Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)
                                          63        Amends
                                                       51A-9.401(a)
                                          64        Amends
                                                       51A-9.402
                                          65        Amends
                                                       51A-9.403
                                          66        Amends
                                                       51A-10.125(b)(4)
                                          67        Amends
                                                       51A-10.140(b)
                                          68        Amends 51A-12.106
                                                       (b)
                                          69        Amends 51A-12.106
                                                       (d)
                                          70        Amends 51A-12.106
                                                       (h)
                                          71        Amends 51A-12.107
                                                       (f)
28471            11-7-11                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1201
                                                       Adds
                                          2         51A-7.1203(a)
                                                       (15.1)
                                                       Adds
                                          3         51A-7.1203(a)
                                                       (24.2)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1205(c)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1207(a)(1)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1208(b)(1)
                                          7         Adds 51A-7.1214.1
28553            2-22-12                    1         Corrects
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                                       Corrects
                                          2         51A-4.203(b)(3.2)
                                                       (A)
                                          3         Corrects
                                                       51A-4.501(d)(7)
                                                       Corrects
                                          4         51A-4.501(g)(6)
                                                       (E)
                                          5         Corrects
                                                       51A-4.501(h)(5)
                                                       Corrects
                                          6         51A-4.605(a)(2)
                                                       (A)(ii)
                                                       Corrects
                                          7         51A-4.702(h)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Corrects
                                          8         51A-4.702(h)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Corrects
                                          9         51A-4.702(i)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Corrects
                                          10        51A-4.702(i)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          11        Corrects
                                                       51A-4.702(i)(3)
                                                       Corrects
                                          12        51A-4.702(i)(4)
                                                       (B)
                                          13        Corrects
                                                       51A-4.803(d)(3)
                                          14        Corrects
                                                       51A-7.603
                                          15        Corrects
                                                       51A-7.909(b)(1)
                                          16        Corrects
                                                       51A-7.909(d)(4)
                                          17        Corrects
                                                       51A-7.913(a)
                                          18        Corrects
                                                       51A-7.930(k)(3)
                                          19        Corrects 51A-
                                                       7.1212(c)(1)
                                          20        Corrects 51A-
                                                       7.1214(b)
                                          21        Corrects
                                                       51A-10.131
                                          22        Corrects
                                                       51A-10.135(c)(3)
                                                       Amends
28671            5-23-12                    1         51A-5.102(a)(3)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
28700            6-27-12                    3         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.127(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.203(a)(3)
                                          10        Adds
                                                       51A-4.203(b)(0)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(4)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(a)(5)
                                          13        Amends 51A-13.306
                                                       (a)(5)(C)
                                          14        Amends 51A-13.306
                                                       (d)(5)(B)(ii)
                                          15        Amends 51A-13.306
                                                       (d)(8)(A)(iii)
                                                       Amends
28737            8-8-12                     3         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Adds
                                          7         51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (16.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Adds
                                          10        51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       (E)(v)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (30.1)(E)
                                          12        Adds
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(1.1)
28784            9-12-12                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.703(d)
28803            9-26-12                    19        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(8)(C)
                                          24        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(12)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          25        51A-4.203(b)(3)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          26        51A-4.203(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
                                          27        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(3)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.204(4)(C)
                                                       (i)
                                          29        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(16)(C)
                                          30        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(17)(C)
                                          31        Amends
                                                       51A-4.208(1)(C)
                                          32        Amends
                                                       51A-4.208(2)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-4.209(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-4.209(b)(5.2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          35        51A-4.210(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          36        51A-4.210(b)(6)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          37        51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (C)(iv)
                                                       Amends
                                          38        51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (C)(vii)
                                                       Deletes
                                          39        51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (C)(viii)
                                                       Amends
                                          40        51A-4.210(b)(8)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          41        51A-4.210(b)(12)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          42        51A-4.210(b)(14)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          43        51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (14.1)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          44        51A-4.210(b)(15)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          45        51A-4.210(b)(28)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          46        51A-4.210(b)(28)
                                                       (C)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(7)(C)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(8)(C)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(9)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          50        51A-4.217(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                          51        Amends
                                                       51A-4.311(a)(1)
                                          52        Adds
                                                       51A-4.311(a)(7)
                                          53        Adds
                                                       51A-4.313
                                                       Amends
                                          54        51A-10.125(b)(5)
                                                       (A)
28822            10-10-12                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.909(g)
28933            2-27-13                    1         Adds 51A-7.2101
                                                       (c)
                                          2         Adds 51A-7.2103
                                                       (a)(8.1)
                                          3         Adds 51A-7.2103
                                                       (a)(19.1)
                                          4         Adds 51A-7.2103
                                                       (a)(24.1)
                                          5         Adds 51A-7.2103
                                                       (a)(26.1)
                                          6         Amends 51A-7.2107
                                                       (a)(1)
                                          7         Amends 51A-7.2108
                                                       (b)(2)
                                          8         Amends 51A-7.2108
                                                       (b)(5)
                                          9         Adds 51A-7.2110
                                          10        Adds 51A-7.2111
                                          11        Adds 51A-7.2112
                                                       Adds Div.
28950            3-27-13                    1         51A-7.2200,
                                                       51A-7.2201 thru
                                                       51A-7.2220
29023            6-12-13      10-1-13        2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.104
29024            6-12-13      10-1-13        2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(x)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.217(b)(9)
                                                       (E)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.304(b)(1)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.305(a)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.306(a)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-7.402(c)
29128            9-11-13                    7         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(m)
                                          8         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(9.1)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(23.1)
                                          10        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(23.2)
                                          11        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(23.3)
                                          12        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(99.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.124(a)(5)
                                                       (B)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-4.124(b)(5)
                                          15        Adds
                                                       51A-4.301(a)(4.1)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(a)(8)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(b)(5)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.314 thru
                                                       51A-4.319
                                                       Renumbers
                                          19        51A-4.330 as
                                                       51A-4.329.1
                                                       Renumbers
                                          20        51A-4.331 as
                                                       51A-4.329.2
                                                       Adds Ch. 51A,
                                                       Art. IV, Div.
                                          21        51A-4.330,
                                                       51A-4.331 thru
                                                       51A-4.335
                                                       Adds Ch. 51A,
                                                       Art. IV, Div.
                                          22        51A-4.340,
                                                       51A-4.341 thru
                                                       51A-4.345
                                                       Corrects
29208            12-11-13                   2         51A-4.207(1)(A)
                                                       (iii)
                                                       Corrects
                                          3         51A-4.209(b)(5.1)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Corrects
                                          4         51A-4.213(11)(E)
                                                       (ix)
                                          5         Corrects
                                                       51A-7.1010(2)
29227            12-11-13                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.901.1
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.903(24.1)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-7.903(29.1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.906(b)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.909(b)(1)
                                          6         Retitles
                                                       51A-7.911(c)(2)
                                          7         Retitles
                                                       51A-7.911(d)(2)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(e)(1)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-7.911(g)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-7.912
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-7.917(c)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-7.917(d)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-7.919(a)
                                          14        Adds
                                                       51A-7.919(d)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-7.920(a)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-7.920(e)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(a)(4)
29228            12-11-13                   3         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(u)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.203(b)(3.2)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       51A-4.203(b)(3.3)
                                                       Amends Ch. 51A,
                                          7         Art. XII,
                                                       51A-12.101 thru
                                                       51A-12.401
                                                       Amends Ch. 51A,
                                                       Art. VII, Div.
29233            12-11-13                   1         51A-7.1600,
                                                       51A-7.1601 thru
                                                       51A-7.1608
29339            5-14-14                    1         Amends 51A-
                                                       7.1214.1
                                                       Amends
29359            5-28-14                    1         51A-5.102(a)(3)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Adds Art. VII,
29392            6-25-14                    1         Div. 51A-7.2300,
                                                       51A-7.2301 thru
                                                       51A-7.2313
29393            6-25-14                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.308(k)
29424            8-13-14                    3         Adds
                                                       51A-6.101(7.1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-6.102(a)(5)
29478            9-17-14      10-1-14        10        Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(a)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.501(k)(3)
                                                       (F)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(e)(2)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-5.209(a)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-8.402
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-8.503(b)(4)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-8.503(c)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-8.504(a)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-8.506(b)(2)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-8.507(b)(4)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-8.510(g)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-8.602(c)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-8.602(c)(3)
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(d)(1)
                                          24        Amends
                                                       51A-8.606(a)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-8.606(d)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(b)
                                          27        Amends
                                                       51A-9.102(a)(2)
                                                       Corrects
29557            12-10-14                   1         51A-4.203(b)(3.2)
                                                       (F)(ii)(ee)(22)
                                          2         Corrects
                                                       51A-7.308(k)
                                          3         Corrects
                                                       51A-7.1601.1(b)
                                          4         Corrects
                                                       51A-7.1608(d)(5)
                                                       Corrects
                                          5         51A-12.204(m)(6)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
29589            12-10-14                   7         51A-4.207(1)(A)
                                                       (i)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.207(1)(A)
                                                       (iii)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.207(1)(A)
                                                       (iv)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.207(1)(E)
                                                       (iii)
                                                       Deletes
                                          11        51A-4.207(1)(E)
                                                       (iv)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(2)(A)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(3)(A)
                                          14        Amends 51A-13.201
                                                       (6)
                                          15        Amends 51A-13.306
                                                       (d)(5)(C)(iii)
29611            1-14-15                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.404(a)(5)
29626            1-28-15                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.106
29645            2-25-15                    22        Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(a)(3)
29687            3-25-15                    4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(1)(B)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.201(1)(E)
                                                       (i)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(3)(A)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(3)(C)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(3)(E)
29702            4-8-15                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.505
29751            5-27-15                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.901.1
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.932
29827            8-12-15                    1         Amends 51A-13.102
                                          2         Amends 51A-13.201
                                          3         Adds 51A-13.303
                                                       (d)
                                          4         Amends 51A-13.501
                                                       (a)(4)
                                          5         Amends 51A-13.502
                                                       (a)
                                          6         Amends 51A-13.502
                                                       (b)(7)
                                                       Replaces 51A-
                                          7         13.502(b)(7)
                                                       graphic
29839            8-26-15                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.216
29882            9-22-15      10-1-15        4         Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(a)(4)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-5.209(a)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-9.102(a)(2)
                                                       Retitles and
29893            9-22-15                    2         amends
                                                       51A-4.504
                                                       Amends
29917            10-28-15                   4         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (M)
                                                       Adds
                                          10        51A-4.203(b)(4.1)
                                                       (E)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(9)
                                          12        Adds
                                                       51A-4.213(10)(E)
                                                       Adds
                                          13        51A-4.213(12)(E)
                                                       (ii)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-4.602(b)
29953            12-9-15                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-11.102
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-11.205
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-11.206
                                                       (title)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-11.206(b)(1)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-11.206(c)(1)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       51A-11.208
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-11.401
29984            1-13-16                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(10.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.408(a)(1)
                                                       (D)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.704(b)(2)
                                                       Adds
                                          5         51A-4.704(b)(5)
                                                       (D)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       51A-4.704(c)(4)
                                          7         Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (k)(5)(A)
                                          8         Adds 51A-13.304
                                                       (k)(5)(L)
30043            3-23-16                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1701(c)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1702
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1704(a)(17)
                                                       Adds
                                          4         51A-7.1704(a)
                                                       (17.1)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1704(a)(23)
                                                       Adds
                                          6         51A-7.1704(a)
                                                       (23.1)
                                                       Adds
                                          7         51A-7.1704(a)
                                                       (31.1)
                                                       Adds
                                          8         51A-7.1704(a)
                                                       (38.1)
                                                       Adds
                                          9         51A-7.1704(a)
                                                       (60.1)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1716
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1717
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1722
                                          13        Adds
                                                       51A-7.1725(9)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1727(b)(1)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-7.1727(c)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1727(c)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-7.1727(c)(4)
                                                       (G)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1727(c)(6)
                                          19        Adds
                                                       51A-7.1727(c)(7)
                                                       Retitles and
                                          20        amends
                                                       51A-7.1727(d)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-7.1727(e)(4)
                                                       (B)
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1727(e)(5)
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1729(a)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-7.1729(b)(3)
                                                       (B)
                                          25        Adds
                                                       51A-7.1729(f)
30139            6-22-16                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1001
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1007.1
                                                       Corrects
30184            9-14-16                    1         51A-4.209(b)(6)
                                                       (E)(vii)
30198            9-14-16                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.602(a)
30215            9-21-16      10-1-16        44        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(g)(3)
                                          45        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(i)
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)(6)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(q)(4)
                                          49        Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(y)
30239            9-28-16                    25        Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(20)
                                          26        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(112.1)
                                          27        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(134.1)
                                          28        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(e)(6)
                                          29        Amends
                                                       51A-5.209(a)
                                          30        Amends
                                                       51A-6.108(e)(1)
                                          31        Amends
                                                       51A-7.212(a)(2)
                                          32        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1720(a)(2)
                                          33        Amends
                                                       51A-8.201(33)
                                          34        Amends
                                                       51A-8.507(b)(8)
                                          35        Amends
                                                       51A-8.508(b)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-8.601(b)
                                          37        Amends
                                                       51A-8.602(d)(2)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(a)
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(a)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-8.608(b)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-8.608(d)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-8.608(f)
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-8.612(g)
                                          44        Amends
                                                       51A-8.615
                                          45        Amends
                                                       51A-8.620
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-10.125(b)(4)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-10.140(b)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-12.203(h)(3)
                                          50        Amends
                                                       51A-12.203(h)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          51        51A-12.204(g)(1)
                                                       (D)
                                          52        Amends
                                                       51A-12.204(p)
30257            10-26-16                   2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(6)
                                                       Amends
30477            5-24-17                    2         51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (J)
                                                       Adds
                                          11        51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (21.1)
30481            5-24-17                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-5.102(a)(3)
30654            9-20-17      10-1-17        38        Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(20)
                                          39        Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(83.1)
                                          40        Deletes
                                                       51A-2.102(112.1)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(134.1)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(e)(6)
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-5.209(a)
                                          44        Amends
                                                       51A-6.108(e)(1)
                                          45        Amends
                                                       51A-7.212(a)(2)
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1720(a)(2)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-8.201(33)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-8.507(b)(8)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-8.508(b)
                                          50        Amends
                                                       51A-8.601(b)
                                          51        Amends
                                                       51A-8.602(d)(2)
                                          52        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(a)
                                          53        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(a)
                                          54        Amends
                                                       51A-8.608(b)
                                          55        Amends
                                                       51A-8.608(d)
                                          56        Amends
                                                       51A-8.608(f)
                                          57        Amends
                                                       51A-8.612(g)
                                          58        Amends
                                                       51A-8.615
                                          59        Amends
                                                       51A-8.620
                                          60        Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)
                                          61        Amends
                                                       51A-10.125(b)(4)
                                          62        Amends
                                                       51A-10.140(b)
                                          63        Amends
                                                       51A-12.203(h)(3)
                                          64        Amends
                                                       51A-12.203(h)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          65        51A-12.204(g)(1)
                                                       (D)
                                          66        Amends
                                                       51A-12.204(p)
30663            9-27-17                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1001(c)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1007.2
30685            10-25-17                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.901.1
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-7.911(e)(2)
                                                       (C)
30731            12-13-17                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1201
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1203(a)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1205(c)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1207(a)(1)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1208(b)(1)
                                          6         Adds 51A-7.1214.2
30802            2-28-18                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1608(c)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1608(j)
                                                       Amends
30808            3-28-18                    1         51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                                       (note)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.212(10.1)
                                                       (B)(iii)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.702(h)(2)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.702(i)(2)
30889            6-13-18                    1         Adds 51A-13.201
                                                       (15.1)
                                          2         Amends 51A-13.201
                                                       (34)
                                          3         Amends 51A-13.302
                                                       (d)
                                          4         Adds 51A-13.304
                                                       (a)(5)
                                          5         Adds 51A-13.304
                                                       (a)(6)
                                          6         Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (b)(4)
                                          7         Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (b)(5)
                                          8         Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (c)(4)
                                          9         Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (c)(5)
                                          10        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (d)(4)
                                          11        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (d)(5)
                                          12        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (e)(4)
                                          13        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (e)(5)
                                          14        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (f)(4)
                                          15        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (f)(5)
                                          16        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (g)(4)
                                          17        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (g)(5)
                                          18        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (h)(4)
                                          19        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (h)(5)
                                          20        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (i)(4)
                                          21        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (i)(5)
                                          22        Amends 51A-13.304
                                                       (j)(4)
                                          23        Amends 51A-13.305
                                                       (e)(1)
                                          24        Replaces graphic
                                                       in 51A-13.305(e)
                                          25        Amends 51A-13.305
                                                       (f)(1)
                                          26        Amends 51A-13.305
                                                       (f)(3)
                                                       Replaces Use
                                          27        Chart in 51A-
                                                       13.306(b)
                                          28        Adds 51A-13.403
                                                       (c)(1)(C)
                                          29        Amends 51A-13.403
                                                       (c)(4)
                                          30        Adds 51A-13.411
                                                       (b)(E)
                                          31        Amends 51A-13.501
                                                       (a)(4)
30890            6-13-18                             5Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(1)(C)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(2)(C)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(1)(C)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(2)(C)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(3)(C)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(4)(C)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(5)(C)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(6)(C)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(7)(C)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(8.1)(C)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(9)(C)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(10)(C)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(11)(C)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(13)(C)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(14)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.203(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-4.203(b)(1.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.203(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.203(b)(3.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.203(b)(4.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          25        51A-4.203(b)(6)
                                                       (C)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(1)(C)
                                          27        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(2)(C)
                                          28        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(5)(C)
                                          29        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(7)(C)
                                          30        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(8)(C)
                                          31        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(9)(C)
                                          32        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(11)(C)
                                          33        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(13)(C)
                                          34        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(14)(C)
                                          35        Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(1)(C)
                                          36        Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(1.1)(C)
                                          37        Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(2)(C)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-4.206(2)(C)
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-4.206(6)(C)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(2)(C)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(3)(C)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(4)(C)
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(5)(C)
                                          44        Amends
                                                       51A-4.208(3)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          45        51A-4.209(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          46        51A-4.209(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          47        51A-4.209(b)(3)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          48        51A-4.209(b)(3.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          49        51A-4.209(b)(4)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          50        51A-4.209(b)(5.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          51        51A-4.209(b)(6)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          52        51A-4.210(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          53        51A-4.210(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          54        51A-4.210(b)(3)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          55        51A-4.210(b)(9)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          56        51A-4.210(b)(10)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          57        51A-4.210(b)(11)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          58        51A-4.210(b)(13)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          59        51A-4.210(b)(16)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          60        51A-4.210(b)(17)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          61        51A-4.210(b)(18)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          62        51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          63        51A-4.210(b)(20)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          64        51A-4.210(b)(21)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          65        51A-4.210(b)(22)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          66        51A-4.210(b)(23)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Deletes
                                          67        51A-4.210(b)(24)
                                                       (C)(iv)
                                                       Deletes
                                          68        51A-4.210(b)(25)
                                                       (C)(iii)
                                                       Amends
                                          69        51A-4.210(b)(26)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          70        51A-4.210(b)(27)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          71        51A-4.210(b)(29)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          72        51A-4.210(b)(30)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          73        51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (30.1)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          74        51A-4.210(b)(31)
                                                       (C)
                                          75        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(1)(C)
                                          76        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(2)(C)
                                          77        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(3)(C)
                                          78        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(4)(C)
                                          79        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(5)(C)
                                          80        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(6)(C)
                                          81        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(7)(C)
                                          82        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(8)(C)
                                          83        Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(9)(C)
                                          84        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(1)(C)
                                          85        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(2)(C)
                                          86        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(3)(C)
                                          87        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(4)(C)
                                          88        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(5)(C)
                                          89        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(6)(C)
                                          90        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(7)(C)
                                          91        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(8)(C)
                                          92        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(9)(C)
                                          93        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(10)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          94        51A-4.212(10.1)
                                                       (C)
                                          95        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(11)(C)
                                          96        Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(12)(C)
                                          97        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(1)(C)
                                          98        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(2)(C)
                                          99        Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(3)(C)
                                          100       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(4)(C)
                                          101       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(5)(C)
                                          102       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(10)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          103       51A-4.213(11.1)
                                                       (C)
                                          104       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(12)(C)
                                          105       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(13)(C)
                                          106       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(14)(C)
                                          107       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(15)(C)
30891            6-13-18                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102(b)
30892            6-13-18                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.323(b)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.505(2)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.507(b)(2)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1706(c)(ii)
                                                       Amends
30893            6-13-18                    1         51A-4.301(f)(5)
                                                       (iii)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.602(b)(3)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-5.206(b)(3)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-5.208(b)(1)
                                                       Amends
30894            6-13-18                    3         51A-4.217(b)(12)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.217(b)(12)
                                                       (G)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.217(b)(12)
                                                       (H)
30895            6-13-18                    8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.401(a)(1)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.401(a)(4)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.402(a)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.402(b)(3)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.403(a)(4)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-4.403(b)(2)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-6.102(a)(5)
30896            6-13-18                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(4)(C)
                                                       Amends Ch. 51A,
30929            6-27-18                             Art. X,
                                                       51A-10.101 thru
                                                       51A-10.140
                                                       Amends
30930            6-27-18                    2         51A-4.209(b)(6)
                                                       (E)
30931            6-27-18                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(a)(4)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-4.510
30932            6-27-18                    6         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(10)
                                          7         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(10.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.124(a)(8)
                                                       (C)(i)(aa)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.124(a)(9)
                                                       (J)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.211(10)(E)
                                                       (v)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.401(a)(6)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.401(b)(3)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-7.502(1)
30933            6-27-18                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-8.606
30934            6-27-18      7-1-19         1         Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(z)
                                          2         Adds Div.
                                                       51A-4.1000
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-8.405
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-10.135(h)
                                          5         Adds
                                                       51A-10.135(i)
30993            9-18-18      10-1-18        24        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(c)(4)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(j)(4)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(t)(4)
30994            9-18-18                    10        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(c)(2)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(e)(6)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-5.101(a)(14)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-5.102
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-5.103(b)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-5.103.1(b)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-5.104(b)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-5.107(b)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-5.107(c)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-5.107(d)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-5.107(e)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-5.107(e)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-5.107(e)(2)
                                          24        Amends
                                                       51A-6.108(e)(1)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(a)(2)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(a)(3)
                                          27        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(a)(5)
                                          28        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(c)(2)
                                          29        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(c)(5)
                                          30        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(c)(6)
                                          31        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(d)(1)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-8.611(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-8.611(d)(2)
                                                       (F)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-8.611(d)(3)
                                                       (B)
31040            11-14-18                   2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(l)
                                                       Adds Div.
                                          3         51A-9.500,
                                                       51A-9.501 thru
                                                       51A-9.507
31041            11-14-18                   2         Adds
                                                       51A-4.217(8.1)
31079            12-12-18                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1201
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1203(a)(23)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1203(a)(33)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1205(c)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1207(a)(1)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1208(b)(1)
                                          7         Adds 51A-7.1214.3
31109            1-23-19                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-5.102(a)(3)
31152            3-27-19                    7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.116(a)(4)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.116(b)(4)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.116(c)(4)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.125(d)(4)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.125(e)(4)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.125(f)(4)
                                          13        Adds Div. 51A-
                                                       4.1110
31174            4-10-19                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-4.511
                                                    
31191            4-24-19                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.901.1(a)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.901.1(j)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-7.903(21.1)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       51A-7.903(21.2)
                                                       Amends title
                                          5         preceding
                                                       51A-7.907
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(a)(3)
                                          7         Adds
                                                       51A-7.911(h)
                                                       Amends
31203            5-8-19                     1         51A-7.1007.2(c)
                                                       (6)
                                                       Amends
31204            5-8-19                     1         51A-7.1007.1(c)
                                                       (6)
31229            5-22-19                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.930(a)(3.1)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(a)(4)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(b)(4)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(g)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(h)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(l)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-7.930(m)
31265            6-26-19                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1501
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1502(b)
31314            9-11-19                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(d)(1)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-5.101(a)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-5.104(c)(12)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(i)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-5.206(b)(2)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-8.506(c)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-8.507(b)(8)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-8.601(b)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-8.602(d)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(a)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(c)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-8.606(b)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(a)(2)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(a)(5)
                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(c)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(d)(1)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(e)(2)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-8.702(d)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-10.101
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-10.132(b)(4)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-12.204(g)(1)
                                                       (D)
31358            10-23-19                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.109
31374            10-23-19                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.901.1(a)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.901.1(k)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-7.903(15.1)
                                                       Amends title
                                          4         preceding
                                                       51A-7.907
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(a)(3)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(c)(1)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(d)(1)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-7.911(e)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-7.911(g)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          10        Adds
                                                       51A-7.911(i)
                                          11        Adds
                                                       51A-7.912(i)
                                          12        Adds
                                                       51A-7.919(e)
31394            12-11-19                   1         Adds
                                                       51A-8.403(a)(1.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-8.403(a)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-8.403(a)(3)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-8.403(a)(5)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-8.404
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-8.503(a)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-8.702(a)
31410            12-11-19                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1702
                                          2         Retitles
                                                       51A-7.1706(c)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1706(c)(ii)
                                                       Adds
                                          4         51A-7.1728(a)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1729(a)(1)
                                          6         Deletes 51A-
                                                       7.1729(a)(2)(C)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1729(a)(4)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1729(a)(5)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1729(a)(8)
                                          10        Deletes 51A-
                                                       7.1729(a)(11)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1729(a)(12)
                                          12        Deletes 51A-
                                                       7.1729(a)(13)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-7.1729(b)(3)
                                                       (B)
31433            1-8-20                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.501(c)
31471            2-26-20                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.701(b)(5)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.701(c)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.701(g)(5)
                                                       (A)
31494            3-25-20                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1303(a)
                                           2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1305
                                           3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1306
                                           4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1307
                                           5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1308
31606            8-12-20                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.703(a)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.703(d)(3)
31607            8-12-20                    2         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(140.1)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.127(c)(8)
                                                       (F)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.127(c)(8)
                                                       (F)(iii)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.209(b)(6)
                                                       (E)(vii)(ff)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.217(b)(12)
                                                       (F)(xii)
                                                       Adds
                                          7         51A-4.217(b)(12)
                                                       (G)(vii)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.345(k)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.605(a)(6)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.906(b)(3)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-13.201(34)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-13.304(b)(6)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-13.304(c)(6)
                                                       Amends
31608            8-12-20                    2         51A-4.209(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-13.403(j)
31616            9-9-20                     1         Amends 51A-10.135
                                                       (i)
31657            9-23-20      10-1-20        29        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(j)(4)
31658            9-23-20      10-1-20        3         Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)
                                                       Amends
31688            10-28-20                   1         51A-4.702(a)(8)
                                                       (A)
31689            11-11-20                   1         Amends
                                                       47A-1.5(19)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       47A-1.5(25)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       47A-1.6
                                          4         Amends
                                                       47A-2.1.2(b)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       47A-2.1.8(b)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       47A-2.2.1(a)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       47A-2.2.4
                                          8         Amends
                                                       47A-2.2.7(a)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       47A-2.2.8
                                          10        Amends
                                                       47A-2.2.9
                                          11        Amends
                                                       47A-2.3.1
                                          12        Amends
                                                       47A-2.3.2
                                          13        Amends
                                                       47A-2.3.3
                                          14        Amends
                                                       47A-2.4.7
                                          15        Amends
                                                       47A-2.5.2(a)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       47A-3.2(b)
                                                       Amends
31690            11-11-20                   1         ch. 5,
                                                       5-1 thru 5-64
                                                       Amends
31695            11-11-20                   1         ch. 45,
                                                       45-1 thru
                                                       45-15
31708            12-9-20                    1         Adds
                                                       42A-2(13.1)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       42A-2(16.1)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       42A-2(21.1)
                                          4         Adds
                                                       42A-2(21.2)
                                          5         Adds
                                                       42A-2(24.1)
                                          6         Adds
                                                       42A-2(28)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       42A-6
                                          8         Amends
                                                       42A-12(j)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       42A-12(l)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        ch. 42A, art. IV,
                                                       42A-28.1 thru
                                                       42A-28.9
31714            12-9-20                    1         Amends
                                                       28-42.1(a)(2)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       28-42.1(b)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       28-42.1(f)
31694            11-11-20                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-11.401
                                                       Adds
31705            11-11-20                   2         51A-4.217(b)
                                                       (11.1)
31707            11-11-20                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-5.104(b)(6)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-5.104(c)(5)
32002            9-22-21                    17        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(j)(2)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-1.105(l)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(28)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(32)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-3.103(a)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.127(c)(8)
                                                       (F)(iii)(bb)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.206(5)(E)
                                                       (iv)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.211(5)(E)
                                                       (iv)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(e)(6)
                                          26        Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(e)(1)
                                          27        Amends
                                                       51A-5.102(e)
                                          28        Amends
                                                       51A-5.105(e)
                                          29        Amends
                                                       51A-5.209(a)
                                          30        Amends
                                                       51A-6.108(e)(1)
                                          31        Amends
                                                       51A-7.932(i)(6)
                                          32        Amends
                                                       51A-8.201(23)
                                          33        Amends
                                                       51A-8.402
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-8.403(a)(1)
                                                       (A)(ii)
                                                       Amends
                                          35        51A-8.403(a)(1)
                                                       (A)(xi)
                                                       Amends
                                          36        51A-8.403(a)(1)
                                                       (A)(xv)
                                                       Amends
                                          37        51A-8.403(a)(6)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          38        51A-8.403(a)(6)
                                                       (G)
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-8.404(i)
                                          40        Amends
                                                       51A-8.506(e)
                                          41        Amends
                                                       51A-8.604(c)
                                          42        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(b)
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(c)(7)
                                                       Amends
                                          44        51A-8.611(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          45        51A-8.611(d)(3)
                                                       (B)
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-8.611(e)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-8.612(a)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-10.140(b)
32003            9-22-21      10-1-21        45        Adds
                                                       51A-1.105(aa)
32039            10-27-21                   1         Amends ch. 51A,
                                                       art. V, title
                                                       Amends art. V,
                                                       Div.
                                          2         51A-5.100,
                                                       51A-5.101 thru
                                                       51A-5.107
32093            1-12-22                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-9.401
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-9.403
32170            4-13-22                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102(d)
32264            8-10-22                    4         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(8.1)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(9)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(57.1)
32209            5-11-22                    2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.112(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.112(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.112(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.112(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.112(e)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.112(f)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.112(g)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.113(2)(C)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.114(2)(C)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(2)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.116(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.116(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.116(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          18        51A-4.121(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          19        51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          20        51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.122(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          25        51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          26        51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          35        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          36        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          37        51A-4.127(c)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                          38        Amends
                                                       51A-4.203(a)(2)
                                          39        Amends
                                                       51A-4.203(b)(6)
32210            5-11-22                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.1102(a)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-4.1103(a)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.1105
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.1106
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.1107(a)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-4.1107(c)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-4.1107(e)(1)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-4.1108
32340            10-26-22                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-10.101(11)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-10.101(64)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-10.103(g)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-10.135(i)(2)
                                                       (B)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-10.135(i)(2)
                                                       (B)(i)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-10.140(b)
                                                       Amends
32441            4-12-23                    4         51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       (E)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(1.1)
                                                       Amends
32465            5-24-23                    2         51A-4.217(b)
                                                       (11.1)(E)(iii)
32481            6-14-23                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.701(d)
                                                       Amends
32482            6-14-23                    2         51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          3         51A-4.116(b)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          4         51A-4.116(c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          5         51A-4.116(d)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          6         51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          9         51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          10        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.127(c)(2)
                                                       (E)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(3)
32556            9-20-23      10-1-23        45        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(t)(4)
32624            12-13-23                   1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.507(b)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          2         51A-4.507(e)(5)
                                                       (C)
32659            2-14-24                    9         Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(55)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.111(2)(D)
                                                       Amends
                                          11        51A-4.112(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.112(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.112(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.112(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.112(e)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          16        51A-4.112(f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          17        51A-4.112(g)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-4.113(2)(D)
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-4.114(2)(D)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-4.115(2)(D)
                                                       Amends
                                          21        51A-4.116(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          22        51A-4.116(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          23        51A-4.116(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          24        51A-4.116(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          25        Amends
                                                       51A-4.117(2)(D)
                                                       Amends
                                          26        51A-4.121(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          27        51A-4.121(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          28        51A-4.121(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          29        51A-4.121(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          30        51A-4.122(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-4.122(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          32        51A-4.122(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          33        51A-4.123(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          34        51A-4.123(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          35        51A-4.123(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          36        51A-4.123(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          37        51A-4.124(a)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          38        51A-4.124(b)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          39        51A-4.125(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          40        51A-4.125(e)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          41        51A-4.125(f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          42        51A-4.126(d)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          43        51A-4.126(e)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          44        51A-4.126(f)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          45        51A-4.127(c)(2)
                                                       (D)
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(1)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(3)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(7.1)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-4.402
                                          50        Amends
                                                       51A-4.403(c)
                                          51        Amends
                                                       51A-4.407(a)
                                                       Adds
                                          52        51A-4.408(a)(1)
                                                       (E)
                                          53        Amends
                                                       51A-13.306(b)
                                                       Amends
                                          54        51A-13.306(d)(2)
                                                       (b)
                                          55        Amends
                                                       51A-13.402(a)(2)
32669            2-28-24                    1         Deletes
                                                       51A-4.501(i)
32676            3-27-24      5-1-24         2         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(b)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(g)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(h)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(i)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(k)(3)
                                          7         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(l)
                                          8         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(m)
                                          9         Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(n)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(q)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(r)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(s)
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(y)
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-8.702(c)
32789            8-14-24                    3         Amends
                                                       51A-4.303(b)(10)
32817            8-14-24                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1001(d)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1007.3
                                                       Adds Ch. 51A,
32821            8-28-24                    1         Art. IX, Div.
                                                       51A-9.600
32863            9-18-24                    37        Amends
                                                       51A-1.105(j)(4)
32864            9-18-24                    41        Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(20)
                                                       Amends
                                          42        51A-4.217(b)
                                                       (11.1)(E)(iii)
                                          43        Amends
                                                       51A-4.502(e)(6)
                                          44        Amends
                                                       51A-4.908
                                          45        Amends
                                                       51A-4.909(d)
                                          46        Amends
                                                       51A-4.1002(c)
                                          47        Amends
                                                       51A-4.1103(a)(13)
                                          48        Amends
                                                       51A-4.1105(d)(3)
                                          49        Amends
                                                       51A-4.1105(f)(2)
                                                       Amends
                                          50        51A-4.1107(c)(5)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          51        51A-4.1107(e)(2)
                                                       (B)
                                          52        Amends
                                                       51A-5.209(a)
                                          53        Amends
                                                       51A-6.108(e)(1)
                                          54        Amends
                                                       51A-7.212(a)(2)
                                          55        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1608(d)(3)
                                          56        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1720(a)(2)
                                          57        Amends
                                                       51A-8.201(33)
                                          58        Amends
                                                       51A-8.507(b)(8)
                                          59        Amends
                                                       51A-8.508(b)
                                          60        Amends
                                                       51A-8.601(b)(8)
                                          61        Amends
                                                       51A-8.607(a)
                                          62        Amends
                                                       51A-8.608
                                          63        Amends
                                                       51A-8.615
                                          64        Amends
                                                       51A-8.620
                                          65        Amends
                                                       51A-9.305(a)
                                          66        Amends
                                                       51A-9.507(a)
                                          67        Amends
                                                       51A-10.140(b)
                                          68        Amends
                                                       51A-12.201(a)(5)
                                          69        Amends
                                                       51A-12.203(h)
                                          70        Amends
                                                       51A-12.204(p)
                                          71        Amends
                                                       51A-12.305(b)(2)
                                          72        Amends
                                                       51A-13.502(b)(1)
                                          73        Amends
                                                       51A-13.502(c)(2)
                                          74        Amends
                                                       51A-13.502(d)
                                                       Amends
                                          75        51A-13.503(c)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          76        51A-13.503(d)(1)
                                                       (b)
32907            10-23-24                   7         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(104.1)
                                          8         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(104.2)
                                          9         Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(139.2)
                                          10        Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(10)(A)
                                          11        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(3)
                                                       Amends
                                          12        51A-4.210(b)(8.1)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          13        51A-4.210(b)(9)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          14        51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (16.1)(A)
                                                       Amends
                                          15        51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (30.1)(A)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-4.210(b)(31)
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-4.217(b)(6)
33011            2-12-25                    1         Adds 51A-7.1001
                                                       (e)
                                          2         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1007.4
33012            2-12-25                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-1.106(g)(1)
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-3.102(d)
                                          3         Adds
                                                       51A-4.701(a)(1.1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-4.703(a)(1)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-4.704(a)(1)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-4.704(a)(3)
33060            3-26-25                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.1101.1
                                          2         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1104(a)
                                          3         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1105(a)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.1105(d)(2)
33070            4-9-25                     1         Amends
                                                       51A-8.601(b)
33112            5-14-25                    216       Amends
                                                       51A-1.102(b)(1)
                                          217       Amends
                                                       51A-2.102(9.1)
                                          218       Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(9.2)
                                          219       Adds
                                                       51A-2.102(9.3)
                                          220       Deletes 51A-2.102
                                                       (23.1)
                                          221       Deletes 51A-2.102
                                                       (23.2)
                                          222       Amends
                                                       51A-4.124(a)(5)
                                          223       Amends
                                                       51A-4.124(b)(5)
                                                       Amends
                                          224       51A-4.126(f)(8)
                                                       (A)
                                          225       Amends
                                                       51A-4.127(a)
                                          226       Amends
                                                       51A-4.127(c)(5)
                                          227       Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(1)(C)
                                          228       Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(2)(C)
                                          229       Amends
                                                       51A-4.201(3)(C)
                                          230       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(1)(C)
                                          231       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(2)(C)
                                          232       Adds
                                                       51A-4.202(2)(E)
                                          233       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(3)(C)
                                          234       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(4)(C)
                                          235       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(5)(C)
                                          236       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(6)(C)
                                          237       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(7)(C)
                                          238       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(8)(C)
                                          239       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(8.1)(C)
                                          240       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(9)(C)
                                          241       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(10)(C)
                                          242       Adds
                                                       51A-4.202(10)(E)
                                          243       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(11)(C)
                                          244       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(12)(C)
                                          245       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(13)(C)
                                          246       Amends
                                                       51A-4.202(14)(C)
                                          247       Adds
                                                       51A-4.202(14)(E)
                                                       Amends
                                          248       51A-4.203(b)(0)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          249       51A-4.203(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          250       51A-4.203(b)(1.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          251       51A-4.203(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          252       51A-4.203(b)(2.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          253       51A-4.203(b)(3)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          254       51A-4.203(b)(3.3)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          255       51A-4.203(b)(4)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          256       51A-4.203(b)(4.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          257       51A-4.203(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          258       51A-4.203(b)(5.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          259       51A-4.203(b)(6)
                                                       (C)
                                          260       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(2)(C)
                                          261       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(3)(C)
                                          262       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(3)(D)
                                          263       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(4)(C)
                                          264       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(5)(C)
                                          265       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(7)(C)
                                          266       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(8)(C)
                                          267       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(9)(C)
                                          268       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(11)(C)
                                          269       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(13)(C)
                                          270       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(13)(D)
                                          271       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(14)(C)
                                          272       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(16)(C)
                                          273       Amends
                                                       51A-4.204(17)(C)
                                          274       Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(1)(C)
                                          275       Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(1)(D)
                                          276       Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(1.1)(C)
                                          277       Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(1.1)(D)
                                          278       Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(2)(C)
                                          279       Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(2.1)(C)
                                          280       Amends
                                                       51A-4.205(3)(C)
                                          281       Amends
                                                       51A-4.206(2)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          282       51A-4.206(2)(E)
                                                       (i)
                                          283       Amends
                                                       51A-4.206(4)(C)
                                          284       Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(1)(C)
                                          285       Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(2)(C)
                                          286       Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(3)(C)
                                          287       Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(4)(C)
                                          288       Amends
                                                       51A-4.207(5)(C)
                                          289       Amends
                                                       51A-4.208(1)(C)
                                          290       Amends
                                                       51A-4.208(2)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          291       51A-4.209(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          292       51A-4.209(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          293       51A-4.209(b)(3)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          294       51A-4.209(b)(3.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          295       51A-4.209(b)(4)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          296       51A-4.209(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          297       51A-4.209(b)(5)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          298       51A-4.209(b)(5.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          299       51A-4.209(b)(5.2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          300       51A-4.209(b)(6)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          301       51A-4.210(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Adds
                                          302       51A-4.210(b)(1)
                                                       (E)
                                                       Amends
                                          303       51A-4.210(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          304       51A-4.210(b)(3)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Adds
                                          305       51A-4.210(b)(3)
                                                       (E)(iii)
                                                       Amends
                                          306       51A-4.210(b)(4)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          307       51A-4.210(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          308       51A-4.210(b)(6)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          309       51A-4.210(b)(7)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          310       51A-4.210(b)(8)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          311       51A-4.210(b)(9)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          312       51A-4.210(b)(9)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          313       51A-4.210(b)(9.1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          314       51A-4.210(b)(10)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          315       51A-4.210(b)(11)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          316       51A-4.210(b)(12)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          317       51A-4.210(b)(13)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          318       51A-4.210(b)(14)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          319       51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (14.1)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          320       51A-4.210(b)(15)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          321       51A-4.210(b)(16)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          322       51A-4.210(b)(17)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          323       51A-4.210(b)(18)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          324       51A-4.210(b)(19)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          325       51A-4.210(b)(20)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          326       51A-4.210(b)(21)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          327       51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (21.1)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          328       51A-4.210(b)(22)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          329       51A-4.210(b)(23)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          330       51A-4.210(b)(24)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          331       51A-4.210(b)(25)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          332       51A-4.210(b)(27)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          333       51A-4.210(b)(28)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          334       51A-4.210(b)(29)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          335       51A-4.210(b)(29)
                                                       (E)(i)
                                                       Amends
                                          336       51A-4.210(b)(30)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          337       51A-4.210(b)
                                                       (30.1)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          338       51A-4.210(b)(31)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Adds
                                          339       51A-4.210(b)(31)
                                                       (E)(iv)
                                          340       Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(1)(C)
                                          341       Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(2)(C)
                                          342       Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(2)(D)
                                          343       Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(3)(C)
                                          344       Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(4)(C)
                                          345       Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(6)(C)
                                          346       Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(7)(C)
                                          347       Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(8)(C)
                                          348       Amends
                                                       51A-4.211(10)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          349       51A-4.211(10)(E)
                                                       (i)
                                          350       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(1)(C)
                                          351       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(2)(C)
                                          352       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(3)(C)
                                          353       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(4)(C)
                                          354       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(5)(C)
                                          355       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(6)(C)
                                          356       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(7)(C)
                                          357       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(8)(C)
                                          358       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(10)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          359       51A-4.212(10.1)
                                                       (C)
                                          360       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(11)(C)
                                          361       Amends
                                                       51A-4.212(12)(C)
                                          362       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(1)(C)
                                          363       Adds
                                                       51A-4.213(1)(E)
                                          364       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(3)(C)
                                          365       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(4)(C)
                                          366       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(5)(C)
                                          367       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(6)(C)
                                          368       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(7)(C)
                                          369       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(8)(C)
                                          370       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(9)(C)
                                          371       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(10)(C)
                                          372       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(11)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          373       51A-4.213(11.1)
                                                       (C)
                                          374       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(12)(C)
                                          375       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(13)(C)
                                                       Adds
                                          376       51A-4.213(14)(E)
                                                       (x)
                                          377       Amends
                                                       51A-4.213(15)(C)
                                                       Amends
                                          378       51A-4.217(b)(1)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          379       51A-4.217(b)(2)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          380       51A-4.217(b)(5)
                                                       (C)
                                                       Amends
                                          381       51A-4.217(b)(8.1)
                                                       (C)
                                          382       Adds
                                                       51A-4.219(a)(7)
                                          383       Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(a)
                                          384       Deletes 51A-4.301
                                                       (b)
                                          385       Deletes 51A-4.301
                                                       (c)
                                          386       Amends
                                                       51A-4.301(d)(7)
                                          387       Amends
                                                       51A-4.303(b)
                                          388       Amends
                                                       51A-4.306(e)
                                          389       Amends
                                                       51A-4.312
                                          390       Amends
                                                       51A-4.313(a)
                                          391       Amends
                                                       51A-4.314(a)
                                          392       Amends
                                                       51A-4.314(b)
                                          393       Amends
                                                       51A-4.320, title
                                          394       Amends
                                                       51A-4.321
                                          395       Amends
                                                       51A-4.322
                                          396       Amends
                                                       51A-4.323, title
                                          397       Amends
                                                       51A-4.323(a)
                                          398       Amends
                                                       51A-4.323(b)
                                                       Amends
                                          399       51A-4.323(c)(1)
                                                       (A)
                                                       Amends
                                          400       51A-4.323(c)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          401       Amends
                                                       51A-4.324
                                          402       Amends
                                                       51A-4.325
                                          403       Amends
                                                       51A-4.326
                                          404       Amends
                                                       51A-4.328(a)
                                          405       Amends
                                                       51A-4.328(b)
                                          406       Amends
                                                       51A-4.328(d)(2)
                                          407       Amends
                                                       51A-4.329.1
                                          408       Amends
                                                       51A-4.329.2
                                          409       Amends
                                                       51A-4.331(b)
                                          410       Amends
                                                       51A-4.333(a)
                                          411       Amends
                                                       51A-4.334
                                                       Amends
                                          412       51A-4.702(a)(6)
                                                       (B)
                                          413       Amends
                                                       51A-4.802(4)
                                          414       Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(a)(1)
                                          415       Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(a)(2)
                                          416       Amends
                                                       51A-4.803 Table 1
                                          417       Deletes 51A-4.803
                                                       (c)
                                          418       Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(e)(1)
                                          419       Amends
                                                       51A-4.803(e)(2)
                                                       Amends
                                          420       51A-4.803(f)(2)
                                                       (A)
                                          421       Amends
                                                       51A-4.1107(a)(4)
                                          422       Amends
                                                       51A-4.1107(c)(2)
                                          423       Deletes
                                                       51A-4.1107(c)(3)
                                          424       Amends
                                                       51A-13.301(a)(4)
                                          425       Amends
                                                       51A-13.301(b)(4)
                                                       Amends
                                          426       51A-13.304(a)(3)
                                                       (D)
                                                       Amends
                                          427       51A-13.306(a)(6)
                                                       (B)(viii)
                                          428       Deletes 51A-
                                                       13.401(c)
                                          429       Amends
                                                       51A-13.402
                                          430       Amends
                                                       51A-13.403(a)
                                          431       Amends
                                                       51A-13.403(c)
                                          432       Amends
                                                       51A-13.403(e)
33113            5-14-25                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-4.504(b)(2)
                                                       Amends
33233            9-17-25                    17        51A-4.217(b)
                                                       (11.1)(E)(iii)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-4.908
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-4.909(d)
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-4.1002(c)
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-4.1105(d)(3)
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-4.1105(f)(2)
33234            9-24-25                    1         Adds
                                                       51A-7.205(c)
33252            9-24-25                    1         Amends
                                                       51A-7.901.1(a)
                                          2         Deletes 51A-
                                                       7.901.1(k)
                                          3         Deletes 51A-7.903
                                                       (15.1)
                                          4         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(a)(3)
                                          5         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(c)(1)
                                          6         Amends
                                                       51A-7.911(d)(1)
                                                       Amends
                                          7         51A-7.911(e)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                                       Amends
                                          8         51A-7.911(g)(1)
                                                       (B)
                                          9         Deletes 51A-7.911
                                                       (i)
                                          10        Deletes 51A-7.912
                                                       (i)
                                          11        Deletes 51A-7.919
                                                       (e)
                                          12        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1201
                                          13        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1202
                                          14        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1203(a)
)                                          15        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1204(a)
                                          16        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1205
                                          17        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1205.1(a)
                                          18        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1206
                                          19        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1207
                                          20        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1208
                                          21        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1209
                                          22        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1210
                                          23        Amends
                                                       51A-7.1211
                                          24        Repeals 51A-
                                                       7.1212
                                          25        Repeals 51A-
                                                       7.1213
                                          26        Repeals 51A-
                                                       7.1214
                                          27        Repeals 51A-
                                                       7.1214.1
                                          28        Repeals 51A-
                                                       7.1214.2
                                          29        Repeals 51A-
                                                       7.1214.3
                                          30        Repeals 51A-
                                                       7.1215
                                                       Amends
                                          31        51A-7.1200, Exh.
                                                       A.
                                          32        Repeals Div. 51A-
                                                       7.2100
                                                    
 
 
